Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Vineland of a
general and permanent nature adopted by the City Council of the City of
Vineland, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 710, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the City of Vineland," hereinafter known and referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such
ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in
force. In particular, the 1990 Code of the City of Vineland, adopted August
28, 1990, by Ordinance No. 90-79, as amended and supplemented, is hereby
superseded and replaced.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Vineland
by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City, to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Vineland" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Vineland, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the City. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for the
periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Vineland to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $2,000 or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 VINELAND CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter saved from repeal.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to July 14, 2009.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
C. Throughout the Code, the following changes in terminology have been
made:
(1) The Department of Public Safety was abolished in 1976, although
the position of Director of Public Safety still exists. Therefore, all
references to the "Director of the Department of Public Safety" are
hereby amended to simply read "Director of Public Safety."
(2) "Municipal Magistrate" is hereby amended to read "Municipal
Court Judge."
(3) "State Health Department" is hereby amended to read "State
Department of Health and Senior Services."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, deleted) 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-68.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the City offices.
§ 1-13 VINELAND CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 9-24-1968 by Ord. No. 674 (Ch. 1, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 1-15. Violations and penalties; default of payment. [Amended
7-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-40]
A. Any person or persons who, after a hearing before the Municipal Court
of the City of Vineland or any other court of proper jurisdiction, shall be
found guilty of violating the provisions of any ordinance of the City of
Vineland shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties: the
payment of a fine not less than $100 and not exceeding the sum of
$2,000 or imprisonment in the Cumberland County Jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68]
B. In default of payment of any fine imposed hereunder, any person
convicted as aforesaid may, in the discretion of the Court, be
imprisoned in the Cumberland County Jail for a term not exceeding 90
days or be required to perform community service for a period not
exceeding 90 days.2
2. Editor's Note: Original § 1-16, Penalties for ordinances not previously amended, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims approval — See Ch. 19.
Emergency management — See Ch. 36.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Purchasing Board — See Ch. 139.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
§ 5-1. Establishment; head.
There is hereby established the Department of Administration of the City
of Vineland,3 the head of which shall be designated and known as the
"Business Administrator," in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-44.
§ 5-2. Appointment of Business Administrator.
The Business Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Vineland, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
§ 5-3. Term of office of Administrator.
The Business Administrator shall be appointed for and serve during the
term of office of the Mayor appointing him and until the appointment and
qualification of his successor.
§ 5-4. Qualifications and residency of Administrator.
No person shall be qualified for appointment as Business Administrator
unless such person shall have 10 years' administrative experience in
business or government and have actual experience in or knowledge of
budget preparation, centralized purchasing functions and development and
administration of personnel systems. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-44,
any person appointed as Business Administrator need not reside in the City
of Vineland at the time of his appointment, but during his tenure in office,
he may reside outside of the City of Vineland only with the approval of the
City Council.
§ 5-5. Duties of Administrator. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
92-40; 7-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-62; 12-26-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-86]
The Business Administrator shall:
3. Editor's Note: The Department of Emergency Services was incorporated within the
Department of Administration by Ord. No. 86-16, adopted 3-25-1986. For further
provisions on the Department of Emergency Services, see Ch. 36.
§ 1-15 VINELAND CODE § 5-5
1:8
§ 5-6. Department functions. [Amended 12-26-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-86]
Under the general supervision of the Mayor and direct supervision of the
Business Administrator, the Department of Administration shall:
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of the Department,
consistent with applicable statutes and ordinances.
B. Appoint, direct and supervise subordinate officers and employees of the
Department and make individual work assignments.
C. Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to
departmental appropriations.4
D. Provide information reports on the work of the Department as may be
required by the Mayor.
E. Serve as hearing officer in lieu of the department head as required in
any departmental hearing of the City of Vineland.
F. Administer an information systems office for the provision of technology
services to all departments.
G. Perform such other duties as directed by the Mayor not inconsistent
with applicable statutes and ordinances.
A. Prescribe and prepare uniform forms for budget requests for use by all
departments, boards and agencies; review and analyze all budget
requests for appropriations and make recommendations and
comments; assist in the conduct of annual budget hearings; and
otherwise assist the Mayor in the preparation of the City budget.
B. Administer a centralized purchasing system.
C. Be responsible for the development and administration of a sound
personnel system, including, without limitation, maintaining a job
classification and pay plan based upon the duties, authority and
responsibilities of offices, employments and positions in the City.
D. Receive all bidding documents for City contracts from the Purchasing
Board, tabulate all bids and make reports and recommendations to the
City Council regarding the same.
E. Maintain a continuing review of federal and state aid programs of
interest to the City of Vineland so that the City may apply for available
funding.
F. Provide technology services to all departments through an information
systems office, as well as care for, store and maintain information
4. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 19, Claims Approval.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:9
§ 5-7. Division of Purchasing.5 [Amended 2-27-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-9]
Within the Department of Administration, there shall be a Division of
Purchasing, the head of which shall be the Purchasing Agent. Under the
general supervision of the Mayor and the Business Administrator and under
the direct supervision of the Purchasing Agent, the Division shall:
§ 5-8. Division of Personnel.
Within the Department of Administration, there shall be a Division of
Personnel, the head of which shall be the Personnel Officer. Under the
general supervision of the Mayor and the Business Administrator and under
the direct supervision of the Personnel Officer, the Division shall:
systems equipment owned by the City of Vineland and in the custody of
the Department.
G. Assign office space, furniture and facilities among and within City
departments and agencies.
H. Perform such other duties, as prescribed by the City Council, not
inconsistent with applicable statutes and ordinances.
A. Develop and provide procedures and forms for requisitions and
purchases by all City personnel.
B. Supervise and control the receipt of all supplies, materials, equipment
and other items purchased on behalf of the City.
C. Maintain an inventory of all supplies, materials and equipment
purchased by the City of Vineland.
A. Maintain personnel files for each official, department head and
employee, which files shall include, without limitation, any appointment
papers, applications, civil service test certifications, documents relating
to all civil service and/or departmental actions pertaining to each
individual, and employee benefits records.
B. Coordinate all civil service actions relating to any employee and act as a
clearinghouse for all department heads or other appointing authorities
for the transmittal and receipt of all civil service forms and
correspondence.
C. Certify the employment and/or eligibility of City employees for the
Public Employees Retirement System of New Jersey, the Police and
Firemen's Pension Fund of New Jersey, the Old Age and Survivors'
Insurance System and any and all employee benefit plans.
D. Maintain a continuous study of the operation and effect of personnel
administration, including hours and days of work, leaves of absence,
5. Editor's Note: For provisions regarding the Purchasing Board, see Ch. 139.
§ 5-6 VINELAND CODE § 5-8
1:10
§ 5-9. City Treasurer. [Added 12-23-1980 by Ord. No. 1236;
amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 84-52; 12-26-1984 by Ord. No.
84-59; 12-26-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-86]
The City Treasurer shall be assigned to the Department of Administration.
§ 5-10. Division of Equipment Maintenance and Vehicle Fueling
Facility. [Added 10-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-72]
§ 5-11. Division of Engineering. [Added 10-24-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-72]
sick leaves, vacations, pensions and retirement, and report its findings
and recommendations to the Business Administrator and the Mayor.
A. Division established. Within the Department of Administration, there
shall be a division of Equipment Maintenance and Vehicle Fueling
Facility.
B. Functions of the Division. Under the direct supervision of the Business
Administrator, the Division shall:
(1) Operate and manage the City garage or garages and yards for the
storage, servicing, repair and maintenance of the City's motor
vehicles and other equipment.
(2) Maintain and repair such other motor vehicles and motorized
equipment of the City as may be directed by the Business
Administrator and certify the amounts due and payable thereunder.
(3) Control the use and maintenance of motor vehicles stored and
serviced by the Division through vehicle operating records, cost
studies and replacement schedules.
(4) Operate, maintain and repair the municipally owned vehicle fueling
facility, including the maintenance of records for the use of such
facility, as shall be directed by the Business Administrator.
A. The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of City Council and shall serve during the term of the Mayor
and until the appointment and qualification of his/her successor in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43. The City Engineer shall be the
supervisor of the Division of Engineering and shall be directly
responsible to advise the Business Administrator and other municipal
elected officials, departments and employees of the proper compliance
and administration of various laws, regulations, technical practices,
operations, and management technique with regards to the Division of
Engineering and related activities conducted by the municipality.
[Amended 7-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-48]
B. Salary of City Engineer, full-time position. The City Engineer shall
receive an annual salary to be paid in the same manner as department
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:11
heads and officers of the City of Vineland, with the salary range as set
forth in Ordinance No. 8 and amendments thereto. The position of City
Engineer shall be considered a full-time position.
C. Outside employment. The City Engineer shall not accept any outside
employment but shall devote his/her working hours and his/her
energies solely to the duties of his/her office, unless the City Council
shall, by special resolution, otherwise provide.
D. Qualifications of City Engineer. The City Engineer of the City of
Vineland shall be a licensed professional engineer, licensed in the State
of New Jersey with a civil engineering background. The City Engineer
shall have a minimum of 10 years' experience as a licensed professional
engineer in the State of New Jersey and shall have minimum of five
years' experience working as a professional engineer for a
governmental entity in the State of New Jersey. [Amended 7-23-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-48]
E. Powers and duties of City Engineer. The City Engineer, in addition to
the functions, powers and duties that are hereby or may hereafter be
conferred and imposed upon him/her by law and the ordinances of the
City of Vineland, pursuant to the policies adopted by the Director, shall:
(1) Direct the operation of the Division of Engineering, manage the
activities of the staff and coordinate engineering services with
other divisions and departments. [Amended 8-27-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-55]
(2) Report, at least monthly, to the Director in such form as shall be
prescribed by the Director on the operation of the Division during
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be
requested by the Director.
(3) Perform his or her duties as prescribed by law and the ordinance of
the City and such other duties as may be required of him/her by the
Mayor, the City Council and the Director of Public Works.
(4) Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his/her office,
consistent with applicable statutes and ordinances.
(5) In conjunction with the Superintendent of Public Works, establish
standards and procedures for the control, use and care of all Cityowned
equipment, materials and supplies in the custody of the
Department of Public Works.
(6) Recommend, with the Director of Public Works, the appointment of
subordinate officers and employees of the Division of Engineering
and make all individual assignments.
(7) Recommend for approval payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to
the City Engineering Division appropriation.
§ 5-11 VINELAND CODE § 5-11
1:12
(8) Prepare and assist in the preparation of loan and grant applications
to state and federal government agencies for City projects and
inform the Director of Public Works, the Mayor and Council of all
available financial aid.
(9) Maintain the custody and charge of and keep in the place provided
by the City Council the original or true copies of maps, charts,
documents, worksheets and data which he/she has acquired or
prepared for the City; and, upon the termination of his/her services
to the City, he/she shall surrender to his/her successor all City
property, papers, maps, charts and records, together with a status
report on any pending project.
(10) The City Engineer shall survey and inspect, from time to time, the
physical condition of all public structures, roads, subsurface
utilities and other physical facilities in the City and evaluate the
need for repairs, replacements, maintenance, additions and
extensions thereof. He/she shall thereupon make recommendations
for capital improvement programs to the Planning Board, the
Mayor and the Council.
(11) Provide such operating standards and maintain or direct the
compilation of such engineering data and records as may be
necessary or desirable for the proper and efficient administration
of the public works facilities.
(12) Prepare or cause to be prepared plans and specifications for
construction projects undertaken by the City, either by City
employees or under public contract, and make such inspections of
the work of public contractors as may be necessary or desirable,
supervise the performance of public works contracts and certify
the amounts due and payable thereunder.
(13) Prepare plans and specifications and administer and oversee
contracts let pursuant to said plans and specifications for solid
waste management.
(14) Coordinate the activities of consulting engineers that may be
retained, from time to time, by the City in connection with the
contractual responsibilities of such engineers and examine and
reject or approve all vouchers submitted for work performed by
contractors in accordance with public projects or improvement
contracts entered into by the City.
(15) Prepare all engineering data, surveys, designs and applications for
approval for traffic signals and signing as required by the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
(16) Provide professional engineering advice and assistance to the
Mayor, the Council and all departments, as required and within the
limits of available appropriations.
§ 5-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:13
§ 5-12. Division of Planning. [Added 10-24-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-72; amended 8-27-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-55]
(17) Perform land use studies and review of applications for land use
and development as provided by ordinance or statute and provide
or cause to be provided assistance to the City Planning Board for
review of subdivision applications and plats, master planning
studies and capital budget preparation and analysis.
(18) Maintain or cause to be maintained the City Official Map, Tax Maps
and the City Zoning Maps in current legal status at all time and
secure the prompt recording thereon of all changes in ownership
and prepare, maintain and preserve maps, charts and records of
roads, easements, rights-of-way, utilities, public buildings and
structures and all public facilities owned or operated by the City of
Vineland.
(19)Keep a complete record of all streets, roads, highways, public
lands, alleys, public parks and squares and other places hereafter
laid out, opened or altered in the City in a suitable book to be
provided for that purpose, wherein shall be entered the true and
lawful description thereof, specifying in each case the date of the
survey or the time when the same was made and laid out, opened or
altered, according to law. The Division of Engineering shall keep an
accurate and complete record of all grades of streets and highways
established by order of the City Council, and furnish a complete
and accurate map in each of such cases.
(20) Provide technical assistance, labor and equipment to other
divisions within the Department of Public Works as expeditiously as
possible based upon the priority of the assistance needed by said
divisions.
A. The City Planner shall be the Supervisor of the Division of Planning.
B. Functions of the Division. The Division of Planning shall:
(1) Advise and assist the Mayor with regards to the physical planning
of all matters relating to the development of the City.
(2) Provide staff assistance to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment on all matters under their jurisdiction.
(3) Perform continuous studies and collect data to serve as a basis for
planning recommendations to the administration.
(4) Act as liaison to the South Jersey Transportation Planning
Organization, County Planning Board, Landis Sewerage Authority,
United States Census Bureau, and other regional, state and federal
planning organizations.
§ 5-11 VINELAND CODE § 5-12
1:14
Chapter 15
CIVIL RIGHTS, COMMISSION ON
§ 15-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Vineland Commission on Civil
Rights Ordinance."
§ 15-2. Purpose. [Amended 4-11-1995 by Ord. No. 95-18]
The enactment hereof shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of
the municipality for the protection of the public safety, health and morals,
the promotion of the general welfare and the fulfillment of the provisions of
the Constitution of the State of New Jersey guaranteeing civil rights as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq., particularly N.J.S.A. 10:5-10c.
§ 15-3. Membership; compensation.
The Commission shall be composed of 15 representative citizens serving
without compensation, to be appointed by the Mayor. These appointees
shall be called "Commissioners." The Mayor shall also designate the
Chairman.
§ 15-4. Terms of office; organization; adoption of rules.
(5) Maintain the City of Vineland Master Plan, including the Housing
Element and Fair Share Housing Plan, and the Land Use
Ordinance.6
(6) Administer redevelopment plans.
A. All appointments to the Commission shall be for a term of three years,
except that, upon the original organization of the Commission, five
Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of one year, five
Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of two years, and five
Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years. In the
event of the death or resignation of any member, his successor shall be
appointed to serve for the unexpired term for which such member has
been appointed. Each member shall serve until his successor is duly
appointed and qualifies.
B. The Commission shall select one or more Vice Chairmen and a
Secretary from its members and fill such other offices as it may
determine.
C. It is empowered to adopt rules for the government of its business and
for its procedures as it may determine consistent with law.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use.
§ 5-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-5
1:15
§ 15-5. Duty and functions; cooperation with other agencies.
§ 15-6. Annual report.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the Mayor and the Council
of its activities and shall periodically make such recommendations to the
municipal body as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
Chapter 19
CLAIMS APPROVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business Administrator; Division of
Purchasing — See Ch. 5.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 50.
Purchasing Board — See Ch. 139.
§ 19-1. Submission of invoice; certification. [Amended 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-47; 5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-25]
Any person claiming payment for materials sold or services rendered to the
City of Vineland shall first submit a detailed, itemized invoice to the City
of Vineland. For any detailed, itemized invoice in excess of $17,500 or for
any detailed, itemized invoice submitted by a sole proprietor for services
rendered or materials sold or any detailed, itemized invoice submitted by
an employee of the City of Vineland for reimbursement for permitted costs
incurred by the employee in furtherance of their employment with the City
of Vineland, the invoice shall be submitted with a voucher form provided by
the QPA. The invoice and voucher shall be properly certified by the vendor,
their authorized representative or City employee that the invoice is correct
in all its particulars, that the articles have been furnished, the services
have been rendered or costs and expenses incurred by the City employee as
stated therein are justly due and that the amount charged is a reasonable
one.
A. The duty and function of the Commission shall be to foster, through
community effort or otherwise, good will, cooperation and conciliation
among the groups and elements of the inhabitants of the community
and to make recommendations to the Mayor and Council for the
development of policies and procedures in general for programs of
formal and informal education that will aid and eliminate all types of
discrimination based on race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry or
age.
B. The Commission shall cooperate with other units of government or any
other agencies concerned with the purpose of this chapter, particularly
the Division on Civil Rights in the New Jersey Department of Law and
Public Safety.
§ 15-5 VINELAND CODE § 19-1.1
1:16
§ 19-1.1. Submission of invoices for payment of vendors in advance
of delivery of materials or services. [Added 5-8-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-25]
§ 19-2. Signing of invoice.
The department head, City officer or employee receiving any such materials
or services on behalf of the City shall sign a copy of the delivery slip,
purchase order, invoice or other similar document, indicating that he has
personal knowledge of the fact that the goods have been received or the
services rendered and that those goods or services are consistent with any
existing contract or purchase order.
§ 19-3. Certification.
The Department of Finance shall have the responsibility of certifying the
date, based on documentation provided by an authorized employee of the
receiving department, that the materials or services have been received,
that the invoice complies with the City's criteria for payment processing,
and checking the calculations, price, terms and other pertinent data on the
invoice for correctness.
A. Any vendor may request payment in advance of delivery of materials or
services in accordance with § 19-1 in addition to those specifically set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16.1 (advance of employee travel expenses);
N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16.2 (advance payment to nonprofit agency under certain
circumstances set forth therein); and N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16.3 (advancing
estimated administrative or direct service cost of a statutorily
authorized joint, interlocal, cooperative or shared services activity in
accordance with an agreement entered into with the City of Vineland):
(1) Payment obligations to the state or to federal governments.
(2) Membership in a nonprofit organization.
(3) Educational courses, including, but not limited to, those where
continuing education credits are awarded.
(4) Registration for a conference or convention sponsored by a
nonprofit organization.
(5) Website hosting, including registration and maintenance of a
domain name.
B. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no advance payment
shall be made directly to officers and/or employees of the City of
Vineland.
§ 19-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4
1:17
§ 19-4. Review by Chief Financial Officer. [Amended 6-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-42]
The Chief Financial Officer (CFO) shall cause all invoices to be examined
and shall approve the same for payment if it is determined that all
calculations are correct, all procedures in place have been followed, and
that sufficient funds are available for payment.
§ 19-5. Review by Business Administrator. [Amended 6-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-42]
The Chief Financial Officer shall thereafter forward the properly itemized
tabulated and certified invoices for review and approval by the Business
Administrator.
§ 19-6. (Reserved)7
§ 19-7. Resolution of Council; payment. [Amended 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-47; 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-42]
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall systematically list, without preference,
invoices received from various vendors on a resolution that is to be
presented to the City Council for consideration at the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting. All bills, claims, or demands approved
by City Council by resolution shall then be processed by the Chief
Financial Officer as provided by law.
B. Notwithstanding with procedures set forth in Subsection A above, the
Chief Financial Officer may approve certain claims between City
Council meetings. However, the approval of any claim between City
Council meetings shall be presented to City Council at its next meeting
for ratification. Only the following claims may, at the discretion of Chief
Financial Officer, be approved in accordance with this subsection:
(1) All purchased power and fuel obligations for the Department of
Municipal Utilities, such as weekly utility payments to PJM
interconnection.
(2) Any payments regarding the administration of workers'
compensation claims.
(3) Payment to acquire property based on a settlement agreement that
has already been authorized by City council in a separate action.
(4) Regular utilities of the City of Vineland, such as phone, natural gas
and fuel.
7. Editor’s Note: Former § 19-6, Review by City Council, was repealed 2-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-3.
§ 19-4 VINELAND CODE § 19-7
1:18
§ 19-8. Method of payments and disbursements. [Added 6-11-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-42]
C. The Chief Financial Officer shall ascertain the existence of proper and
sufficient appropriations for the payments to be made and shall
determine that there is legal authority for the payment.
A. Wire transfer. At the discretion of the Chief Financial Officer
disbursements of moneys or payments under Subsection B may be
made by wire transfer.
B. Standard electronic funds transfers. Subject to the adoption of a
resolution approving a Cash Management Plan incorporating therein
general policies and procedures for all EFT payments, automated
clearing house (ACH) transactions shall be permitted in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16.5.
C. Payment by procurement card (P-card). P-cards may be used subject to
the adoption of a resolution approving a Cash Management Plan
incorporating therein policies and procedures for all electronic funds
transfers (EFT) as well as specific policies and procedures for the use of
procurement cards (P-cards). The policies specific to P-cards shall
include the authorizing of certain purchases and payments for the use
of P-cards as maybe used for the payments of all bills and demands
against the City of Vineland. Said use shall be based upon a contractual
agreement with a banking institution approved by the City of Vineland,
a cooperative purchasing agreement with either the New Jersey
Treasury Department's Division of Purchase and Property or another
legally operating purchasing co-op, or by way of the competitive
contracting process, following the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.1
et seq. Policies and procedures promulgated in accordance with
resolutions adopted as specified herein must include the ability to
institute but not be limited to the following controls:
(1) Control limits and review current activity online and in real time.
(2) The appointment and designation of the qualified purchasing agent
for the City of Vineland as the program manager.
(3) Establish, change or delete limits on each card in individually.
(4) Restrict the use of individual P-cards to the qualified purchasing
agent (QPA) or such other officer or employee who shall be
authorized by the Business Administrator, in consultation with the
CFO and program manager. Further, the program manager shall be
responsible for day to day oversight management of supervisor
review of the P-card usage provided the program manager remains
a qualified purchasing agent as specified herein above. At no time
shall the Chief Financial Officer be program manager.
(5) The QPA acting as the program manager shall develop and
administer a supervisor review process identifying and managing
§ 19-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-8
1:19
Chapter 24
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Law — See Ch. 84.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
§ 24-1. Establishment; statutory authority.
A Municipal Court of the City of Vineland is hereby established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1. The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal
Court of Vineland," and it shall be located in the City of Vineland.
§ 24-2. Appointment of Judges; term of office. [Amended 9-10-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-43]
The Vineland Municipal Court shall be presided over by two Judges, one of
which shall be designated as the Chief Judge Municipal Court of Vineland.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:12-4, the two Judges shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, and each shall
serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment and until a
successor is appointed and qualified. The Chief Judge shall be designated
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 24-3. Qualifications of Chief Judge and Judge. [Amended
9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-43]
The qualifications of the individuals considered for the position of Judge and
Chief Judge of the Municipal Court of Vineland shall be as provided for in
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-7. The Chief Judge shall be based upon the extent of his/her
experience as a jurist and attorney in the State of New Jersey as well as the
extent of the qualifications set forth in the aforementioned statute.
§ 24-4. Salary of Judges; part-time positions. [Amended 9-10-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-43]
all risks associated with P-card use and engage in any other
oversight and management duties required to ensure proper
utilization.
A. The Judges of the Municipal Court shall receive such salary as may be
fixed by the Council in the compensation schedules heretofore adopted
or hereafter to be adopted in the Schedule of Classified/Unclassified
Positions and Applicable Salary Ranges in the Civil Service of the City
of Vineland.
§ 19-8 VINELAND CODE § 24-4
1:20
§ 24-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 9-10-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-43]
§ 24-6. Territorial jurisdiction.
The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over cases arising within the
territory of the City of Vineland. Said Court shall have jurisdiction over
offenses within its territorial jurisdiction as specified in the New Jersey
statutes.
§ 24-7. Public Defender. [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-52]
B. The Municipal Court Judge and Chief Judge of the Vineland Municipal
Court shall be part-time. The Vineland Municipal Court Judge and Chief
Judge shall be available to perform their duties and shall sit on such
days and evenings and for such period as the disposition of matters
before them shall require in accordance with the rules, regulations and
directives of the New Jersey Supreme Court, the Administrative Office
of the Courts, and the Assignment Judge of Cumberland County.
C. The Vineland Municipal Court Judge and Chief Judge may engage in
private practice or serve in other legal capacities which shall not
interfere or supersede their duties as Judge and Chief Judge of the
Vineland Municipal Court.
A. The Municipal Court Judge and Chief Judge of the Vineland Municipal
Court shall possess and exercise all of the functions, powers, duties and
jurisdiction conferred by New Jersey law.
B. The Chief Judge of the Vineland Municipal Court shall be responsible to
designate the time and place of Court and assign cases among Judges of
the Vineland Municipal Court pursuant to the rules of Court. The Chief
Judge shall have the authority to designate an Acting Court
Administrator or Deputy Administrator, to serve temporarily in the
event of the absence of the Administrator or Deputy Administrator, who
shall be paid at a rate established by the Chief Judge but not exceeding
that which has been established for the Administrator or Deputy
Administrator.
A. The position of Public Defender within the Municipal Court is hereby
established and shall be a part-time position. The Public Defender shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council and shall serve for the term of one year from the date of
appointment and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The
Public Defender shall not be entitled to compensatory time or overtime.
[Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68; 8-26-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-39]
B. The Public Defender shall, in the manner prescribed by New Jersey law,
provide legal representation of any person charged with a disorderly
persons offense or with the violation of any law, ordinance or regulation
§ 24-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-7
1:21
§ 24-8. Alternate Public Defender. [Added 1-11-2011 by Ord. No.
2010-63]
The position of Alternate Public Defender is hereby established. The
Alternate Public Defender shall serve in the absence of the Public Defender
or in cases where a conflict prohibits the Public Defender from serving.
The Alternate Public Defender shall be subject to the same administrative
provisions of this article.
Chapter 29
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
§ 29-1. Incorporation.
The City of Vineland is hereby authorized to act as incorporator to create
a nonprofit corporation to be known as the "Vineland Development
Corporation."
§ 29-2. Incorporators.
The Mayor, President of City Council and the Business Administrator are
hereby authorized to execute any and all documents necessary to create
said Corporation consistent herewith.
of a penal nature where there is a likelihood that the person so charged,
if convicted, will be subject to imprisonment or, in the opinion of the
Court, any other consequences of magnitude. The Public Defender shall
also represent those defendants who have been declared indigent by
the Municipal Court Judge and provide necessary time and expertise
so as to adequately and competently represent those persons assigned
to his/her counsel and in a manner that shall not adversely impact the
proper operation of the Vineland Municipal Court in dispensing justice.
[Amended 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-39]
C. The Municipal Court Administrator shall charge $200 per application
for Public Defender services. The fee may be waived, in whole or in
part, upon a clear and convincing finding by the Municipal Court Judge
that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the
person seeking representation. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-68]
D. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a dedicated
fund administered by the City Comptroller. Such fund shall be used
exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of the
Public Defender, including, when required, expert and lay investigation
and testimony.
§ 24-7 VINELAND CODE § 29-3
1:22
§ 29-3. Board of Directors.
The Board of Directors of the Vineland Development Corporation shall
consist of and operate pursuant to the following conditions:
§ 29-4. Bylaws and Executive Director.
The Board of Directors of the Corporation shall develop bylaws and may
hire an Executive Director to supervise the day-to-day operations of the
Corporation. The Board shall develop qualifications for the Executive
Director and may thereafter hire a person who meets said qualification for
a term specified by the Board. In lieu thereof, the Director of Economic
Development of the City of Vineland or his assignee shall serve as Executive
Director. The Board may hire such other persons, including professionals,
as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the Corporation.
A. The Board of Directors shall consist of nine members; [Amended
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68; 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-8;
4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-22]
B. The Board of Directors shall consist of: [Amended 9-9-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-61; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13; 2-14-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-8; 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-22]
(1) The five Vineland members of the Enterprise Zone Development
Corporation of Vineland and Millville, appointed in accordance with
the bylaws of said corporation;
(2) Two residents of the City of Vineland, appointed by the Mayor of
the City of Vineland with the advice and consent of the City Council
of the City of Vineland;
(3) Two business owners or professionals maintaining a principal office
in the Vineland Urban Enterprise Zone, appointed by the Mayor of
the City of Vineland with the advice and consent of the City Council
of the City of Vineland.
C. Five members of the Board shall constitute a quorum;
D. All ordinary business conducted by the Corporation shall be approved
by a simple majority of those Board members who are present at any
regular or special meeting of the Board of Directors;
E. Extraordinary business conducted by the Corporation, including but not
limited to amendment to the certificate of incorporation, approval or
modification of the bylaws, proposals for projects to be undertaken by
the Corporation and the hiring or firing of professional, technical and
consultative personnel, shall require the affirmative vote of 2/3 of the
entire Board of Directors.
§ 29-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-5
1:23
§ 29-5. Registered office and registered agent.
The registered office of the Corporation shall be City Hall, 640 East Wood
Street, Vineland, New Jersey 08360, and the registered agent shall be the
City Clerk of the City of Vineland.
§ 29-6. Duration.
The duration of the Corporation shall be indefinite unless the Corporation is
terminated by the adoption of an ordinance of the City Council of the City of
Vineland.
§ 29-7. Termination.
Upon termination of the Corporation, the Corporation's assets shall be
distributed to the City of Vineland as required by the New Jersey Nonprofit
Corporation Act8 and consistent with the Internal Revenue Code.
Chapter 36
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Fire Department — See Ch. 56.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Police Department — See Ch. 123.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
§ 36-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
"Emergency Management Ordinance of the City of Vineland."
§ 36-2. Intent and purpose.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an Emergency
Management Office that will ensure the complete and efficient
utilization of all of the City's facilities to combat disaster resulting from
major emergencies; natural, man-made or nuclear disasters; or enemy
attack.
B. The City of Vineland Office of Emergency Management will be the
coordinating agency for all activity in connection with emergency
management. It will be the instrument through which the Director/
Coordinator may exercise the authority and discharge the
responsibilities vested in him in the New Jersey Civilian Defense and
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq.
§ 29-5 VINELAND CODE § 36-2
1:24
§ 36-3. Establishment of Office; assignment of personnel. [Amended
12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 97-88; 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-84]
There is hereby established within the Fire Department the Office of
Emergency Management Services, the head of which shall be the
Coordinator of the Office of Emergency Management Services. The
Coordinator of the Office of Emergency Management Services and related
personnel are hereby assigned to the Fire Department.
§ 36-4. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter:
COORDINATOR — The Coordinator of the City of Vineland Office of
Emergency Management, appointed as prescribed in this chapter.
DISASTER — An unusual incident resulting from natural or unnatural
causes which endangers the health, safety or resources of the residents of
this City and which is or may become too large in scope or unusual in type
to be handled in its entirety by regular City operating services.
EMERGENCY — Includes "disaster" and "war emergency" as defined in this
section.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES — The employees, equipment and
City facilities of all departments, boards, institutions and commissions; and,
in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities
contributed by or obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEER — Any person duly registered,
identified and appointed by the Coordinator of the Office of Emergency
Management and assigned to participate in the emergency management
activity.
LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY — Includes any disaster or the immediate
imminence thereof resulting from natural or unnatural causes other than
Disaster Control Act of 1942, P.L. 1942, c. 251,9 as amended and as
supplemented by this chapter.
C. This chapter will not relieve any City department of the responsibilities
or authority given to it by ordinance, nor will it adversely affect the
work of any volunteer agency authorized for relief in disaster
emergencies.
D. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and
welfare of the people of the City of Vineland and to aid in the prevention
of damage to and the destruction of property during any emergency as
herein defined by prescribing a course of conduct for the civilian
population of this City during such emergency and by centralizing
control of all civilian activities having to do with such emergency.
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
§ 36-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-4
1:25
enemy attack and limited to the extent that action by the Governor under
the New Jersey Civilian Defense and Disaster Control Act10 is not required.
REGULATIONS — Includes plans, programs and other emergency
procedures deemed essential to civil defense.
VOLUNTEER — Contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the
emergency management organization without remuneration.
WAR EMERGENCY — Includes any disaster occurring anywhere within the
City as the result of enemy attack or the imminent danger thereof.
§ 36-5. Emergency Management Council; Coordinator.
A. The Mayor shall appoint not more than 15 members to an Emergency
Management Council. Members shall hold office at the will and
pleasure of the Mayor. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall
be a member and shall serve as Chairman of the Emergency
Management Council. The Emergency Management Council shall assist
the City in establishing the various local volunteer support needed to
meet the requirements of all emergency management and disastercontrol
activities in accordance with rules and regulations established
by the Governor in pursuance of the provisions of P.L. 1942, c. 251,11 as
amended by this chapter.
B. Coordinator.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint an Emergency Management Coordinator
from among the residents of this municipality, who shall be a
person well versed and trained in planning operations involving the
activities of many different agencies which will operate to protect
the public health, safety and welfare in the event of danger from
emergencies as defined in this chapter.
(2) Term and conditions. The Coordinator of Emergency Management
Services shall, subject to fulfilling the requirements of this section,
serve for a term of three years. As a condition of his appointment
and his right to continue for the full term of his appointment, said
Coordinator of Emergency Management Services shall have
successfully completed at the time of his appointment or within one
year immediately following his appointment or the effective date of
the Civilian Defense and Disaster Control Act (N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33
et seq.), whichever is later, the current approved home study
course and the basic emergency management workshop. The
failure of any Coordinator of Emergency Management Services to
fulfill such requirements within the period prescribed shall
disqualify the Coordinator from continuing in the office of
Coordinator, and thereupon a vacancy in said office shall be
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
§ 36-4 VINELAND CODE § 36-5
1:26
§ 36-6. Emergency powers and duties of Coordinator.
deemed to have been created. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-68]
(3) Removal of Coordinator of Emergency Management Services. The
Governor may remove any Coordinator of Emergency Management
Services at any time for cause. In such event, the Mayor of the
municipality shall appoint a new Coordinator of Emergency
Management Services with the approval of the Governor. If the
Mayor shall not appoint a Coordinator of Emergency Management
Services within 10 days after such office shall become vacant, the
Governor may appoint a Temporary Coordinator of Emergency
Management Services, who shall serve and perform all of the
duties of that office until such time as a new Coordinator of
Emergency Management Services shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Governor.
C. The Coordinator may designate and appoint, with the approval of the
Mayor, up to six Deputy Coordinators, one of which shall be the First
Deputy, and who shall consist of members of the following departments
and first responders whenever possible: Public Works, Police, Fire,
Emergency Medical Services, to assume the emergency duties of the
Coordinator in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, the intent
being that there shall always be at all times a Coordinator in charge of
emergency management operations. Whenever possible, such deputy
shall be appointed from among the salaried officers or employees of the
municipality. [Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 97-88; 4-24-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-24]
D. The Coordinator shall designate and appoint, with the approval of the
Mayor, a Deputy Coordinator to assume the emergency duties of the
Coordinator in the event of his absence or inability to act, the intent
being that there will always and at all times be a Coordinator in charge
of emergency management operations. Whenever possible, such deputy
shall be appointed from among the salaried officers or employees of the
municipality.
A. The Coordinator of the Office of Emergency Management shall be
responsible to the Mayor in regard to all phases of the emergency
management activity. Under the supervision of the Mayor, he shall be
responsible for the planning, activation, coordination and operation of
the emergency management activity in the City. Under the supervision
of the Mayor, he shall maintain liaison with the county, state and federal
authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions so
as to ensure the most effective operation of the Emergency
Management Plan. His duties shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Personnel: coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and
agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the City for
§ 36-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-6
1:27
emergency management purposes. The Coordinator may require
emergency services of any City officer or employee. If regular
forces are determined to be inadequate, the Coordinator may
require the services of such other personnel as he can obtain
that are available, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized
persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the
privileges and immunities as are provided by state law, the Charter
and ordinances for regular City employees and other registered
and identified emergency-management workers.
(2) Obtaining vital supplies, equipment and other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property of
the people, and binding the City for the fair value thereof.
(3) Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in
control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings
or other property for emergency management purposes.
(4) Causing to be prepared the Basic Plan herein referred to as the
"City of Vineland Emergency Management Basic Plan."
(5) Developing and coordinating plans for the immediate use of all the
facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the City of
Vineland for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to
persons and property and protecting and restoring to usefulness
the governmental services and public utilities necessary for the
public health, safety and welfare.
(6) Through public information programs, educating the civilian
population as to the actions necessary and required for the
protection of their persons and property in case of emergency, as
defined herein, either impending or present.
(7) Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation
of the emergency management forces and to familiarize residents
with regulations, procedures and operations.
(8) With the approval of the Mayor, ordering emergency management
forces to the aid of other communities when required only in
accordance with the statutes of the state and requesting the state
or county (or a political subdivision of the state) to send aid to the
City of Vineland in case of disaster when conditions in the City are
beyond the control of the local emergency management
organization and/or resources.
(9) Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the City
may direct to promote and execute the Emergency Management
Plan.
B. The Coordinator shall be Chairman of the Emergency Management
Council.
§ 36-6 VINELAND CODE § 36-6
1:28
§ 36-7. Proclamation of local disaster emergency.
Wherever, in his opinion, a disaster has occurred or is imminent in any
municipality, the Coordinator of Emergency Management Services of that
municipality shall proclaim a state of local disaster emergency within the
municipality. The Coordinator of Emergency Management Services, in
accordance with regulations promulgated by the State Civilian Defense
Director, shall be empowered to issue and enforce such orders as may be
necessary to implement and carry out disaster-control operations and to
protect the health, safety and resources of the residents of the municipality.
§ 36-8. Basic Plan; volunteers.
C. The Coordinator may exercise the emergency power and authority
necessary to fulfill his general powers and duties, as defined in this
chapter. The judgment of the Coordinator shall be the sole criterion
necessary to invoke emergency powers indicated in this chapter and
other appropriate authorities. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as abridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the
Mayor or Council, as defined in the Administrative Code of the City.
D. During any period when disaster threatens or when the City has been
struck by disaster within the definition of this chapter, the Mayor may
promulgate such regulations as he deems necessary to protect life and
property and preserve critical resources. The Coordinator shall assist in
implementing such regulations.
(1) Said regulations shall be as follows:
(a) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of
vehicles in order to facilitate the work of emergency
management forces or to facilitate the mass movement of
persons from critical areas within or without the City.
(b) Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas
deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster.
(c) Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace,
health and safety.
(2) Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above
will be published in the official newspaper. These regulations will
have the force of ordinance when duly filed with the Clerk, and
violations will be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter.
E. Reports; performance.
(1) The Coordinator shall prepare and file such reports as required by
the City, state or federal governmental agencies.
(2) The Coordinator shall perform his duties in accordance with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the Governor.
§ 36-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-8
1:29
§ 36-9. Cooperation of public employees; authority of Governor.
It shall be the duty of the members of the governing body and of each
and every officer, agent and employee of every political subdivision of
this municipality and of each member of all other governmental bodies,
agencies and authorities of any nature whatsoever fully to cooperate with
the Governor and the Civilian Defense Director in all matters affecting
any emergency as defined by the Civilian Defense and Disaster Control
Act.12 The Governor is authorized to make, amend and rescind orders, rules
and regulations as provided in said act, and it shall be unlawful for this
municipality to adopt any rule or regulation or to enforce any such rule or
regulation that may be at variance with any such order, rule or regulation
established by the Governor. In the event of a dispute on the question of
A. A comprehensive Emergency Management Basic Plan shall be
maintained by the Coordinator. In the preparation of this plan as it
pertains to City organization, it is the intent that the services,
equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and
agencies, including volunteer fire companies and first-aid squads (said
department agencies and companies hereinafter referred to as
"departments"), shall be utilized to the fullest extent to protect the
peace, health and safety of citizens. When approved, it shall be the duty
of all municipal departments to perform the functions assigned by the
plan and to maintain their portions of the plan in a current state of
readiness at all times. The Basic Plan shall be considered
supplementary to this chapter and shall have the effect of law whenever
a disaster, as defined in this chapter, has been proclaimed. The plan
shall be compatible with county and state plans.
B. The Coordinator shall prescribe in the Basic Plan those positions within
the disaster organization in addition to his own for which lines of
succession are necessary.
C. Each department head assigned responsibility in the Basic Plan shall be
responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein.
Duties will include the organization and training of assigned City
employees and volunteers. Each department head shall formulate an
operation plan for his service which, when approved, shall be an annex
to and a part of the Basic Plan.
D. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not
available within the City government, the Coordinator is authorized to
seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of
duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the
persons assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during and after the
occurrence of a disaster. Such services from persons outside of
government may be accepted by the City on a volunteer basis. Such
citizens shall be enrolled as emergency management volunteers in
cooperation with the heads of departments affected.
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
§ 36-8 VINELAND CODE § 36-9
1:30
whether or not any such rule or regulation is at variance with an order, rule
or regulation established by the Governor under said act, the determination
of the Governor shall control.
§ 36-10. Liability for damage or injury.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. App. A:9-52, neither the Office of Emergency
Management Services nor the City of Vineland, under any circumstances,
nor the agents, officers, employees, servants or representatives of the
City, including all volunteers, in good faith carrying out, complying with
or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant to the provisions of said Civilian Defense and Disaster Control
Act13 or performing any authorized service in connection therewith shall
be liable for any injury or death to persons or damage to property as the
result of any such activity. No person owning, possessing or managing
any real property which has been designated, pursuant to the provisions
of the Civilian Defense and Disaster Control Act14 or of any order, rule
or regulation promulgated thereunder, as a shelter from destructive
operations or attacks by enemies of the United States shall be liable in
any civil action for death or injury to any person who, because such real
property has been designated as a shelter as aforesaid, enters upon it
solely for the purpose of seeking refuge therein during such destructive
operations or attacks or during civil defense tests ordered by lawful
authority, except where such death or injury is caused by the willful act
of such owner, possessor or manager or his agents or employees. The
foregoing shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits or
compensation which may be specifically provided by the provisions of the
Civilian Defense and Disaster Control Act15 or any other state or federal
statute, nor shall it affect the right of any person to recover under the terms
of any policy of insurance.
§ 36-11. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority
contained herein or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of
the emergency management organization as herein defined in the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation or plan
issued thereunder.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.16
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 36-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-12
1:31
§ 36-12. Conflicting regulations superseded. [Amended 12-9-1997
by Ord. No. 97-88; 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-84]
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing
ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith. Chapter 56, Fire Department, is hereby amended to
incorporate the Office of Emergency Management Services within the Fire
Department.
Chapter 41
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 247.
Excavations — See Ch. 341.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Littering — See Ch. 446.
Noise — See Ch. 469.
Nuisances — See Ch. 473.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 507.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 620.
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
Water — See Ch. 710.
§ 41-1. Creation; statutory authority; purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56A, there is hereby created an
Environmental Commission of the City of Vineland for the protection, care
and development of the natural resources within the territorial limits of the
City of Vineland.
§ 41-2. Membership; terms of office; compensation.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Mayor, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Vineland and one of
whom shall also be a member of the City Planning Board. The Mayor
shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and presiding
officer.
B. The Mayor shall designate the Commissioners first appointed to hold
office for terms as follows: two members for one year, two members for
two years and three members for three years, respectively, from the
date on which said appointments are made and until their successors
are duly appointed and have qualified. Thereafter, all appointments
shall be for three-year terms. Where a vacancy arises otherwise than by
expiration of a term, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 36-12 VINELAND CODE § 41-2
1:32
§ 41-3. Powers and duties.
The Environmental Commission of the City of Vineland:
C. The Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
D. The City Council of the City of Vineland may, by ordinance, provide for
the appointment of no more than two alternate members. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the
governing body as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of
the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of
the alternate member first appointed shall be two years for Alternate
No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2. [Added 5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
92-35]
A. Shall conduct research into the use and possible use of open land areas
within the City of Vineland.
B. Shall compile and maintain an index of all open areas, publicly and
privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other
wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such
areas.
C. May study and make recommendations concerning open-space
preservation, water-resources management, air-pollution control, solidwaste
management, noise control, soil and landscape protection,
environmental appearance, marine resources and protection of flora
and fauna.
D. With the approval of the City Council, may acquire property, both real
and personal, in the name of the City of Vineland, by gift, purchase,
grant, bequest, devise or lease, for any of its purposes, including but
not limited to use as living museums, sites for scientific study, areas for
teaching of natural history and conservation, places of historic or
prehistoric interest and scenic beauty and habitats for rare and
endangered plants and animals, and shall administer the property for
such purposes, subject to the terms of conveyance. Such an acquisition
may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right,
easement, convenant or other contractual right as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise
conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and water
areas in the City of Vineland.
E. May adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the use of the property
acquired and to govern the conduct of persons while on or using said
property.
F. May recommend to the City Planning Board plans and programs for
inclusion in the Master Plan of the City of Vineland.
§ 41-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-3
1:33
§ 41-4. Records and annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the City Council in January
of each year. The annual report shall be a detailed and comprehensive
report of operations, receipts and expenditures, proposed activities and
recommendations.
§ 41-5. Appropriations.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-5, the City Council shall annually fix, determine
and appropriate a sum sufficient for the care, custody, policing and
maintenance of property acquired for the uses stated herein and for the
operating expenses of the Commission by taxation in the same manner as
other taxes.
§ 41-6. Appointment and salaries of employees.
The Commission may appoint a Secretary or Clerk and such number of
custodians, supervisors and assistants for any property acquired pursuant
to this chapter as it shall deem necessary. The salaries of any such
employees shall be fixed and determined by the City Council. The total
salaries of all such persons shall be within the limits of funds appropriated
to the Commission.
§ 41-7. Removal of members.
The Mayor or City Council may remove any member of the Commission
for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel.
§ 41-8. Prior Board abolished; records transferred.
As of the effective date of this chapter, the Board of Natural Areas
Preservation Commissioners is hereby abolished. The records of said Board
shall be transferred to the Environmental Commission.
Chapter 46
G. May advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans
and pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its
purposes.
H. May plan, implement and inform the public about local environmental
programs.
I. May coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
J. May adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation.
§ 41-3 VINELAND CODE § 41-8
1:34
FEES, AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 350.
§ 41-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-8
1:35

ARTICLE I
Training Programs Through Police Academy
[Adopted 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-7 (Ch. 44, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 46-1. Establishment of fees.
The Director of Public Safety, the Chief of Police and the Chief Financial
Officer of the City of Vineland shall be responsible for establishment of fees
for training programs offered through the Police Academy based upon the
cost accounting records for service provision.
§ 46-2. Annual review.
The Director of Public Safety and the Chief Financial Officer shall review
annually the cost accounting records for service provision, and the fee for
service shall be adjusted annually as required pursuant to such review.
§ 46-3. Copies on file.
Certified copies of this article shall be filed with the Director of Public
Safety, the Chief Financial Officer and the applicable federal and/or state
agencies.
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-3
1:37

ARTICLE II
Bid Specifications and Construction Plans
[Adopted 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-17; amended in its entirety
8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-67 (Ch. 44, Art. II, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 46-4. Establishment of fees.
The Business Administrator, Chief Financial Officer and Purchasing Agent
shall be responsible for establishment of fees for the provision of bid
specifications and construction plans issued by the City of Vineland based
upon the cost accounting records for same.
§ 46-5. Annual review.
The Business Administrator, Chief Financial Officer and Purchasing Agent
shall review annually the cost accounting records for the provision of bid
specifications and construction plans issued by the City of Vineland, and
the fee for service shall be adjusted annually as required pursuant to such
review.
§ 46-6. Copies on file.
Certified copies of this article shall be filed with the Business Administrator,
Chief Financial Officer and Purchasing Agent.
§ 46-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-6
1:39
Chapter 50
FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 5. Claims approval — See Ch. 19.
§ 50-1. Establishment; head.
There is hereby established the Department of Finance of the City of
Vineland, the head of which shall be the Director of the Department of
Finance.
§ 50-2. Appointment of Director.
The Director of the Department of Finance shall be appointed by the Mayor
of the City of Vineland, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
§ 50-3. Term of Director.
The Director of the Department of Finance shall be appointed for and
serve during the term of office of the Mayor until the qualification and
appointment of a successor.
§ 50-4. Qualifications of Director.
No person shall be qualified for appointment as Director of the Department
of Finance unless such person is certified as a municipal finance officer
under N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.2.
§ 50-5. Duties of Director of Finance. [Amended 9-13-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-30]
The Director of the Department of Finance shall:
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of the Department,
consistent with applicable statutes and ordinances.
B. Appoint, direct and supervise the subordinate officers and employees of
the Department.
C. Approve or disapprove pay rolls, bills and claims chargeable to the
departmental appropriations.
D. Provide such information and reports on the work of the eight
departments as may be required by the Mayor or City Council.
E. Perform such other duties, as directed by the Mayor, not inconsistent
with applicable statutes and ordinances.
§ 46-6 VINELAND CODE § 50-5
1:40
§ 50-6. Division of Assessments.
Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Division of Assessments,
the head of which shall be the City Tax Assessor. All personnel of the City
Tax Assessor's office are hereby assigned to the Department of Finance. The
City Tax Assessor and related personnel shall continue to administer and
enforce the tax laws of the State of New Jersey, but said personnel shall
be subject to the general supervision of the Director of the Department of
Finance in all budgetary, personnel and administrative matters unrelated to
the enforcement and administration of the tax laws and other related laws
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 50-7. Division of Collections.
Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Division of Collections,
the head of which shall be the City Tax Collector. All personnel of the City
Tax Collector's office are hereby assigned to the Department of Finance.
Under the general supervision of the Director of the Department of Finance
and the direct supervision of the Tax Collector, the Division shall:
Chapter 52
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
§ 52-1. Financial disclosure statement required.
Any appointed member to a board or commission of the City of Vineland
shall, upon notice by the City Clerk, immediately complete and file the
required financial disclosure statement when due or within any grace
periods provided
§ 52-2. Suspension for noncompliance.
Any appointed member of a board or commission who fails to file a financial
disclosure statement and has received a notice of violation from the State
of New Jersey Local Finance Board shall be immediately suspended from
his/her appointed position until he/she has provided proof that he/she has
F. Provide accounting support and other such reports and statements of
revenue and expenses as may be required by the Director of Municipal
Utilities.
A. Perform all tax collection and other assessment collection duties
required by law.
B. Perform such other collections of municipal funds as directed by the
Mayor or Director of the Department of Finance.
C. Make periodic recommendations and reports to the Mayor and Director
of the Department of Finance as required.
§ 50-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-2
1:41
complied with all of the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.6 and any
directive from any notice of violation.
§ 52-3. Termination from office.
In the event the appointed official shall be suspended for a period in excess
of 45 days as provided herein, that appointed official shall be immediately
terminated from that position after the expiration of 45 days, which shall
create a vacancy subject to appointment in accordance with the laws of the
State of New Jersey and the City of Vineland.
Chapter 56
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 36.
Health Department, Division of Emergency
Medical Services — See Ch. 62, Art. II.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Police Department — See Ch. 123.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 362.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 372.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 609.
§ 52-2 VINELAND CODE § 52-3
1:42
ARTICLE I
Establishment; Composition
§ 56-1. Establishments; compositions
A. There shall be and hereby is established a Fire Department of the City
of Vineland, in the County of Cumberland, the head of which shall be a
Director, hereinafter known and identified as the "Director of the Fire
Department."
B. Composition; organization.
(1) The Fire Department shall consist of the following:
(a) The established volunteer fire companies as follows:
Fire Company No. 1, located at 810 East Chestnut Avenue,
formerly consisted of the Pioneer Volunteer Company No. 1,
Reliance Engine No. 2 and Truck Company No. 1 of the former
Borough of Vineland; Fire Company No. 2 (South Vineland),
located at 876 East Sherman Avenue; Fire Company No. 3
(North Vineland), located at 185 West Forest Grove Road; Fire
Company No. 4 (Main Avenue), located at 1500 East Oak Road;
and the Fire Company No. 5 (Panther Road), located at 4450
Italia Avenue, of the former Township of Landis; said
respective fire companies representing the merged and
consolidated companies under the jurisdiction and control of
the City of Vineland as a result of consolidation of the former
Borough of Vineland and the former Township of Landis on July
1, 1952, by a majority vote of the people of said municipalities
on February 5, 1952; the established career fire company, Fire
Company No. 6, located at 110 North 4th Street.
(b) The City of Vineland Fire Department is headquartered at 110
North 4th Street.
(c) The Director of the Fire Department as heretofore stated in
§ 56-1A above.
(d) A Fire Chief of the Fire Department to be designated duties as
set forth in § 56-7 (hereinafter referred as the "Fire Chief").
(e) Volunteer Fire District Chiefs (hereinafter referred to as
"District Chiefs") as approved by the Director of the Fire
Department as set forth in § 56-9 and the Fire Department
organizational chart.
(f) Volunteer Fire Deputy Chiefs as approved by the Director of
the Fire Department as set forth in § 56-10 and the Fire
Department organizational chart.
(g) Fire Captains of the Fire Department as set forth in the Fire
Department organizational chart.
§ 56-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:43
§ 56-2. Jurisdiction and functions of Fire Department.
The Fire Department shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the control,
fighting and the extinguishment of any conflagration which occurs within
the City limit. The Fire Department shall:
§ 56-3. Continuance of existing organizations and rules and
regulations; division into companies.
(h) Fire Lieutenants of the Fire Department as set forth in the Fire
Department organizational chart.
(i) Firefighters in such numbers as shall be recommended by the
Director of the Fire Department, with the approval of the
Mayor, and designated by the City Council pursuant to budget
appropriation therefor.
(2) In addition thereto, the name of any existing division or bureau may
be changed and other divisions, bureaus or units may be hereafter
established by the Director of Fire with the approval of the Mayor.
A. Provide fire-fighting service for the preservation of human life and
property through the extinguishment of fires, performance of rescue
services and special hazardous materials mitigation throughout the
City.
B. Investigate the origin, cause and circumstance of fires and report every
case of suspicion of arson to the Vineland Police Department who will
then notify the Prosecutor.
C. Inspect and test any automatic or other fire alarm system or fireextinguishing
equipment.
D. Be authorized to enter upon, without fee or interference, all premises,
grounds, structures, buildings, vessels and passages whenever
necessary in the performance of its duties.
E. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the fire-fighting
efficiency of the members of the Fire Department.
F. Administer and enforce the Fire Prevention Bureau as provided in
§ 372-3, Enforcing agency, of Chapter 372, Fire Prevention, of the Code
of the City of Vineland.
A. All officers, subordinates and firefighters in the respective companies
comprising said Fire Department immediately prior to the passage of
this chapter shall continue in his/her respective capacities and shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of
the Department to the same extent as new members.
B. For the greater efficiency of the Department and to provide proper and
adequate fire protection throughout the City of Vineland, said Fire
Department shall have six companies divided into five districts. Each
§ 56-1 VINELAND CODE § 56-3
1:44
§ 56-4. Director.
§ 56-5. Powers and duties of director.
company will be known and designated as "Company No. 1," "Company
No. 2," "Company No. 3," "Company No. 4," "Company No. 5" and
"Company No. 6."
A. The Fire Department of the City of Vineland shall be headed by a
Director, who shall be known as the "Director of the Fire Department of
the City of Vineland."
B. Said Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council of the City of Vineland and shall serve only
during the term of office of the Mayor appointing him.
C. The Director of the Fire Department shall be technically qualified by
training and experience in management and familiar with budgeting,
grant writing and supervision of employees. The Director shall have not
less than 10 years' experience in public safety (e.g., firefighter,
emergency management officer, emergency medical technician);
firefighter experience is preferred but not mandatory. In lieu of the 10
years' experience, the Director shall have five years' experience in
public safety and shall have graduated with a degree from an
accredited college or university related to the qualifications specified
herein. [Amended 8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-52]
A. The Director of the Fire Department shall have general administrative
authority over the Department of Fire. He shall appoint subordinate
officers and employees of said Department under his jurisdiction, which
are herein or which may hereafter be authorized by ordinance, subject
to the provisions of the statutes of New Jersey. The Director of the Fire
Department shall be a full-time position, but the Director shall not be
entitled to overtime and/or compensatory time. [Amended 8-8-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-52]
B. The Director of the Fire Department shall prepare and submit to the
Council of the City of Vineland, for its approval, a manual or set of rules
and regulations for the administration, control and discipline of the Fire
Department and all of its officers and members. Upon approval by
resolution of the City Council, said rules and regulations shall go into
effect, and a copy thereof shall be furnished to each officer and member
of the Department.
C. The Director of the Fire Department may discipline fire officers and
firefighters within the Fire Department with input from the Fire Chief.
D. The Director of the Fire Department may, with the approval of the
Mayor, remove such fire officers and employees, subject to the
provisions of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, Title 11, Civil Service.
§ 56-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-5
1:45
§ 56-6. Orders and instructions issued to Fire Chief.
E. The Director of the Fire Department shall serve as the liaison to the City
administration and receive direction from the Mayor.
F. The Director of the Fire Department shall prepare the Fire Department
budget and provide oversight on the expenditures of approved funds
and payroll.
G. The Director of the Fire Department may issue administrative orders of
the Fire Chief.
H. The Director of the Fire Department shall approve all fire line officers
for each company with input from the Fire Chief.
I. The Director of the Fire Department shall preside at and serve as the
hearings officer with input from the Fire Chief on suspensions and
dismissals from the Fire Department unless otherwise directed by the
Business Administrator and/or City Solicitor with the consent of the
Mayor. [Amended 8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-52]
J. The Director of the Fire Department shall review and approve standard
operating procedures (SOPs), guidelines and general orders proposed
by the Fire Chief.
K. The Director of the Fire Department shall develop, implement and
revise administrative and personnel related SOPs as needed.
L. When the Director also holds a certification as a Fire Official issued by
the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, he/she shall
also assist in the performance of the necessary duties of the Fire
Official as specified in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. and the Code of the
City of Vineland § 372-1 et seq. [Added 8-8-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-52]
M. The Director shall also assist the local enforcing agency in the
enforcement of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A.
52:270-19 et seq. and the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70
et seq. [Added 8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-52]
A. When the Fire Chief is not also the Director of the Fire Department,
orders or instructions regarding management, budgets, supervision
and/or department policies shall be issued to the Fire Chief by the
Director with the approval of the Mayor. All such orders or instructions
shall be recognized, carried out and obeyed by the Fire Chief and all
other members of the Fire Department. Such orders or instructions
shall not in any way conflict with the provisions of any ordinance or law.
[Amended 8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-52]
B. The Fire Chief shall have control and general supervision and direction
of the Department of Fire for the preservation of human life through the
§ 56-5 VINELAND CODE § 56-6
1:46
§ 56-7. Powers and duties of Fire Chief.
extinguishment of fires, performance of rescue services and special
hazardous materials mitigation throughout the City.
A. When the Fire Chief is not also the Director of the Fire Department, the
Fire Chief shall assist the Director of the Fire Department in the
discharge of duties of the Director of the Fire Department, and he shall
have such other duties provided by law, under the direction and
authority, however, of the Director of the Fire Department.
B. The Fire Chief shall have control and general supervision and direction
of the Department of Fire for the preservation of human life and
property through the extinguishment of fires, performance of rescue
services and special hazardous materials mitigation throughout the
City.
C. The Fire Chief shall be directly responsible to the Director of the Fire
Department for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of the
Fire Department.
D. The Fire Chief shall preserve the discipline of the Department and
provide instruction to the subordinate Fire Department personnel in the
performance of his/her duties in connection with the services provided.
E. The Fire Chief, or his/her designee(s), shall inspect all equipment in
each station on at least a monthly basis, to see that all equipment is
clean, in its proper place and ready for service. A complete report of the
same shall be maintained by the Fire Chief or his/her designee(s).
F. The Fire Chief with input from the Director of the Fire Department
shall:
(1) Develop standard operating procedures, guidelines and general
orders with the approval of the Director of Fire.
(2) Develop firefighter safety and health programs and operational
programs with the approval of the Director of Fire.
(3) Recommend to the Director of Fire the appointment, discipline and
removal of fire officers, firefighters and employees.
(4) Recommend and advise the Director of Fire on the budget of the
Fire Department and assist with the financial administration of the
Department.
(5) Oversee the Fire Department's role in fire prevention programs.
(6) Ensure that all fire officers and firefighters are properly trained.
(7) Provide the Director of Fire with monthly or other periodic reports
on the operations of the Fire Department as may be required.
§ 56-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-8
1:47
§ 56-8. Career staff.
§ 56-9. District Chiefs.
A. The career firefighter staff of the Fire Department shall consist of those
career firefighters in the employ of the Department at the time of the
passage and adoption of this chapter and such other and additional
career firefighters as may hereafter be designated by the Council of the
City of Vineland.
B. The present career firefighters staff shall continue to enjoy the
privileges and legal status afforded them by statute.
C. All career firefighter staff of the Department shall be subject to
discipline, suspension and removal for the good of the Department in
the manner prescribed by law (Title 11 of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated); provided, however, that the Director of the Fire
Department may, after a formal hearing, prescribe reprimand, extra
duty, deduction in pay or reduction in rank, depending upon the gravity
of the offenses.
D. All career firefighters staff shall receive such salaries as may be fixed by
the Council of the City of Vineland in the compensation schedules
heretofore adopted or hereafter to be adopted in the Schedule of
Classified Positions and Applicable Salary Ranges in the Civil Service of
the City of Vineland.
E. The personnel of the career firefighter staff of the Fire Department
shall consist of the ranks of Fire Chief, Captain, Lieutenant, Firefighter
and such other employees as recommended by the Director of Fire
Department to the Mayor and City Council.
A. Each volunteer company shall be in direct charge of a District Chief,
who shall be elected by the active volunteer members of each
respective company and approved by the Director of the Fire
Department.
B. Each District Chief shall be responsible to the Director of the Fire
Department for the efficient operation of his/her station.
C. Each District Chief shall preserve the discipline of his/her company and
provide instruction to the subordinate Fire Department personnel in the
performance of his/her duties in connection with the emergency
services provided.
D. Each District Chief, or his/her designee(s), shall inspect all equipment
in his/her charge each month to see that all equipment is clean, in its
proper place and ready for service. A complete report of the same shall
be made each month to the Fire Chief or his/her designee.
E. Each District Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of the fire
and training attendance of each member of his/her station and shall
§ 56-8 VINELAND CODE § 56-9
1:48
§ 56-10. Deputy Chiefs and other officers.
§ 56-11. Composition and qualifications of membership;
suspensions and discharges.
submit such to the Fire Chief or his designee. For this purpose and for
other clerical work of his/her station, the District Chief may appoint one
of his/her station members to assist in the performance of these clerical
duties.
F. Each District Chief shall assist and make recommendations to the Fire
Chief on the control, general supervision, development of standard
operating procedures, guidelines and general orders and the direction
of the Department of Fire for the preservation of human life through the
extinguishment of fires, performance of rescue services and special
hazardous materials mitigation throughout the City.
A. Each volunteer company shall elect from its members a Deputy Chief,
who shall, in the absence of his/her District Chief, exercise the same
duties and have the same powers as devolve upon the District Chief. At
all other times, the Deputy Chief shall perform such duties as the
District Chief may direct.
B. In addition to the District Chiefs and Deputy Chiefs as aforesaid, the
active members of each company shall elect from among its members a
Captain, Lieutenant(s) and such other officers as may be necessary and
expedient for the efficient operation of each station.
A. The membership of the Fire Department shall consist of the Fire
Companies herein organized and any new firefighters who may be
approved for membership by resolution of the City Council of the City of
Vineland. No person shall become a member unless:
B. Volunteer staff:
(1) Be at least 18 years of age at the time of application. Members
must be at least 18 years of age and not older than 45 years of age
to be accepted into the New Jersey State Firemen's Association.
Members over the age of 45 may still join, but will not be entitled to
the benefits of membership in the New Jersey State Firemen's
Association.
(2) Possess or be actively acquiring, within five years of joining the
Department, a high school diploma, GED certificate or graduating
from a vocational school. Current members who do not possess the
required diploma or certificate are exempt from this requirement.
(3) Submit an application to the City of Vineland.
(4) Possess a valid New Jersey driver license.
§ 56-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-11
1:49
(5) Successfully pass a medical examination administered by the Fire
Department's contracted occupational healthcare provider. The
medical examination will be performed utilizing NFPA 1582,
Standard on Medical Requirements for Firefighters.
(6) Successfully pass a criminal background investigation, a drug
screen, a driver license abstract investigation and other tests as
may be required by the City of Vineland.
(7) Successfully complete a course of training and obtain a Firefighter
I certification issued by the New Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
Candidates currently possessing the said certification shall take a
challenge examination. The Fire Department's training officer or
his/her designee will administer the challenge examination.
(8) Complete all additional training as may be required by state and/or
Fire Department regulations and procedures.
(9) Perform periodic proficiency assessments to demonstrate skills and
abilities necessary for the Fire Department operations in
accordance with the most current Fire Department standard
operating procedure.
(10) Members shall comply with the rules and regulations of the relief
association, particularly those regulations which preclude the
membership of a volunteer in more than one fire company relief
association.
C. Career staff.
(1) Career service competitive positions are made from eligible lists
compiled and approved by the New Jersey Civil Service
Commission. Candidates are ranked according to the result of an
examination or education/experience. Any employee who is not
hired from such a list to fill a position in the Career Service,
Competitive Division, is considered a provisional appointment. All
hiring procedures are subject to the N.J.A.C. Title 4A, and N.J.S.A.
11A.
(2) Requirements are:
(a) A citizen of the United States.
(b) Resident preference.
(c) High school or an equivalence certificate or vocational school
graduate.
(d) Between the age of 18 and 35. Volunteer firefighters are not to
exceed 40 years of age prior to an appointment date.
(e) Successfully pass a medical examination administered by the
Fire Department's contracted occupational healthcare
§ 56-11 VINELAND CODE § 56-11
1:50
§ 56-12. Apparatus and equipment.
provider. The medical examination will be performed utilizing
NFPA 1582, Standard on Medical Requirements for
Firefighters.
(f) Successfully pass a criminal background investigation, a drug
screen, a driver license abstract investigation, a psychiatric
exam and other tests as may be required by the City of
Vineland.
(g) Possess a valid New Jersey driver license.
(h) Successfully complete a course of training and obtain a
Firefighter I Certification issued by the New Jersey Division of
Fire Safety. Candidates currently possessing the said
certification shall take the challenge examination. The Fire
Department's training officer or his/her designee will
administer the challenge examination.
(i) Complete all additional training as may be required by state
and/or Fire Department regulations or procedures.
(j) Perform periodic proficiency assessments in accordance with
the most current Fire Department standard operating
procedure.
D. Any member of the Department may be suspended or discharged from
the Department by the Director of the Fire Department at any time the
Director may deem such action necessary for the good of the Fire
Department. On written request of such member to the Director, he
shall be given a public hearing on the charges against him.
A. The Department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other
equipment which it now has and such as may be required from time to
time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property
from fire and other hazards.
B. Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made
by the Director of the Fire Department and shall be purchased in such a
manner as may be designated by the City Council.
C. All apparatus and equipment of the Department shall be safely, properly
and conveniently housed in such places as may be designated by the
Director of the Fire Department.
D. Suitable arrangement or equipment shall be provided for notifying all
members of the Department so that they may promptly respond.
E. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purposes, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority
take away or conceal any article used in any way by the Department.
§ 56-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-12
1:51
§ 56-13. Identification.
§ 56-14. Special traffic regulations.
§ 56-15. Obstruction of fire stations or hydrants.
No person shall park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to be
placed within 50 feet of the entrance to any fire station or other place where
fire apparatus is stored or within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
§ 56-16. False alarms.
No person shall maliciously tum in or case to be turned in a false alarm as
per § 372-12, False/nuisance alarms.
§ 56-17. Personnel roster.
The personnel of each volunteer station of the Fire Department shall consist
of the ranks of district chiefs, deputy chiefs, captains, lieutenants,
firefighters, fire police, and such other positions as recommended by the
Director of Fire Department to the Mayor and City Council.
§ 56-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of § 56-12E or F, 56-14B or C, 56-15 or
56-16 shall, upon conviction before the Municipal Court Judge, pay a fine as
determined by local ordinance.
F. No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or
handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department unless
accompanied by or having the special permission of an officer or
authorized member of the Department.
G. No apparatus shall be hired out or permitted to leave the City of
Vineland except in response to a mutual aid call in a neighboring
community, without the consent of the Director of Fire Department or
his designee.
A. Each member of the Department shall be issued an identification card
his/her rank and that he/she is to be considered essential personnel.
A. All personal vehicles of members of the Fire Department shall be
governed by N.J.S.A. 39:3-54.12 when responding to an alarm.
B. No unauthorized person with any vehicle shall follow within 600 feet of
any apparatus belonging to the Department nor park any vehicle within
300 feet of any fire.
C. No person shall drive any vehicle over fire hose except upon specific
orders from the officer in charge where the hose is being used.
§ 56-12 VINELAND CODE § 56-19
1:52
§ 56-19. Grant of special police powers.
All appointed members of the Fire Department are hereby given the
necessary special police powers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 56-20. Duties of police.
It is hereby made the special duty of the Chief of Police and/or other
police officers who may be on duty and available for fire duty to respond
to all fire alarms and assist the Department in the preservation of human
life and property, in regulating traffic, maintaining order and in enforcing
observance of all sections of this chapter.
§ 56-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-20
1:53

ARTICLE II
Length of Service Awards Program
§ 56-21. Program established.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 338 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members of
the volunteer firefighters for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the
residents of the City of Vineland.
§ 56-22. Annual contributions; plan.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the City of Vineland pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 338; and that
such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the State of
New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code and this article.
§ 56-23. Criteria.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
who meets the criteria as follows:
§ 56-24. Vesting.
The LOSAP shall provide for contributions as credit for no more than 10
years of prior years' services for each eligible volunteer in accordance with
the following schedule.
§ 56-25. Cost of Program.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
A. Fifty points are required for a member to be eligible for an annual
contribution (see Schedule A17).
B. Five years of service are required for vesting.
C. The annual contributions shall be $1,589 per eligible member.
A. Vested prior years: only contributing for year 2000.
A. For regular annual services: $1,589 per member per year.
B. For contributions for prior years' service: $1,150 per year for 2000.
17.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 56-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-26
1:55
§ 56-26. Points.
Each active volunteer shall be credited with points for volunteer services
provided to the volunteer fire company in accordance with the following
schedule (see Schedule A).18
§ 56-27. Approval at general election.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election.19
18.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
19.Editor's Note: This article was approved by the voters at the general election held
November 2, 1999.
§ 56-26 VINELAND CODE § 56-27
1:56
ARTICLE III
Rescue Fees
§ 56-28. Reimbursable services.
Services shall be reimbursable whenever a Fire Department vehicle and
equipment respond to an emergency rescue incident. Said emergency shall
include, but not be limited to, a motor vehicle accident, hazardous material
spill or technical rescue incident. Emergency services provided shall
include, but not be limited to, extrication by the use of any specialized
equipment. Fees for incidents involve multiple vehicles shall be established
on a per-vehicle basis.
§ 56-29. Required information.
Any recipient of services herein specified shall provide the Fire Department
with his or her name, address and telephone number, as well as the name,
address and telephone number of his or her insurance carrier, if applicable.
§ 56-30. Fees.
A. The Fire Department response to rescue shall be reimbursed as follows:
(1) Light rescue: $314.
(a) Operations such as stabilizations, use of hand tools, hazard
control and other related light rescue.
(2) Medium Rescue: $629.
(a) Operations include the use of power tools and hydraulic rescue
tools to perform activities such as opening or removing doors
to provide access to patients as well as stabilizing vehicles and
performing hazardous assessment.
(3) Heavy rescue: $1,259.
(a) Operations include any technical rescue procedures, including
but not limited to water and ice rescue, rope rescue, confined
space rescue, high-angle rescue, trench rescue or structural
collapse rescue. Motor vehicle rescue that includes the use of
power tools and hydraulic tools to perform operations such as
partial or full roof removal, front/dash displacement, third door
access and separating vehicles from one another.
(4) Technical rescue: There shall be a fee charged for any technical
rescue response. Technical rescue includes rope rescue, trench
rescue, structural collapse rescue, confined space rescue, and
water rescue. Fees for technical rescue services shall be calculated
using the following guidelines. [Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-44]
§ 56-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-30
1:57
(a) Manpower. All manpower fees shall be figured on a per person
rate based on that responders assigned position.
[1] Chief: Contracted salary rate figured at an overtime rate of
1 1/2 times the hourly rate.
[2] Officers: Top contracted salary figured at an overtime rate
of 1 1/2 times the hourly rate.
[3] Firefighters: Top contracted salary rate figured at an
overtime rate of 1 1/2 times the hourly rate.
[4] Emergency medical technician: Top contracted salary rate
figured at an overtime rate of 1 1/2 times the hourly rate.
(b) Apparatus.
[1] Aerial apparatus: $300 per hour.
[2] Fire engine: $250 per hour.
[3] Ambulance: $200 per hour.
[4] Support/command: $150 per hour.
(c) Equipment. A fee shall be charged at replacement cost plus
10% for any damaged equipment or equipment that has to be
placed out of service after an incident.
(d) Contracted services. A fee shall be charged for permit-required
confined space rescue/recovery operations and standby
services. Any municipality or industrial business that operates
or has the potential to operate in permit-required confined
spaces shall be assessed an annual service fee as described
below.
[1] Annual fee.
[a] One to 10 permit-required confined spaces: $1,000.
[b] Each additional permit-required confined space: $200.
[c] Total fee not to exceed: $4,000.
[2] Standby fee (noncontracted). The fee for permit-required
confined space standby service requests shall be
calculated using the service fees outlined in this
§ 56-30A(4).
[3] Standby fee (contracted). The annual fee for contracted
facilities for permit-required confined space standby
services shall cover the apparatus and equipment fees
(unless damaged). Manpower shall be calculated as an
additional charge following the fee schedule set forth in
this § 56-30A(4).
§ 56-30 VINELAND CODE § 56-30
1:58
§ 56-31. Enforcement.
The Fire Department and Comptroller's Office shall establish a third-party
billing program to collect the aforesaid fees. Any applicable charges for
rescue services rendered to a person shall be billed to said person and/or
said person's insurance carrier.
§ 56-32. Duty to respond.
The Fire Department has the duty to rescues, notwithstanding the ability
to pay or lack of insurance of the recipient of said rescue services. The
Fire Department shall not refuse nor delay any emergency service to any
person, firm, organization or company based on the ability to pay or lack of
insurance.
B. As per Ordinance No. 2001-41 the above fees will increase 3% annually.
§ 56-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-32
1:59
Chapter 62
HEALTH, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
§ 56-32 VINELAND CODE § 56-32
1:60
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 62-1. Establishment.
§ 62-2. Director.
The Department of Health shall be headed by a Director, who shall be
known as the "Director of the Department of Health."
§ 62-3. Appointment of Director.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of City Council, the
Director of the Department of Health, who shall have at least five years'
experience in public health issues.
§ 62-4. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director shall be the executive and administrative head of the
Department and have the power and authority to:
A. There shall be and hereby is established a Department of Health for the
City of Vineland.
B. The following divisions shall be assigned to and be under the control
and direction of the Department of Health:
(1) Division of Emergency Medical Services.
(2) Division of Community Nursing Services.
(3) Division of Public Health.
(4) Division of Vital Statistics.
A. Appoint subordinate officers and employees in the Department
necessary for the performance of the duties and activities of the
Department as required by the provisions of Title 26 of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes.
B. Make periodic reports and recommendations to the Mayor and Council
as provided by law or as may be requested by the Mayor and City
Council.
C. Perform such other health-related duties as shall be prescribed by the
Mayor and City Council and are not limited by statute.
D. Establish rules, regulations, policies and procedures for all
departmental functions consistent with the powers of department
heads as provided by law.
§ 62-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-5
1:61
§ 62-5. Division Administrator. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-13]
The Board of Health of the City of Vineland shall appoint a local registrar in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:8-11(b), who shall be certified by the Municipal
Clerk to the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services.
§ 62-6. Enactment and approval of legislation.
All ordinances, resolutions and other legislative enactments pertaining to
the Department of Health and health matters shall be enacted by the City
Council and approved by the Mayor as required.
§ 62-7. Local Board of Health abolished; exercise of functions.
The Local Board of Health authorized by Ordinance No. 7 is hereby
abolished and terminated, and hereafter all legislative functions shall be
exercised by the City Council and all executive and administrative functions
shall be exercised by the Department of Health and its Director, officers and
employees.
§ 62-5 VINELAND CODE § 62-7
1:62
ARTICLE II
Division of Emergency Medical Services
§ 62-8. Establishment.
There be and is hereby established a Division of Emergency Medical
Services in the City of Vineland Department of Health.
§ 62-9. Implementation.
The Division of Emergency Medical Services shall be implemented pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 8:40 and N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.
§ 62-10. Annual report.
A report of the Division of Emergency Medical Services shall be made
annually and transmitted to the Director of the Department of Health for
filing with the Mayor of the City of Vineland.
§ 62-11. Duties.
The Division of Emergency Medical Services is to provide emergency
medical care and transportation within the boundaries of the City of
Vineland and to other medical facilities as deemed medically necessary.
§ 62-12. Third-party payment plan.
A. The Director of the Department of Health and the Chief Financial
Officer of the City of Vineland shall be responsible for the third-party
billing program for emergency medical services.
B. The Director of the Department of Health, together with the Chief
Financial Officer, shall review annually the cost-accounting records for
services provided and to adjust the fees therefor.
C. A certified copy of this section shall be filed with the Director of the
Department of Health, the Chief Financial Officer and applicable
federal or state agencies.
§ 62-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-12
1:63

ARTICLE III
Division of Community Nursing Services
§ 62-13. Establishment.
There be and is hereby established a Division of Community Nursing
Services in the City of Vineland Department of Health.
§ 62-14. Division Administrator.
The governing authority shall appoint a Nursing Administrator, as
recommended by the Director of Health, as the administrative head of the
Division of Community Nursing Services, who shall be responsible for all
operations, subordinate employees and agents of said Division.
§ 62-15. Qualifications of Nursing Administrator.
The Nursing Administrator shall have at least one of the following
qualifications:
§ 62-16. Duties of Nursing Administrator.
The Nursing Administrator shall be responsible for, but not limited to, the
following:
A. A master's degree in nursing or a health-related field and two years'
combined community health nursing and progressive management
experience in community health nursing with supervisory or
administrative experience in home health care or in a health-care
setting; or
B. A bachelor of science degree in nursing or a health-related field and
three years' combined community health nursing and progressive
management experience in community health nursing with four years'
supervisory or administrative experience in home health care or a
health-care setting.
A. Ensuring the development, implementation, and enforcement of all
policies and procedures, including patient rights.
B. Planning for and administering the managerial, operational, fiscal and
reporting components of the Division.
C. Participating in the quality assurance program for patient care.
D. Ensuring that all personnel are assigned duties based upon their
education, training, competencies and job descriptions.
E. Ensuring the provision of staff orientation and staff education.
F. Establishing and maintaining liaison relationships, communication, and
integration with Division staff and services and with patients and their
§ 62-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-16
1:65
§ 62-17. Alternate Nursing Administrator.
In the absence of the Nursing Administrator, the Alternate Nursing
Administrator, designated by the Director of the Department of Health, shall
serve as the Nursing Administrator.
§ 62-18. Patient care services.
The Division shall establish written policies and procedures governing
patient care that shall be adopted by governing authority and shall include
at least the following:
§ 62-19. Advisory group.
The governing authority shall appoint a twelve-member advisory group
to review policies, evaluate programs and make recommendations to the
leadership for change or further study. Membership shall include the
families, in accordance with the philosophy and objectives of the
Division.
G. Directing of patient care services provided to patients.
H. Establishing written policies as set forth in this article.
A. Criteria for admission and discharge of patients. Admission criteria
shall be based solely upon the patient's needs and the ability of the
Division to safely meet the medical, nursing and social needs of the
patient. Discharge policies shall preclude punitive discharge.
B. Criteria for physician orders for home health services, including time
frames and other requirements for written, verbal, and renewal orders.
Physician orders for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech
therapy shall include the modality, frequency and duration of treatment.
C. Protocols for initiation, implementation, review and revision of plans for
care and services.
D. Protocols for reassessment of patients, in accordance with time frames
documented in the service plan by each health-care practitioner.
E. Protocols for providing continuity of care by the same health-care
practitioner whenever possible.
F. Provision of care in accordance with the plan of care.
G. Provision of emergency care.
H. Requirements for a discharge plan for each patient developed prior to
the patient's discharge, and methods for including the patient or the
patients family in planning and implementing the discharge plan.
I. A patient referral system for additional sources of care.
§ 62-16 VINELAND CODE § 62-19
1:66
Nursing Administrator, a nursing supervisor, a physician, three consumers,
a representative of physical therapy services, occupational therapy
services, speech-language therapy services, social work, and dietary
counseling. The advisory group shall meet at least annually.
§ 62-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-19
1:67

ARTICLE IV
Division of Public Health
§ 62-20. Establishment.
There be and is hereby established a Division of Public Health in the City of
Vineland Department of Health.
§ 62-21. Division Administrator.
The appointing authority shall appoint a Health Officer.
§ 62-22. Qualifications of Health Officer.
The Health Officer shall be licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Health and Senior Services pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:7.
§ 62-23. Duties of Health Officer.
The Health Officer shall be employed full-time as the chief executive officer
of the Department of Health for the administration of the Division of Public
Health. The Health Officer shall evaluate health problems, plan appropriate
activities to address those health problems, develop necessary budgetary
procedures to finance the activities and direct staff to implement the
activities in an efficient and economical manner consistent with the
obligations imposed by N.J.A.C. 8:52 et seq. The Health Officer shall also
provide for the following:
A. Administrative services. The Health Officer shall be responsible for the
administrative and organizational management services necessary to
effectively lead the Department of Health pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:52-5.
The functions of management and leadership include, but are not
limited to, planning, organization, public health staffing, coordination
and response, budgeting, evaluation and reporting.
B. Health education and health promotion. Strategies that promote health
and quality of life. This service shall include the combination of health,
education and related activities which are designed to facilitate
behavioral and environmental adaptations to protect or improve health.
This process enables individuals and communities to control and
improve their health status. This service also provides opportunities for
individuals to identify problems, develop solutions, and work in
partnerships to build on existing skills and strengths.
C. Public health nursing. Synthesis of nursing and public health practices
for the purpose of protecting and promoting physical and mental health
to prevent disease, injury and disability. Public health nursing practice
incorporates the core public health functions of assessment, assurance
and policy development within the art and science of professional
nursing practice through a systematic process which promotes and
protects the public health.
§ 62-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-23
1:69
D. Best practices. The Health Officer, the Department of Health and all
subordinate employees and agents assigned thereto shall strive to meet
the guidelines of best practices as set forth in the Appendix of the New
Jersey Administrative Code, Title 8, Department of Health and Senior
Services, which shall include:
(1) Environmental health activities.
(2) Communicable disease activities.
(3) Maternal and child health activities.
(4) Adult health services activities.
(5) Health education and health promotion.
E. Monitor health status. Directing the collection, compilation,
interpretation, and communication of vital statistics and health status
measures; the identification of threats to health; the assessment of
health service needs; and the analyses, communication and publication
of information on access, utilization, quality and outcomes of personal
health issues.
F. Policy development. Directing the systematic planning process for
health improvement. The development and tracking of measurable
health objectives as a part of continuous quality improvement strategy,
the development of consistent policy regarding prevention and
treatment services, and the development of model codes to guide the
practice of public health.
G. Diagnosis and investigation of health problems and hazards. Directing
the epidemiological identification of emerging health threats; active
infectious disease prevention and control efforts; and technical capacity
for epidemiological investigation of disease outbreaks and patterns of
chronic disease and injury.
H. Preventive personal health services and access to health care. Directing
the accessibility of the personal health care system to socially
disadvantaged individuals. Culturally and linguistically appropriate
materials and staff shall be accessible to assure linkage to services for
special populations. Guiding continuous care management,
transportation services, and technical assistance and health
information for high-risk groups and occupational health programs.
§ 62-23 VINELAND CODE § 62-23
1:70
ARTICLE V
Division of Vital Statistics
§ 62-24. Establishment.
There be and is hereby established a Division of Vital Statistics in the City
of Vineland Department of Health.
§ 62-25. Division Administrator.
The appointing authority shall appoint a Local Registrar, who shall be
certified by the Municipal Clerk to the New Jersey Department of Health
and Senior Services.
§ 62-26. Term of office.
The Local Registrar shall be appointed to a three-year term of office or until
a successor has been appointed and qualified. At least 10 days prior to the
expiration of the term of office, the appointing authority shall appoint a
successor or reappoint the incumbent Local Registrar.
§ 62-27. Qualifications of Local Registrar.
The Local Registrar shall be duly licensed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
8:2A-4.1(c).
§ 62-28. Duties of Local Registrar.
The Local Registrar shall:
§ 62-29. Deputy Registrar, Alternate Deputy Registrar.
A. Directly supervise the registration of births, marriages, domestic
partnerships, civil unions and deaths, as well as the reporting of the
same with the State of New Jersey Registrar.
B. Verify the identity of any applicants for records, determine their
relationship to the individual listed on the vital record and establish the
need for such records.
C. Be available during business hours to address the needs of federal and
state agencies, as well as the public.
D. Appoint a Deputy Registrar, Alternate Deputy Registrar and Sub-
Registrar, as needed.
A. The Deputy Registrar shall assist in the normal day-to-day operations of
the division and act as the designee of the Local Registrar in the
absence, disability or death of the Local Registrar. In the event of the
Local Registrar's death, the Deputy Registrar shall serve until a
replacement has been appointed and qualified. The Deputy Registrar
shall hold a certified municipal registrar certificate.
§ 62-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-29
1:71
B. In addition to the Deputy Registrar, the Local Registrar may appoint
one or two Alternate Deputy Registrars if the Local Registrar deems
such an appointment to be necessary for office efficiency. The Deputy
Registrar and Alternate Deputy Registrar shall have the authority to
receive birth and death certificates; to issue burial permits and copies
of birth, death, marriage, civil union and domestic partnership
certificates; to take the oath on marriage and civil union license
applications, and to issue marriage and civil union licenses and register
domestic partnerships. The Deputy Registrar and Alternate Deputy
Registrar shall receive instructions from and perform their duties under
the direct supervision of the Local Registrar, who shall be the final
authority with regard to their duties and responsibilities. The Deputy
Registrar and any Alternate Deputy Registrar shall serve at the
pleasure of the Local Registrar.
§ 62-29 VINELAND CODE § 62-29
1:72
Chapter 68
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 300. Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
§ 68-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Housing Authorities Law of the State
of New Jersey, as amended,20 a body corporate and politic, to be known as
the "Housing Authority of the City of Vineland," be and the same is hereby
created and established.
§ 68-2. Filing with state.
The Clerk of the City of Vineland be and he is hereby authorized and
directed to file a certified copy of this chapter with the Commissioner of the
State Department of Conservation and Economic Development.
Chapter 74
INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION
§ 74-1. Creation; membership.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55B-1 et seq. (Chapter 154 of Laws
of New Jersey 1936), a local industrial commission, to be known as the
"Industrial Commission of the City of Vineland," is hereby created to consist
of seven members, which said Commission shall be a body corporate having
the powers hereinafter enumerated.
§ 74-2. Appointment; terms of office; qualifications; oaths of office;
compensation. [Amended 12-27-1994 by Ord. No. 94-94]
A. The members of such Commission shall be appointed by the City
Council. Each member shall be, for the last five years preceding his
appointment, a citizen of the United States and a qualified voter of the
State of New Jersey. One member shall be appointed for one year, one
member for two years, one member for three years, two members for
four years and two members for five years. At the expiration of each of
the above terms, the new member or members shall be appointed for a
term of five years. Vacancies in the membership of the Commission,
occurring for whatever cause, shall be promptly filled by appointment
by the City Council for the unexpired term thereof. Members shall serve
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:14A-1 et seq.
§ 62-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-2
1:73
§ 74-3. Organization; quorum; bonding.
§ 74-4. Employees: maintenance of office.
for their respective terms and until their successors are appointed and
qualify.
B. Each member shall be chosen with a special view to his qualifications
and fitness for service on the Commission. He shall have had
experience in industry or commerce and shall be conversant with the
industrial needs and facilities of the City of Vineland and shall be of
known devotion to public service.
C. There shall be appointed upon said Commission, unless local conditions
shall otherwise require, at least one thoroughly competent
representative of industry or commerce, a representative of labor, a
representative of the clearinghouse or banks of said municipality, a
representative of the Chamber of Commerce, a representative of the
service clubs of such municipality, a representative of the legal
profession and a representative of a recognized real estate dealers'
association. [Amended 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-71]
D. No member, officer or employee of the Commission shall be interested,
directly or indirectly, in any contracts for work or materials used by the
Commission or in any sales, leases or agreements in connection with
lands, buildings or other property owned or controlled by it or in any
fees or compensation of any kind paid to any broker, architect,
engineer, merchant or other person doing business with the
Commission or in any other transaction of or with the Commission, or
the benefits or profits thereof.
E. Each member and officer of the Commission shall, before assuming
office, take and subscribe an oath that he will faithfully and impartially
discharge the duties of his office.
F. The members and officers of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, but each shall receive his actual disbursements for his
expenses in performing his duties.
A. The members of the Commission shall choose annually from among
their members a chairman or president and such other officers as they
may deem necessary. The Mayor of the City of Vineland shall be ex
officio a member thereof.
B. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of the
Commission.
C. The members and officers may be required to furnish bonds to the
Commission to secure the faithful discharge of their duties, in form,
amount and with such surety as may, from time to time, be required by
resolution of the governing body of the City of Vineland.
§ 74-2 VINELAND CODE § 74-4
1:74
§ 74-5. Powers.
To effectuate its purposes, the Industrial Commission shall have the
following powers:
A. Insofar as may be practicable, the employees and assistants required by
the Commission shall be recruited from the public officers and
employees of the City of Vineland. The Municipal Counsel shall be the
counsel to the Commission; the Municipal Engineer shall be the
engineer of the Commission, and the several departments of the City
government shall be available to the Commission for the purposes of
the Commission's business. City employees serving the Commission
shall do so without compensation other than their regular
compensation as employees of the City of Vineland. The Commission
shall, from time to time, make known to the Mayor its wants in the
nature of services by employees of the City, and the Mayor shall
designate which of the City's employees, if any, shall render such
services.
B. To the extent that the Commission shall deem it necessary to carry on
its function and to the extent that it shall consider the services of
existing employees of the City insufficient for its purposes, it may
employ such additional employees or services and at such
compensation as may be approved by resolution of the governing body
of the City of Vineland. Its requirements in this direction shall be
submitted from time to time in writing to such governing body.
C. The civil service laws, rules and regulations of the state applicable to
the City of Vineland shall govern the appointment of employees of the
Commission. Such laws, rules and regulations shall not be deemed to
prevent the use of services of existing employees without extra
compensation therefor, nor shall the use of such services operate to
enlarge the civil service rights or the status of the municipal employee
rendering the same.
D. The Commission shall have and maintain a suitable office, where its
maps, plans, documents, records and accounts shall be kept, subject to
public inspection at such times and under such reasonable regulations
as the Commission shall determine. If practicable, existing office
facilities of the City served by the Commission shall be used without
charge by the City, and the office and similar equipment of the City
shall, wherever possible, be used by and be made available for the use
of the Commission, without charge.
A. To sue and be sued.
B. To adopt and use an official seal.
C. To adopt suitable bylaws for the management of its affairs.
D. To determine the qualifications and duties of its employees and to fix,
subject to the foregoing provisions hereof, their compensation.
§ 74-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:75
§ 74-6. Functions and duties.
The Industrial Commission shall constitute the corporate instrumentality of
the City of Vineland for the following purposes:
§ 74-7. Limitations on powers; economic survey; reports.
E. To enter into contracts.
A. To inquire into, survey and publicize the extent, advantages and utility
of the vacant lands of the City of Vineland, whether municipally owned
or otherwise.
B. To classify such vacant lands according to their adaptability for the
settlement thereon of various types of industrial enterprises.
C. To study and analyze the various industries of the nation and, to the
extent it deems necessary for its purposes, the industries of other
nations, with a view to ascertaining the opportunities for the industrial
expansion of the City of Vineland. In this connection, the reports,
records, statistics, compendiums and similar documents of existing
federal, state, county, municipal and other governmental and public
agencies, as well as of responsible private institutions, boards, agencies
and similar bodies interested in the compilation of the information
relating to industry, shall be resorted to, wherever possible, in order to
avoid unnecessary original research and gathering of source material.
D. To advertise the industrial advantages and opportunities of the City of
Vineland and the availability of real estate within the City of Vineland
for industrial settlement and to encourage and accomplish such
industrial settlement within the City of Vineland.
E. To solicit the several industries to purchase or lease the vacant lands
and property of or in the City of Vineland.
F. To accomplish the sale or lease of the City of Vineland's vacant lands to
industries whose settlement thereon is best calculated, in the judgment
of the Commission, to advance the interests of the City of Vineland and
of its citizens and inhabitants.
G. To acquire title to vacant land owned by the City of Vineland for the
purpose of resale or lease to industries whose presence within the City
of Vineland will benefit, in the judgment of the Commission, its citizens
and inhabitants.
A. The Industrial Commission shall not have any power of condemnation
or eminent domain.
B. The Industrial Commission shall not have power to pledge the credit of
the City of Vineland or of any other municipality or of the State of New
Jersey or to create any debt against or in any manner act as the agent of
such municipality or of the State of New Jersey.
§ 74-5 VINELAND CODE § 74-7
1:76
§ 74-8. Construal of provisions.
§ 74-9. Appropriations; records of accounts; limits on budget.
C. The Industrial Commission shall have power and authority to make an
economic survey, analyzing the present and potential possibilities of the
City of Vineland with a view to ascertaining its industrial needs,
determining its resources for efficient manufacture and exploring its
probable sphere in the future development of the state and nation. In
carrying out such a survey, the Commission may be evolved to enable it
to compete more successfully with competitors in other states and,
more particularly, how it might successfully round out and enlarge the
products manufactured within the City of Vineland, with a view to
diversifying local industry and stabilizing employment conditions. The
Commission may make any investigation deemed necessary to enable it
effectually to carry out the provisions of this chapter, and for that
purpose, the Commission may take and hear proofs and testimony and
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books,
papers, records and documents, including public records, and its
authorized agents may enter upon any lands as, in its judgment, may be
necessary for the purpose of making surveys and examinations to
accomplish any purposes authorized by this chapter.
D. The Industrial Commission shall make an annual report to the City of
Vineland, setting forth in detail its operations and transactions for the
preceding 12 months.
A. Nothing in this chapter provided and no authority given to or exercised
by the Industrial Commission created under this chapter shall impair or
invalidate in any way any funded indebtedness of the City of Vineland
by which it has been created nor impair the provisions of law regulating
the payment into sinking funds of revenues derived from municipal
property or dedicating the revenues derived from any municipal
property to a specific purpose.
B. The creation of the Industrial Commission by the City of Vineland shall
not be deemed to limit in any manner the City of Vineland's right to deal
with its vacant lands or to sell or lease the same, independently of such
Commission, as heretofore, but the powers conferred upon the City and
Commission by this chapter shall be in addition to any rights or powers
now possessed by the City of Vineland with reference to its vacant lands
or other properties.
A. The governing body of the City may appropriate annually, during the life
of its Commission, such sums as may be reasonably necessary to
conduct the normal operations of the Commission, but no moneys so
appropriated shall be used by the Commission for the construction of
any building or to finance such construction.
B. The Commission shall annually present to the Chief Financial Officer of
the City its budget for operations for the ensuing year, reflecting
§ 74-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-9
1:77
§ 74-10. Study of tax structure.
The Industrial Commission shall make a study of the tax structure, with a
view to reducing the tax burden on the City of Vineland.
Chapter 76
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
therein all unexpended balances on hand from previous appropriations
received from the City, at the same time and in the same manner
and form as is required by the several departments of the City's
government, and the budget so submitted shall be acted upon as in the
case of the budgets of such several municipal departments and, being
so acted upon, shall be made a part of the City's budget.
C. The Commission shall keep complete and accurate records of its
accounts, and separate accounts shall be kept for its normal functions.
D. The Commission shall not exceed its budget, and moneys received from
the City shall be expended only for the purposes for which they have
been appropriated.
§ 74-9 VINELAND CODE § 74-10
1:78
ARTICLE I
Municipal Self Insurance Fund
[Adopted 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-38]
§ 76-1. Establishment; purposes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6 et seq., there is hereby
created the insurance fund of the City for the following purposes:
§ 76-2. Annual appropriation.
The City Council shall annually appropriate the funds necessary for the
purposes of the insurance fund.
§ 76-3. Insurance Fund Commission.
A. To insure against any loss or damage, however caused, to any property,
motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by the City, or owned by
or under the control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or
commissions.
B. To insure against liability resulting from the use or operation of motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by or controlled by the City or
owned by or under the control of any of its departments, boards,
agencies or commissions.
C. To insure against liability for negligence of the City or its officers,
employees and servants, whether or not compensated or part-time, who
are authorized to perform any act or services, but not including an
independent contractor within the limitations of the New Jersey Tort
Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.).
D. To insure against any loss or damage from liability as established by
Chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes (Workmen's
Compensation).
A. Establishment; members. There is hereby established an Insurance
Fund Commission consisting of three members, who shall be the
Business Administrator, Director of the Municipal Utilities, the Director
of Finance and one member of City Council. The Risk Manager and City
Solicitor shall serve in an advisory capacity. The Business Administrator
shall be designated as the Chairperson of the Commission. The
commissioners shall serve for a period of two years or for the remainder
of their terms of office as officials, whichever is less, and until their
successors shall have been appointed and qualified. Vacancies caused
by any reason other than expiration of term as an official shall be filled
for the unexpired term. The commissioners shall serve without
compensation.
§ 76-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-3
1:79
§ 76-4. Powers and duties of commissioners.
The commissioners shall have the following powers and authority. The
commissioners shall:
B. Organization. The commissioners shall, forthwith after their
appointment, organize for the ensuing year by election from their
membership of a Chairman, who shall serve for the year.
C. Commission Secretary. There is hereby established the position of
Secretary to the Board of Insurance Commissioners, who shall be the
City Solicitor and shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission. The
Secretary shall have the obligation to take and maintain accurate
minutes of Commission meetings and to maintain accurate records of
each and every claim filed against the City, whether a general liability
claim or a workers' compensation claim. Vacancies in the position of
Secretary shall be filled in the manner of the original appointments.
A. Prepare or cause to be prepared the proposed budget for the
subsequent fiscal year. The budget shall identify the proposed items
and amounts of expenditure and the status of the self insurance or loss
retention trust accounts maintained by the Fund. The budget shall be
prepared on a basis that does not recognize investment income or
discounting of claim reserves but recognizes all anticipated or
forecasted losses and administrative expenses associated with that
fiscal year [N.J.A.C. 11:15-2.4(f)].
B. Invest the fund and all additions and accretions thereto in such
securities as they shall deem best suited for the purposes of this article.
C. Adopt rules and regulations for the control and investment of the fund.
D. Keep on hand at all times sufficient money, or have the same invested in
such securities as can be immediately sold for cash, for the payment of
losses to any buildings or property of the City or liability resulting from
the operation of publicly owned motor vehicles, equipment or
apparatus.
E. Delegate settlement authority up to $5,000 to the Risk Manager of the
City of Vineland as may be recommended by the designated third-party
administrator for the City's self-insurance program.
F. Delegate settlement authority between $5,001 and $15,000 to the
Chairman of the Commission and Director of Finance.
G. Approve settlements of claims against the City from $15,001 up to and
including the sum of $25,000.
H. Recommend to the City Council for its approval all claims in excess of
$25,000.
I. Place insurance upon property owned or controlled by the City or any of
its departments, boards, agencies, or commissioners.
§ 76-3 VINELAND CODE § 76-4
1:80
§ 76-5. Adoption of Official Notice of Tort Claim Form.
The form on file with the Municipal Clerk, as may be amended from time
to time, is hereby adopted as the Official Notice of Tort Claim Form for the
City of Vineland.
§ 76-6. Completion of form required.
All persons making claims against the City of Vineland pursuant to the
New Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:8-1 et seq., shall be required to
complete the form herein adopted as a condition of compliance with the
notice requirements of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act. The City may, after
initial submission of the form by the claimant, require such other additional
and supplemental information and documents as it deems necessary to
evaluate the claim, and the claimant shall supply such requested documents
and information within 30 days of the request.
J. Review and recommend to the administration the Occupational Health
Provider for the City.
§ 76-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-6
1:81
Chapter 80
LANDIS SEWERAGE AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 585. Water-Sewer Utility — See Ch. 687, Part 4.
§ 80-1. Appointment of members.
From and after the beginning of the terms of office beginning February 1,
1955, the members of the Landis Sewerage Authority shall be appointed by
the Council of the City of Vineland by resolution adopted in accordance with
law.21
§ 80-2. Filing with state.
A copy of this chapter, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall forthwith be
filed by the City Clerk in the office of the Secretary of State of New Jersey.
Chapter 81
LANDIS THEATER FOUNDATION BOARD OF DIRECTORS
§ 81-1. Appointment and recommendation of members; terms of
office.
A. The Mayor of the City of Vineland shall appoint three members to the
Board of Directors to serve a two-year term.
B. The City Council of the City of Vineland shall appoint three members to
the Board of Directors to serve a three-year term.
C. The City of Vineland Board of Education shall recommend to the Mayor
one member to the Board of Directors which, if approved by the Mayor,
said appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of City Council, initially to serve two one-year terms, and
thereafter this appointment shall serve a one-year term.
D. The Greater Vineland Chamber of Commerce shall recommend to the
Mayor one member to the Board of Directors which, if approved by the
Mayor, said appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of City Council to serve a one-year term.
E. The Vineland CEO Group shall recommend to the Mayor one member to
the Board of Directors which, if approved by the Mayor, said
21.Editor's Note: Original § 71-2, Compensation of members; attendance of conferences,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 76-6 VINELAND CODE § 81-1
1:82
§ 81-2. Compliance with bylaws required.
The appointed members of the Board of Directors of the Landis Theater
Foundation Inc., shall be subject to and serve in accordance with the bylaws
of the Landis Theater Foundation Inc.
Chapter 84
LAW, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Commission on Civil Rights — See Ch. 15.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 24.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
§ 84-1. Establishment.
A Department of Law for the City of Vineland is hereby established.
§ 84-2. Director. [Amended 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-53]
The Department of Law shall be headed by a director, who shall be known
as the "City Solicitor." The City Solicitor shall:
appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of City Council, initially to serve two one-year terms, and thereafter this
appointment shall serve a one-year term.
F. The City of Vineland Rotary Club shall recommend to the Mayor one
member to the Board of Directors which, if approved by the Mayor, said
appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
City Council to serve a one-year term.
G. The Vineland Downtown Improvement District Board shall recommend
to the Mayor one member to the Board of Directors which, if approved
by the Mayor, said appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of City Council, initially to serve two one-year
terms, and thereafter this appointment shall serve a one-year term.
A. Be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of City Council.
B. Be appointed for and shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor
appointing him and until a successor has been appointed and qualified.
C. Devote his primary time and effort to the legal needs and demands of
the City of Vineland and its employees as a full-time employee employed
by the City of Vineland. The Solicitor may devote available time in
private practice as long as those legal matters do not interfere or
supersede the duties as Solicitor for the City of Vineland. The Solicitor
may not be engaged in contested litigation.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:83
§ 84-3. Associate Solicitors and legal assistants. [Amended
4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-13]
The City Solicitor shall have the power and be given the authority to appoint
three Associate Solicitors and such other legal assistants as the City shall
require.
§ 84-4. Supervision of Department.
The Director shall supervise all activities of the Department of Law.
§ 84-5. Powers and duties of City Solicitor; functions of
Department.
The City Solicitor shall have the power and duty to perform the following
functions:
D. Be subject to removal as provided by law.
A. Legal advice. The City Solicitor shall furnish legal advice to the Mayor,
City Council and all officers, departments, boards and commissions
concerning any matter arising out of the exercise of their official
powers or performance of their official duties and, except as otherwise
expressly provided, shall supervise, direct and control all legal work of
the City and delegate such duties to the Associate Solicitors as he
deems in the best interest of the City.
B. Litigation. The Department of Law shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all
debts, taxes and accounts due the City which shall be placed with it for
collection by any officer, department, board or commission, and it shall
represent the City and every officer, department, board or commission
in all litigation. It shall prosecute and defend all legal and equitable
actions or proceedings in any court in which the City or any officer
thereof, as such, is interested as a party, when so ordered by City
Council, and shall appear therein as counsel for the City. The
Department of Law shall represent all City-owned utilities in all legal
matters and litigation.
C. Contracts and bonds. The Department of Law shall prepare or approve
all contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing in which the City,
the public utilities and all departments, boards and commissions are
concerned and shall approve all surety bonds required to be given for
the protection of the City.
D. Law enforcement. As directed by the Mayor, the Department of Law
shall take such steps and adopt such means as may be reasonably
necessary to prosecute and enforce all City ordinances.
E. Ordinance drafting and codification. Upon request of City Council, the
Department of Law shall prepare or assist in preparing any ordinance
for introduction into City Council, and when requested by City Council,
it shall prepare and submit to City Council for its consideration a
§ 84-2 VINELAND CODE § 84-5
1:84
§ 84-6. Qualifications of Solicitor.
The City Solicitor and all Associate Solicitors shall be attorneys at law
licensed to practice in the Superior Court of New Jersey as well as the
United States District Court for the District of New Jersey. The City Solicitor
shall have actively practiced law in the State of New Jersey for a minimum
of five years and shall be a resident of the City of Vineland during the term
of office.
§ 84-7. Compensation. [Amended 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-39;
8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-53; 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-13;
1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2013-6822]
Chapter 92
LICENSES AND INSPECTIONS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction code administration — See Ch.
300.
Effect of tax delinquency on licenses and
permits — See Ch. 437, Art. I.
§ 92-1. Department established.
There is hereby established a Department of Licenses and Inspections in the
City of Vineland, the head of which shall be the Director.
comprehensive revision and codification of all of the general ordinances
of the City.
F. Access to records. The City Solicitor shall have the power at any time to
access the records of any officer, department, board or commission of
the City.
A. The salary of the City Solicitor shall be set forth by City Council in the
compensation schedules theretofore adopted or hereafter to be adopted
in the Schedule of Classified/Unclassified Positions, and Applicable
Salary Ranges in the Civil Service of the City of Vineland. [Amended
2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
B. The Associate Solicitors shall be paid for services rendered at a
reasonable hourly rate as set by the appointing authority.
C. The Director of Law and Associate Solicitors shall be entitled to
reimbursement for all disbursements made and expenses incurred for
filing and recording fees and all documented out-of-pocket costs.
22.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor on 1-21-2014; however, the City
Council overrode the Mayor’s veto by adopting Res. No. 2014-51, which is on file in the
City offices, on 1-28-2014.
§ 84-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-2
1:85
§ 92-2. Appointment of Director.
The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Vineland with
the advice and consent of City Council.
§ 92-3. Term.
The Director shall be appointed for and shall serve during the term of
the office of the Mayor appointing him and until the appointment and
qualification of his successor.
§ 92-4. Compensation. [Amended 7-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-63;
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68]
The Director shall receive a salary to be paid in the same manner as other
department heads and officers of the City of Vineland. The current salary is
set forth in Chapter 157, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 92-5. Qualifications. [Amended 12-12-1978 by Ord. No. 1142;
7-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-63; 3-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-20]
No person shall qualify for appointment as the Director of the Department
of Licenses and Inspections unless such person shall have a background
of not less than 10 years' experience in a supervisory capacity and further
shall have 10 years' experience in departmental management, budgeting,
employee discipline, scheduling of employees and enforcement of laws and
regulations.
§ 92-6. Duties. [Amended 12-12-1978 by Ord. No. 1142; 7-25-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-63]
A. In the event that the Construction Official of the City of Vineland is
appointed Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections, then
said person shall continue to administer and enforce the State Uniform
Construction Code and the building, plumbing, electrical and fire
protection subcode officials and all related support personnel.
B. In the event that the Construction Official of the City of Vineland is not
appointed Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections, then
the Construction Official shall continue to administer and enforce the
State Uniform Construction Code and the building, plumbing, electrical
and fire prevention subcode officials and all related personnel, but said
subcode officials and personnel shall be subject to the general
supervision of the Director and all budgetary personnel in
administrative matters unrelated to the enforcement and
administration of the State Uniform Construction Code.
C. The Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall,
consistent with applicable statutes and ordinances, also: [Amended
9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-65]
(1) Prescribe the work and internal organization of the Department.
§ 92-2 VINELAND CODE § 92-6
1:86
Chapter 98
MAP, OFFICIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 425.
§ 98-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance
with Chapter 1 of Title 58 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.23
GOVERNING BODY — The chief legislative body of the City of Vineland.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance of the governing body
showing the location and width of streets and drainage rights-of-way and
(2) Appoint, direct and supervise subordinate officers and employees
of the Department and make all individual work assignments.
(3) Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to
Department appropriations.
(4) Provide such information reports on the work of the Department as
the Mayor may from time to time require.
(5) Supervise administrative functions of the Zoning Officer and all
related activities of support personnel engaged in enforcement and
administration of zoning ordinances and statutes.
(6) Supervise administrative functions of the Housing Inspector and all
related activities of support personnel engaged in enforcement and
administration of housing ordinances and codes.
(7) Prescribe and maintain applications for all licenses and permits,
and establish procedures for issuing licenses and permits, except
for limousine and liquor licenses, together with any additional
requirement imposed by law or deemed necessary by City Council.
D. The Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall work
a minimum of 20 hours per week and no more than 29 hours per week.
[Added 8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-50]
23.Editor's Note: Chapter 1 of Title 58 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated was repealed by
P.L. 1945, c. 22; P.L. 1979, c. 359; and P.L. 1981, c. 262. See now N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
§ 92-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-1
1:87
the location and extent of public parks and playgrounds, whether existing
or proposed.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or
approved by official action pursuant to the Municipal Planning Act (1953)24
or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and
the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines.
§ 98-2. Establishment; purpose.
§ 98-3. Final authority for street and drainage determinations.
The Official Map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the location
and width of streets and drainage rights-of-way, whether such streets and
drainage rights-of-way are improved or unimproved.
§ 98-4. Use of park and playground areas within plats.
Upon the application for approval of a plat, the municipality may reserve for
future public use the location and extent of public parks and playgrounds
shown on the Official Map or any part thereof and within the area of said
plat for a period of one year after the approval of the final plat, or within
such further time as agreed to by the applying party. Unless, within such
one-year period or extension thereof, the municipality shall have entered
into a contract to purchase or instituted condemnation proceedings for
said park or playground according to law, such applying party shall not
be bound to observe the reservation of such public park or playground.
During such period of one year or any extension thereof, the applicant for
the plat approval and his assigns and successors in interest may use the
area so reserved for any purpose other than the location of buildings or
improvements thereof, except as provided in § 98-6 of this chapter.
A. There is hereby established as the Official Map of the City of Vineland a
map entitled "Official Map of Arterial Highways and Drainage Rights-of-
Way," prepared by the Engineering Department of the City of Vineland,
dated May 6, 1958, and on file in the office of the City Clerk.
B. The Official Map is hereby established for the express purpose of
conserving and promoting the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
24.Editor's Note: The Municipal Planning Act (1953) was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291. See
now the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 98-1 VINELAND CODE § 98-5
1:88
§ 98-5. Amendments.
§ 98-6. Building permits.
A. The governing body may from time to time amend the Official Map by
making changes therein, additions thereto or deletions therefrom.
B. Prior to amending the Official Map or any part thereof, the governing
body shall refer such proposed amendment to the Planning Board of the
City for its recommendation, and the governing body shall not act
thereon without such recommendation or until 45 days after such
reference without recommendation. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Planning Board or until 45 days after such
reference without such recommendation, the governing body shall hold
a public hearing on the proposed amendment to the Official Map, and at
least 10 days prior to such hearing, notice of this hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. A map
showing the proposed amendments shall be made available for public
inspection in the office of the City Clerk during such period, and the
notice shall so state.
A. For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map of the
City, no permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer or Building
Inspectors for any building which is proposed to be built in the bed of
any street or drainage right-of-way shown on the Official Map or on a
plat filed pursuant to the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City25 or
the Municipal Planning Act,26 except as herein provided.
B. Whenever it shall appear that one or more parcels of land upon which is
located the bed of such a mapped street or drainage right-of-way or any
park or playground location reserved pursuant to §§ 98-3 and 98-4 of
this chapter cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless a
building permit is granted, the Board of Adjustment of the City may, in a
specific case, by a majority vote of its members, grant a permit for a
building in the bed of such mapped street or drainage right-of-way or
within such reserved location of a public park or playground which will
as little as practicable increase the cost of opening such street or tend
to cause a minimum change of the Official Map. The Board of
Adjustment shall impose reasonable requirements as a condition of
granting the permit, so as to promote the health, morals, safety and
general welfare of the public, and shall inure to the benefit of the City.
C. Action upon any such application for a building permit under the
provisions of this section shall only be taken after a public hearing has
been held, at which hearing the parties in interest and others shall have
an opportunity to be heard. The applicant shall notify all owners of
property within 200 feet of the property to be affected by the grant or
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use.
26.Editor's Note: The Municipal Planning Act (1953) was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291. See
now the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 98-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-6
1:89
§ 98-7. Lot and improvement requirements for issuance of building
permits.
No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless the building
lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed structure which has been
duly placed on the Official Map or a street shown upon a plat approved
by the Planning Board and governing body of the City of Vineland, as
provided in the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City.27 Before such
building permit shall be issued, such street shall have been certified to be
suitably improved to the satisfaction of the governing body, acting on the
advice of the City Engineer, or such suitable improvement shall have been
assured by means of a performance guaranty, in accordance with standards
and specifications approved by the governing body in relation to the City
Subdivision Ordinance,28 and as adequate with respect to the public health,
safety and general welfare for the special circumstances of the particular
street.
§ 98-8. Appeal to Board of Adjustment.
denial of the building permit, service to be made in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Board of Adjustment. At least 10 days prior
to the time fixed for the public hearing, there shall be published in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the City notice of the time
and place of the hearing. The notice shall be inserted in a newspaper
by the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment, and any costs incidental
thereto shall be paid by the applicant.
A. Where the enforcement of §§ 98-6 and 98-7 of this chapter would entail
practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship or where the
circumstances of the case do not require the structure to be related to a
street, the applicant for the permit may appeal from the decision of the
Zoning Officer or Building Inspectors to the Board of Adjustment of the
City, and this appeal shall be governed by the same provisions as those
provided in cases of appeals in respect to zoning regulations.
B. The Board of Adjustment may, in determining any such appeal, make
reasonable exceptions and issue a permit subject to conditions that will
assure adequate access for fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and
other emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health and
safety. The Board may also impose conditions which will protect any
future street layout shown on the Official Map or on the Master Plan of
the City Planning Board. The Board of Adjustment shall refer any
application made under this section to the City Planning Board for
report and recommendation before taking final action.
C. The City Planning Board shall consider such application referred to it at
its next regular meeting and make its report and recommendation, in
writing, within two weeks from that regular meeting. Failure to act
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use.
§ 98-6 VINELAND CODE § 98-8
1:90
Chapter 103
MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE COMMITTEE
§ 103-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-1 et seq. (Chapter 51, P.L.
1989), a municipal alliance committee, to be known as the "Vineland
Municipal Alliance," is hereby created.
§ 103-2. Membership.
§ 103-3. Duties.
The Vineland Municipal Alliance, in consultation with the Local Advisory
Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, shall identify alcoholism and
drug prevention, education and community needs. The Vineland Municipal
Alliance also shall implement the alliance programs formulated pursuant to
Section 8 of P.L. 1989 (N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-8).
Chapter 110
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 50.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 135.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 425, Art. VIII.
Taxation — See Ch. 647.
within this time shall constitute a favorable recommendation from the
City Planning Board, and thereafter the Board of Adjustment may
proceed to take final action.
A. Members of the Vineland Municipal Alliance shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Such
membership may include the Chief of Police; the President of the School
Board; the Superintendent of Schools; a student assistance coordinator;
a representative of the Parent-Teacher Association; a representative of
the local bargaining unit for teachers; a representative of the Chamber
of Commerce; a Municipal Court Judge; representatives of local civic
associations; representatives of local religious groups; and private
citizens.
B. Members on the Committee shall serve without compensation.
§ 98-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-3
1:91

ARTICLE I
Comptroller
[Adopted 5-26-1953 by Ord. No. 75; amended 8-8-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-68 (Ch. 91, Art. II, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 110-1. Office established.
The office of Comptroller for the City of Vineland is hereby established.
§ 110-2. Duties.
The Comptroller shall:
§ 110-3. Term of office.
The Comptroller shall hold office coextensive with the term of office of the
appointing authority.
§ 110-4. Bond.
The Comptroller shall be bonded by the City of Vineland for at least the
minimum amount as specified by New Jersey law.
A. Perform such duties as set forth under the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
B. Manage the finances of the City as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-48.
C. Take all steps necessary and as provided by law for setting up an
encumbrance system of budget operation, for expenditures only upon
written requisitions, for the preaudit of all claims and demands against
the municipality prior to payment and for the control of all payments
out of any public funds by individual warrants for each payment to the
official having custody thereof.
D. Perform such further duties as shall hereafter be required by the Mayor
and City Council.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-4
1:93

ARTICLE II
Tax Assessor
[Adopted 6-9-1959 by Ord. No. 315; amended 8-8-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-68 (Ch. 91, Art. III, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 110-5. Office established.
The office of the Tax Assessor for the City of Vineland is hereby established
as of July 1, 1959. The Board of Assessors was abolished on June 30, 1959.
§ 110-6. Appointment.
The Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of City Council.
§ 110-7. Term of office.
The term of the Tax Assessor shall be four years, commencing on the first
day of July following appointment. The Tax Assessor shall serve on a fulltime
basis. Any appointment to fill the vacancy in this office shall be for the
unexpired term only.
§ 110-8. Duties.
The Tax Assessor shall perform all the duties required by law regarding the
making of valuations and assessments of property for municipal taxation
and shall:
A. Supervise and direct the appraising and assessing of land, buildings
and personal property in the City of Vineland.
B. Supervise the preparation of tax lists, tax and assessment
apportionments and sales of public property.
C. Make reports and keep such other records as are needed and
necessary.
D. Hear and dispose of complaints concerning assessments.
E. Make reports to City Council at such times as may be required
concerning the office of the Tax Assessor and its work.
F. Create and supervise an efficient administrative organization for the
Tax Assessor's office and assign any subordinate employee of the Tax
Assessor's office to any work not inconsistent with New Jersey
Department of Personnel regulations or the position held by said
employee.
G. Perform such other duties as required by State of New Jersey law and
applicable City of Vineland ordinances.
§ 110-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-8
1:95
§ 110-9. Qualifications. [Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-24]
The qualifications of the Tax Assessor shall be:
§ 110-10. Deputy Tax Assessor and assistants. [Amended
12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-62]
H. Supervise various clerical functions in the office, give suitable
assignments and instructions to subordinate employees and field
investigators, supervise their work and make proper assessments of
real and personal property.
A. The attainment of a valid tax assessor certificate as required by law.
B. Formal and other education and training showing attainment of the
level represented by graduation from high school, supplemented by the
completion of a course or courses in the appraising of real estate and
assessment principles and practices.
C. At least three years of experience in real and personal property
assessments and appraisals, one or more of which shall have been on
the local level.
D. A thorough knowledge of accepted procedures used in assessing real
and personal property, of the laws, rules, regulations, practices and
policies relating to tax assessments, of the forms required for tax
purposes and of supervising the establishment and maintenance of
needed records and files and the ability to develop a suitable work
program and to apply existing laws, rules and regulations to the taxassessing
work.
A. The position of Deputy Tax Assessor for the City of Vineland is hereby
established.
B. The Deputy Tax Assessor shall have all the powers and perform all the
duties of the Tax Assessor when the Tax Assessor is unavailable.
C. The Deputy Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of City Council and shall hold office coextensive
with the term of office of the Mayor.
D. An individual must hold a certified tax assessor's certificate from the
State of New Jersey to be eligible for the position of Deputy Tax
Assessor. Such other qualifications shall be determined by the City of
Vineland.
E. City Council may, by resolution, make provisions for the appointment
and fixing of compensation of such assistant or assistants to the Tax
Assessor, whose duties shall be to perform such work and such duties as
may be assigned to them by the Tax Assessor not inconsistent with their
position or State of New Jersey regulations. Said resolution shall
§ 110-8 VINELAND CODE § 110-10
1:96
provide that any such assistant shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of City Council.
§ 110-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-10
1:97

ARTICLE III
Deputy Municipal Clerk
[Adopted 10-22-1968 by Ord. No. 678; amended 8-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-68 (Ch. 91, Art. IV, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 110-11. Creation of office.
The position of Deputy Municipal Clerk for the City of Vineland is hereby
established.
§ 110-12. Duties.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the
duties of the Municipal Clerk when the Municipal Clerk is unavailable.
§ 110-13. Appointment; term of office.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed by City Council and shall
hold office coextensive with the term of office of City Council.
§ 110-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-13
1:99

ARTICLE IV
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 90-38; amended in its entirety
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-30]
§ 110-14. Position established.
The position of Chief Financial Officer is hereby established. The Chief
Financial Officer shall be responsible for the proper financial administration
of the City under the Local Government Supervision Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-1
et seq.); the Local Bond Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq.); the Local Fiscal
Affairs Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq.); the Local Public Contracts Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.); and such other statutes and such rules and
regulations promulgated by the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services, the Local Finance Board, or any other state agency,
as may pertain to the financial administration of the City.
§ 110-15. Qualifications and appointment of Chief Financial Officer
or Temporary Chief Financial Officer.
§ 110-16. Term of office; tenure; removal from office.
A. The qualifications for the position of Chief Financial Officer shall be
those established and set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.2 et seq., and no
person shall be appointed or reappointed as Chief Financial Officer
unless he or she shall hold a municipal finance officer certificate issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq. No person who serves as a
member of the governing body of the City of Vineland shall serve as
Chief Financial Officer in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.6.
B. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by City Council pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10.
C. Temporary Chief Financial Officer. When a vacancy occurs in the office
of Chief Financial Officer, City Council may appoint a person who does
not hold a municipal finance officer certificate to serve as Temporary
Chief Financial Officer for a period not to exceed one year, commencing
on the day of the vacancy. However, the person so appointed may, with
the approval of the Director of the Division of Local Government
Services, be reappointed as Temporary Chief Financial Officer for one
additional year. The City shall not have a Temporary Chief Financial
Officer for more than two consecutive years.
A. The term of office shall be for four years, which shall run from January 1
in the year in which the Chief Financial Officer is appointed in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10.
B. Any person who has served in the position of Chief Financial Officer for
a period of four consecutive years and thereafter is reappointed as the
City's Chief Financial Officer and who holds a municipal finance officer
certificate issued, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., shall
§ 110-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-16
1:101
§ 110-16.1. Duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall:
be granted tenure of office upon filing with the City Clerk and with the
Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community
Affairs a notification evidencing his or her compliance with this section
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.8. Thereafter, that person shall
continue to hold office and shall not be removed therefrom except for
just cause, and then only as set forth in the City Code or state statutes.
C. The Chief Financial Officer may be removed from office as follows:
(1) Upon the issuance of a written complaint setting forth the charge
or charges against the Chief Financial Officer filed with the City
Clerk and the Director of the Division of Local Government
Services. A certified copy thereof shall be served upon the person
so charged. The Director of the Division of Local Government
Services shall thereafter designate a hearing date before the said
Director or his or her designee, which shall not be less than 30 days
nor later than 60 days from the date of service of the complaint.
The hearing date may be extended by the Superior Court of New
Jersey for good cause shown upon the application of either party.
The person so charged and/or the complainant shall have the right
to be represented by counsel, and the power to subpoena witnesses
and documentary evidence, together with discovery proceedings.
(2) Any municipal finance officer certificate may be revoked or
suspended by the Director of the Division of Local Government
Services for dishonest practices or willful or intentional failure,
neglect or refusal to comply with the Constitution of the State of
New Jersey or laws relating to municipal finances or other good
cause. The City Council or the Mayor may request a review by the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services of the
behavior or practices of a certified municipal finance officer. The
Director may also initiate a review of the behavior or practices of a
certified municipal finance officer if the Director finds it advisable
to do so through the normal exercise of his or her statutory duties
and responsibilities. If the municipal finance officer certificate of a
person serving as Chief Financial Officer or Municipal Finance
Officer shall be revoked, such person shall be removed from his or
her office or position by the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services, and the person or position shall be declared
vacant.
A. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the City or in
possession of the City in a fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise
provided by law, and keep such funds, and all moneys of the City not
required for current operations safely invested or deposited in interestbearing
accounts.
§ 110-16 VINELAND CODE § 110-16.1
1:102
B. Supervise the administration of the City debt and the receipt and
delivery of City bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange,
subject to provisions of the Local Bond Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq.) or
other law.
C. Develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system of accounts, including
forms, standards and procedures for all departments.
D. Establish and maintain the City's central bookkeeping and accounting
records according to generally accepted accounting principles and in
accordance with the requirements of the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services.
E. Maintain accounts of all cash receipts and disbursements, and make
reports in accordance with the system of accounts approved or
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services
and prepare a monthly statement of all moneys received and expended,
and of the unexpended and unencumbered balance in each account for
the City Council, Mayor, Business Administrator and the general public.
F. Review each proposed expenditure and commitment to be made on
behalf of any department for conformity with state law and City
ordinances and authorize only such expenditures and commitments,
including claims, bills and demands, so as to conform to all
requirements of the Administrative Code in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:69A-48.
G. Audit all receipts and disbursements of the City and preaudit all bills,
claims and demands, including payroll upon the City.
H. Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded and maintain such books and records as may be required for
the exercise of budget control, including an encumbrance system of
budget operations and expenditures only upon written requisition in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-48.
I. Provide specific notification to the Business Administrator, Mayor and
Council when conditions arise which may reveal insufficient funds in
any account balance or which may lead to or result in audit
discrepancies or comments.
J. Make disbursements of City funds with every warrant check made
payable to the order of the person entitled to receive the same and
specify the purpose for which it is drawn, and the account or
appropriation to which it is chargeable and shall bear such signature as
are required by the Administrative Code.
K. Prepare any records, reports, studies or schedules requested by the
Mayor, Business Administrator or City Council, including reports for the
preparation of the budget or the determination of the cost of
performance of each program or activity, measured in such work units
as may be appropriate thereto.
§ 110-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-16.1
1:103
§ 110-16.2. Payment of claims; presentation to City Council.
The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare for each regular meeting of City
Council a list of all bills, claims and vouchers which have been received in
a timely fashion since the last preceding list was compiled. No bills shall be
paid except for the payroll until the listing of bills has been approved by the
resolution of City Council.
L. Perform such other duties and responsibilities as required for the
proper administration of the City's finances in accordance with the
statutes and code.
§ 110-16.1 VINELAND CODE § 110-16.2
1:104
ARTICLE V
Municipal Prosecutor
[Adopted 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 97-14; (Ch. 91, Art. VI, of the 1990
Code29)]
§ 110-17. Positions established. [Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16; 1-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-1; 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-12]
There shall be established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:25-1 et seq., two parttime
Municipal Prosecutor positions for the Vineland Municipal Court. Both
positions may be served by the same person; however, should the positions
be filled by different persons, one shall be designated as Chief Municipal
Prosecutor for the Vineland Municipal Court. The duties of the Municipal
Prosecutor and Chief Municipal Prosecutor shall be in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 2B:25-5 and the Code of the City of Vineland. They shall possess
the minimum qualifications as outlined in N.J.S.A. 2B:25-4. Provided the
effectiveness and efficiencies of the Court and prosecution are not adversely
affected and the positions are filled by the same person, no Chief Municipal
Prosecutor shall be named.
§ 110-18. Position assigned to Department of Law. [Amended
3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
The position is an assigned function of the Department of Law.
§ 110-19. Salary; Mayor to appoint; term. [Amended 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-83; 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68; 1-26-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-1; 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12]
The salary for the Municipal Prosecutor and Chief Municipal Prosecutor
shall be authorized by ordinance. Should both positions be filled by the
same person, the salaries of both positions shall be combined and paid to
the single person filling both positions, subject to a professional services
agreement. Appointments to the position or positions, as the case may be,
shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council.
The appointment(s) shall be made from attorneys licensed to practice law
in the State of New Jersey and shall be appointed for a term of one year
from the date of his or her appointment and shall continue to serve in office
until reappointment, replacement or otherwise disqualified to practice law
in the State of New Jersey. The Municipal Prosecutor and Chief Municipal
Prosecutor, if both are appointed, shall each provide coverage in the
Vineland Municipal Court in the absence of the other with no additional
compensation. In the event either the Municipal Prosecutor or the Chief
Municipal Prosecutor are unavailable to serve during any court proceeding
as required by this section, it shall be the responsibility of the Chief
Municipal Prosecutor or, should no Chief Municipal Prosecutor be
appointed, the Municipal Prosecutor, to assure the court coverage of the
29.Editor's Note: This article was renumbered 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-68.
§ 110-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-19
1:105
Alternate Municipal Prosecutor and fees, if any, shall be paid from the
salary of the Vineland Municipal Prosecutor or Chief Municipal Prosecutor
scheduled to serve and shall be at no cost to the City.
§ 110-20. Supervision of positions. [Amended 1-26-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-1; 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12]
Should both positions be filled by two persons and a Chief Municipal
Prosecutor is appointed, the Municipal Prosecutor shall be directly
supervised by the Chief Municipal Prosecutor. Both Municipal Prosecutor
and Chief Municipal Prosecutor shall be under the supervision of the
Attorney General or County Prosecutor who may represent the state, county
or municipality in any matter within the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court
of the City of Vineland.
§ 110-21. Alternate Municipal Prosecutor. [Added 6-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-51]
The position of Alternate Municipal Prosecutor is hereby established. The
Alternate Municipal Prosecutor shall serve in the absence of the Municipal
Prosecutor or in cases where a conflict prohibits the Municipal Prosecutor
from serving. The Alternate Municipal Prosecutor shall be subject to the
same administrative provisions of this article.
§ 110-19 VINELAND CODE § 110-21
1:106
ARTICLE VI
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Adopted 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-41]
§ 110-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the City of Vineland's responsibility to assist
in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985.
§ 110-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the City of Vineland to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the City of Vineland.
§ 110-24. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position;
compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the City of
Vineland.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the City of
Vineland, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(6) which may be contracted
out:
(1) Serving as City of Vineland's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the City of Vineland's
Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 110-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-24
1:107
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the City of Vineland as described in
Subsection F below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the City of Vineland may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by
the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of City of Vineland,
except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out
pursuant to Subsection C above. If the City of Vineland contracts with
another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing
program, including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing
plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to ensure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Vineland and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
§ 110-24 VINELAND CODE § 110-24
1:108
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Vineland when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
§ 110-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-24
1:109
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered or in any other way
committed to any person other than a household duly certified
to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 110-24 VINELAND CODE § 110-24
1:110
Chapter 119
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
§ 110-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-24
1:111

ARTICLE I
Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-45]
§ 119-1. Positions eligible to participate.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 119-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. Business Administrator.
B. Department directors.
C. City Solicitor and Associate Solicitors.
D. City Engineer.
E. City Prosecutor.
F. Municipal Court Judge.
G. Landis Sewerage Authority Board members.
H. Vineland Housing Authority Board members.
A. Certified Health Officer.
B. Tax Collector.
C. Chief Financial Officer.
D. Construction Code Official.
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
F. Tax Assessor.
G. City Planner.
H. Registered Municipal Clerk.
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 119-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-3
1:113
§ 119-3. Determination of exemption.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 119-1 and the
individual is not serving in a position as described in § 119-2 above, the City
of Vineland Pension Certifying Officer may determine that the individual is
not required to join the Defined Contribution Retirement Program if that
individual:
§ 119-4. Implementation; construal.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-1 et seq. as amended from time to time, and any regulations or
guidance documents from the Local Finance Board or the Division of
Pensions and Benefits.
§ 119-5. Severability.
Should any part or parts of this article be held to be invalid by any
competent court of law, such invalidity shall only affect the part or parts
held to be invalid, and all other parts shall remain in effect.
§ 119-6. Filing.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time;
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process;
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim or "acting" basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in § 119-2 herein, and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 119-3 VINELAND CODE § 119-6
1:114
Chapter 123
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 24.
Emergency management — See Ch. 36.
Department of Law — See Ch. 84.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Residency preference — See Ch. 151.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
§ 119-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-6
1:115

ARTICLE I
Composition; Membership; Regulations
[Adopted 11-12-1952 by Ord. No. 39 (Ch. 96, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 123-1. Establishment. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14;
4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-23]
A. There shall be and hereby is established a Police Department for the
City of Vineland which shall consist of such number of superior officers
and patrolmen as are hereinafter set forth and consistent with the
annual budget of the City of Vineland. This subsection is intended to
ratify the existence and operation of the Police Department which has
historically operated within and served the City of Vineland and to
satisfy statutory requirements of the enabling legislation as amended.
B. The Police Department shall preserve the public peace; protect life and
property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of the State
of New Jersey and the ordinances of the City of Vineland; direct and
control traffic; provide attendance and protection during emergencies;
provide appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement
agencies; and provide training for the efficiency of its members and
officers.
C. The Police Force shall consist of the following police officers in the
following descending ranks and order of authority: [Amended
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-52]
(1) Chief of Police: one.
(2) Deputy Chief of Police: one.
(3) Captains: not more than four. [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-34]
(4) Lieutenants: not more than eight.
(5) Sergeants: not more than 28.
(6) Police officers: not more than 117.
D. The number of Police Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants and police
officers appointed in accordance with this article shall further be
determined by the Mayor with the advice of the Director of Public
Safety and provided the funds for the positions are certified by the
Chief Finance Officer of the City of Vineland, but in no event shall there
be more positions than as established in accordance herewith.
E. The powers, functions and duties of the members of the Police Force
shall be as currently prescribed by the City of Vineland Police
Department Rules and Regulations Manual and as are generally set
forth herein.
§ 123-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-2
1:117
§ 123-2. Duties of Chief of Police [Amended 11-9-1976 by Ord. No.
1046]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause public peace to be
preserved and to see that the police officers are prompt and faithful in the
discharge of their duties. He shall, whenever any violation of the laws of
this state or of the ordinances of this City comes to his knowledge, cause
the requisite complaint to be made and see that the evidence is procured
for the prosecution of the offender. He shall obey and cause the police
officers under him to obey the police rules and shall, in the case of riots
or insurrections, take command, in person, of the police officers and direct
their movements and operations. Subject to the supervision of the Chief of
Police, the Department shall maintain records, registers, books and reports
concerning the affairs and operations of the Department. The Chief of Police
shall be responsible for the efficiency, general conduct and good order of
the Police Department and shall receive all complaints made against any
police officer.
§ 123-3. Duties of the Deputy Police Chief. [Added 10-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-5230]
The Deputy Police Chief shall assist the Police Chief in management and
discipline of the Department and shall perform all of the duties of Chief
of Police in his or her absence. The Deputy Police Chief, among other
duties, shall give assignments and instructions to subordinate members of
the Department, provide them with needed advice/assistance when difficult/
unusual problems arise, checks the work of subordinate personnel to assure
proper procedures are followed, that reasonable standards of workmanship,
conduct and output are maintained and that desired police objectives are
achieved. The Deputy Police Chief shall take the lead in establishing and
maintaining helpful, cooperative relations with civic, recreation and
business organizations, school/court officers, police authorities in other
jurisdictions, and others interested in maintenance of law and order.
§ 123-3.1. Duties of other members. [Amended 8-9-1966 by Ord. No.
584; 11-9-1976 by Ord. No. 1046; 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-33;
8-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-55; 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-52]
The Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants and patrol officers of the Police
Department shall severally perform the duties imposed upon them,
respectively, by ordinances of the City of Vineland and the rules and
regulations of the Department. During the temporary absence of the Chief
of Police and the Deputy Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall appoint one
of the Captains to exercise all powers and duties of the Chief of Police. In
the event of the permanent absence or incapacitation of the Chief of Police,
the Deputy Chief of Police shall exercise all of the powers and duties of the
Chief of Police pending the appointment of a Chief of Police by the Mayor
which shall be with the advice and consent of City Council.
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 123-3 as § 123-3.1.
§ 123-2 VINELAND CODE § 123-4
1:118
§ 123-4. Powers and duties of policemen on duty.
The several policemen, when on duty, shall preserve order, peace and quiet
and promptly report to the Chief of Police all violations of the laws and
ordinances. They shall have power to arrest, without warrant, all persons
in the act of violating any law or ordinance or in aiding or abetting in
any such violation and shall arrest all persons found under suspicious
circumstances and shall take all such persons so arrested to the City jail.
They shall have power and authority within the City to serve and execute
warrants and other processes for the apprehension and commitment of
persons charged with or held for examination or trial or taken in execution
for the commission of any crime or misdemeanor for the violation of any law
or ordinance and, while executing or serving or assisting in the execution
or serving of any such warrant or process and while in the performance of
their duties as peace officers, they shall be and hereby are vested with and
shall have all the powers and authority conferred on constables at common
law and by the laws of this state.
§ 123-5. Engagement in other business; absence from duty; special
duty.
The officers and patrolmen of the Department shall not engage in any
other business which may draw their attention from the public service or
make them unfit for their duties and shall not absent themselves from duty
without permission from the Chief of Police. The policemen shall usually be
employed in regular service, but the Chief of Police, whenever in his opinion
the public service requires it, may detail any number of policemen for any
special or particular duty connected with the police service and may require
the policemen to do duty at any time of the day or night.31
§ 123-6. Conduct of duty.
Each of the regular policemen shall devote all of his time to the duties of his
office and shall be vigilant in detecting and arresting all offenders against
any City ordinance or any law of the state within the City and in preserving
the public peace and protecting the rights of persons and property and,
when on duty, shall wear such dress or badge as the Director may designate.
§ 123-7. Detective assignments. [Amended 1-9-1973 by Ord. No.
879; 11-9-1976 by Ord. No. 1046]
The Chief of Police shall have the power to designate and assign members
of the Police Department to perform the duties of detective work for such
periods of time and on such occasions as he may from time to time
determine.
31.Editor's Note: Original § 127-9, Tenure; § 127-10, Reports, as amended; § 127-11, Pursuit
of criminals; and § 127-12, Uniforms, guns and equipment, which immediately followed
this section, were repealed 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-76. In addition, original § 127-13,
Ranks of the regular police, as amended, which also followed this section, was repealed
11-9-1976 by Ord. No. 1046. [1968 Code citations.]
§ 123-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-8
1:119
§ 123-8. Suspension, removal, fine and reduction in rank. [Amended
11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-76]
Any member of the Police Department may be suspended, removed, fined
or reduced in rank for incapacity, misconduct or disobedience of rules and
regulations as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147.32
§ 123-9. Rules and regulations. [Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord. No.
89-76]
Each member of the Police Department shall be presented with a printed
copy of the rules and regulations of the Police Department as promulgated
by the Director of Public Safety. Such rules shall show what his duties
shall be on all occasions or upon his being apprised of the violation of the
provisions of any of the ordinances of the City of Vineland and also what
particular provision of any ordinance or ordinances it is his duty to see
enforced, and any neglect by any member of the Police Department to carry
out each and every rule and regulation or order as aforesaid shall be held
to be sufficient cause for his dismissal from the Department.
§ 123-10. Ordinances and rules and regulations on file. [Amended
11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-76]
The aforesaid ordinances and rules and regulations to be promulgated by
the Director of Public Safety shall be printed and filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall be binding upon all police officers and members of the
Department.
32.Editor's Note: Original § 127-17, Pay withheld during suspension, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 11-9-1976 by Ord. No. 1046. Original § 127-18,
Charges against members of the Police Department, as amended, which also followed this
section, was repealed 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-76. [1968 Code citations.]
§ 123-8 VINELAND CODE § 123-10
1:120
ARTICLE II
Director of Public Safety
[Adopted 11-9-1976 by Ord. No. 1046 (Ch. 96, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 123-11. Establishment of position.
There is hereby established the position of the Director of the Police
Department of the City of Vineland, who shall be designated and known as
the "Director of Public Safety."
§ 123-12. Appointment.
The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Vineland, with
the advice and consent of the City Council.
§ 123-13. Term of office.
The Director shall be appointed for and shall serve during the term of office
of the Mayor appointing him and until the appointment and qualification of
his successor.
§ 123-14. Salary. [Amended 7-24-1984 by Ord. No. 84-24; 2-27-1990
by Ord. No. 90-12; 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68]
The Director shall receive an annual salary and mileage and/or other
transportation compensation, to be paid in the same manner as other
department heads and officers of the City of Vineland. The current salary is
set forth in Chapter 157, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 123-15. Qualifications. [Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-24]
No person shall be qualified for appointment as Director of the Police
Department unless such person shall be of high moral character and shall
not have been convicted of a crime as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:1-4 or shall
not have been convicted of a disorderly or petty disorderly offense in the
past 10 years. Furthermore, no person shall be qualified for appointment as
Director of the Police Department unless such person shall have:
A. Ten years' administrative business experience and have a high school
diploma or its equivalent; or
B. Five years' experience in business administration for a governmental
agency and have attained a Master of Business Administration; or
C. Five years in the rank of lieutenant or greater in law enforcement; or
D. Three years in the rank of lieutenant or greater in law enforcement; and
(1) Has a post-secondary education in public administration, criminal/
justice studies or similar degree from an accredited institution; and
§ 123-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-15
1:121
§ 123-16. Part-time position. [Amended 2-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-4]
The office of the Director of Public Safety is hereby declared to be a parttime
position. The Director shall serve not less than 20 hours per week and
not more than 29 hours per week. The Director shall be primarily stationed
at the Vineland Police Building.
§ 123-17. Powers and duties. [Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord. No.
89-76]
(2) Advanced law enforcement administrator training from a
recognized agency; or
E. Has attained the rank of E-9 or higher in the military service for a
period of five years and remains in such rank or has been honorably
discharged from the military service.
A. The Director shall possess all of the general appointment and
supervisory powers granted to department heads pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:69A-43 and is designated the appropriate authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The Director shall have complete responsibility for
the fiscal and administrative affairs of the Police Department, including
the authority to:
(1) Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of
the Police Department and for the discipline of members.
(2) Provide for the health, safety or welfare of the City in an emergency
situation through special emergency directives.
(3) Prepare budget requests and administer the departmental budget.
(4) Appoint police officers and employees of the Department.
(5) Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to the
Department appropriations.
(6) Provide such information reports on the work of the Department as
may from time to time be required by the Mayor.
(7) Preside at all departmental hearings and remove or suspend police
officers and employees of the Department as provided by law.
(8) Perform such other duties as directed by the Mayor, not
inconsistent with applicable ordinances and statutes.
(9) Examine at any time the operations of the Department or the
performance of any officer and members.
B. The Director shall exercise all powers and duties conferred by
ordinances of the City of Vineland with respect to license application
§ 123-15 VINELAND CODE § 123-17
1:122
§ 123-18. Powers and duties of the Chief of Police. [Amended
11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-76]
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall be
directly responsible to the Director for the efficiency and routine day-to-day
operations of the Department. The Chief of Police shall, pursuant to policies
adopted by the Director:
§ 123-19. Department of Public Safety abolished.
The Department of Public Safety heretofore established by Ordinance No. 6
is hereby abolished.
and approval, except where expressly reserved to the Chief of Police by
law.
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the Department and its
officers and personnel.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Department.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and personnel.
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the Department to be exercised under his
direction and supervision.
E. Report at least monthly to the Director, in such form as shall be
prescribed by the Director, on the operation of the Department during
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be requested
by the Director.
§ 123-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-19
1:123

ARTICLE III
Special Law Enforcement Officers
[Adopted 9-9-1986 by Ord. No. 86-4733 (Ch. 96, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 123-20. Appointment.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Special Law Enforcement Officers Act,34
there shall be two categories of special law enforcement officers who may
be appointed as special officers in the Police Department of the City of
Vineland:
§ 123-21. Employment limitation.
Special law enforcement officers appointed to the Police Department of the
City of Vineland may be employed for not more than 20 hours weekly, except
that they may serve without hourly limitation during periods of emergency.
A. The City Council may appoint such Class One officers as are needed to
supplement the Police Department of the City of Vineland, subject only
to budget appropriations available in the municipal budget to be
adopted in each year. Class One officers shall be authorized and
empowered to issue summonses for violations of municipal ordinances
and parking violations under municipal ordinances and under Title 39
of the Statutes Annotated of the State of New Jersey.
B. The City Council may appoint as many Class Two special officers as is
permitted by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.17, and shall be entitled to perform
such duties as are permitted by the Special Law Enforcement Officers
Act and by the certification which each such officer receives from the
Police Training Commission.35 [Amended 1-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-2]
A. An emergency is defined as any sudden, unexpected or unforeseeable
event requiring the immediate use or deployment of law enforcement
personnel.
B. In determining whether an emergency exists to justify the deployment
of special law enforcement officers, the Chief of Police or, in his
absence, the officer in charge of the City of Vineland Police Department
33.Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance provided as follows: "WHEREAS, the Special
Law Enforcement Officers Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8, was signed into law in January of
1986 and is to be effective as of October 1, 1986; and WHEREAS, a 'special law
enforcement officer' is defined by the act as any person appointed as a special police
officer to temporarily or intermittently perform duties similar to those performed
regularly by members of a police force of a local unit to provide assistance to a police
force during unusual or emergency circumstances or at individual times or during regular
seasonal periods in resort municipalities; and WHEREAS, pursuant to said act, the
governing body of a municipality must, by ordinance, make certain determinations with
regard to the appointment of special police officers in said municipality."
34.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: For such duties as are permitted by the Special Law Enforcement Act, see
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
§ 123-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-21
1:125
§ 123-22. Equipment and uniforms.36
There shall be no fee charged or cost assessed for equipment and uniforms
which are supplied to special officers appointed to serve in the Police
Department of the City of Vineland.
§ 123-23. Eligibility.
Prior to appointment of any special officer, the Chief of the Police
Department or, in his absence, the officer in charge of the City of Vineland
Police Department shall ascertain the eligibility and qualifications of any
person who is recommended for appointment as a special officer in the
City of Vineland Police Department and shall report these determinations,
in writing, to the City Council prior to such person being appointed as a
special law enforcement officer.37
§ 123-24. Compensation of Class Two officers. [Added 3-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-14]
The compensation rate for Class II Officers:
or the Mayor of the City of Vineland or the Director of Public Safety of
the City of Vineland is hereby authorized to designate the existence of
an emergency.
A. Class II officer, basic training: $14.50 per hour.
B. Class II officer, less than 25 years law enforcement experience: $14.50
per hour.
C. Class II officer, 25 years or more law enforcement experience: $20 per
hour.
D. Class II officer, one part-time liaison officer assigned to Vineland
Municipal Court: $30,680 per year, no health benefits.
36.Editor’s Note: Former § 123-22, Residency requirement, was repealed 3-28-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-23. This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 123-23, 123-24, and 123-24.1 as
§§ 123-22, 123-23, and 123-24, respectively.
37.Editor's Note: Former § 123-24.1, Establishment of liaison police officer for Vineland
Municipal Court, added 12-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-65, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-2. Original Art. IV, Street-Marking and
Traffic Sign Unit, adopted 4-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-22, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 4-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-37.
§ 123-21 VINELAND CODE § 123-24
1:126
ARTICLE IV
Preference to Residents
[Adopted 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 94-22 (Ch. 96, Art. IV, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 123-25. Priority of eligibility.
A. Classification.
(1) Before any person shall be appointed as a member of the Police
Department and force, the appointing authority may classify all the
duly qualified applicants for the position or positions to be filled in
the following classes:
(a) Class I, residents of the City of Vineland.
(b) Class II, other residents of Cumberland County.
(c) Class III, other residents of the state.
(d) Class IV, all other qualified applicants.
(2) Within each such classification, duly qualified applicants who are
veterans shall be accorded all such veterans' preferences as are
provided by law. Persons discharged from the service within six
months prior to making application to the City of Vineland who
fulfill the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1 and who thereby
are entitled to appointment notwithstanding their failure to meet
the New Jersey residency requirement at the time of their initial
application shall be placed in Class III.
B. The City of Vineland shall first appoint from those in Class I and then
from those in each succeeding class in the order above listed and shall
appoint a person or persons in any such class only to a vacancy or
vacancies remaining after all qualified applicants in the preceding class
or classes have been appointed or have declined an offer of
appointment.
C. The classes of qualified applicants defined in Subsection A of this
section shall be considered as separate and successive lists of eligibles,
and the Civil Service Commission shall, when requested to certify
eligibles for positions specified in this article, make such certifications
from said classes separately and successively and shall certify no
persons from any such class until all persons in the preceding class or
classes have been appointed or have declined offers of appointment.
D. This section shall apply only to initial appointments and not to
promotional appointments of persons already members of the Police
Department.
E. In making temporary appointments, the appointing authority may
utilize the classifications set forth in Subsection A of this section and
§ 123-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-25
1:127
§ 123-26. Promotions; preference to resident.
Promotions to positions on the Police Department and force shall be based
upon merit as determined by suitable promotion tests for such positions;
provided, however, that a resident shall be appointed rather than a
nonresident thereof in any instance in which the resident and nonresident
achieved the same final average score in such test. The preference granted
by this section shall in no way diminish, reduce or affect the preferences
granted to veterans pursuant to N.J.S.A. 11A:5-1 et seq., or any other
provision of law.
shall classify accordingly all duly qualified applicants for the positions
to be temporarily filled.
F. For purposes of this section, a person shall be considered a Class I
applicant if such person is a bona fide resident of the City of Vineland as
of the closing date for the civil service examination and up to and
including the date of appointment.
§ 123-25 VINELAND CODE § 123-26
1:128
ARTICLE V
Enforcement Duties
[Adopted 7-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-56 (Ch. 96, Art. V, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 123-27. Sight triangle enforcement.
Ordinance No. 943, adopted September 10, 1974, provided enforcement
authority by the Police Department for property owners to maintain
shrubbery pursuant to said ordinance regulations.38 Said ordinance is
referenced herein to document the Police Department's enforcement
responsibilities.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 247, Brush, Weeds, Plant Life, Solid Waste and Debris.
§ 123-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-27
1:129

ARTICLE VI
Police Athletic League
[Adopted 6-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-37; amended in its entirety
2-27-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-10 (Ch. 96, Art. VI, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 123-28. Establishment; incorporation.
The City of Vineland is hereby authorized to act as an incorporator to
create a nonprofit corporation to be known as the "Vineland Police Athletic
League," and the Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized to execute
a certificate of incorporation containing provisions authorized by and
consistent with this article. The City Clerk is further authorized to file the
certificate of incorporation authorized by this article with the New Jersey
Secretary of State after execution by the Mayor and City Clerk.
§ 123-29. Purpose.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq., the certificate of incorporation shall
include the following purposes:
§ 123-30. Membership; terms; vacancies; qualifications;
compensation.
A. To provide and maintain a method for the Vineland Police Department
to exchange ideas, experiences and information on youth problems,
their causes and treatment.
B. To study methods and procedures necessary to develop a constructive
program with a goal toward solving youth problems.
C. To promote competition in the field of sportsmanship and nationally in
the interest of youth.
D. To promote friendly and cooperative relationships between members of
the Vineland community and the Vineland Police Department.
A. The Board of Directors of the Vineland Police Athletic League shall
consist of 11 members. Three members shall serve by virtue of their
employment or position as follows:
(1) One City Council member selected by its body.
(2) Chief of Police or designee.
(3) Superintendent of Recreation or Recreation Commission member
selected by the Mayor.
B. Of the remaining eight members, four shall be appointed by the Mayor
and four shall be appointed by City Council, as follows:
(1) One Mayoral appointment for one year.
(2) One Mayoral appointment for two years.
§ 123-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-30
1:131
§ 123-31. Duration.
The duration of the corporation shall be perpetual.
§ 123-32. Officers.
The Board shall elect annually at the reorganization meeting a Chairperson,
Vice Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer in accordance with its bylaws.
The Board shall have no other officers. The Chairperson may appoint ad hoc
committees as needed.
§ 123-33. Development of bylaws.
The Board shall develop bylaws for the corporation.
(3) One Mayoral appointment for three years.
(4) One Mayoral appointment for four years.
(5) One Council appointment for one year.
(6) One Council appointment for two years.
(7) One Council appointment for three years.
(8) One Council appointment for four years.
C. At the expiration of each of the above terms, the new members shall be
appointed for a term of four years.
D. Vacancies in the Board of Directors, occurring for whatever cause, shall
be promptly filled by the respective appointing authority for the
unexpired term thereof.
E. Each person shall be chosen based on qualifications and fitness for
service on the Board. He/she shall have an understanding of the
multicultural, multirace and multiethnic composition of the community.
The membership shall represent the makeup of the community and
shall be devoted to public service.
F. No member, officer or employee of the Board shall be interested,
directly or indirectly, in any contract for work or material used by the
Board or in any sale, lease or agreement in connection with lands,
buildings or other property owned or controlled by it or in any fee or
compensation of kind paid to any person doing business with the Board
or in any other transaction of or with the Board or the benefits or profits
thereof.
G. The members and officers of the Board shall serve without
compensation.
§ 123-30 VINELAND CODE § 123-34
1:132
§ 123-34. Voting procedure.
All business not inconsistent with the powers of the Board shall be
conducted in accordance with its bylaws. Amendments to the bylaws
require a majority vote of the entire Board.
§ 123-35. Dissolution; distribution of assets.
Upon dissolution of the corporation, after payment of any debt, the
corporation's assets shall not be distributed to any Board member or officer
but shall be the property of the City of Vineland, consistent with the
provisions of Section 115 of the United States Internal Revenue Code.
§ 123-36. Certificate of incorporation.
A. The certificate of incorporation shall include the address of the
corporation's initial registered office, which shall be the office of the
Vineland City Clerk, and the name of the corporation's initial registered
agent at the address, as required by the New Jersey Nonprofit
Corporation Act.39
B. The certificate of incorporation shall also contain the names and
addresses of the first Board of the corporation and such additional
information as may be required by the New Jersey Nonprofit
Corporation Act.
39.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq.
§ 123-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-36
1:133

ARTICLE VII
Employment of Off-Duty Police Officers
[Adopted 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-38]
§ 123-37. Policy established.
A. Members of the Vineland Police Department shall be permitted to
accept police-related employment for private employees, school
districts or other governmental entities within the City of Vineland only
during those hours that said officers are off duty and at such times as
will not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled
or emergency duty for the City of Vineland.
B. Any person or entity who intends to employ off-duty police shall make
application for such service with the Chief of Police of the City of
Vineland on such form and providing such information which the Chief
reasonably believes is necessary to consider such employment,
including but not limited to the time, length of service, type of event,
location of said event and purpose and reasons for which such officers
are requested. Such approval shall only be granted if, in the opinion of
the Chief, such employment would be consistent with the efficient
functioning and good reputation of the Police Department. Further, the
Chief shall determine, in his opinion, the number of officers necessary
to carry out the service requested considering the need and safety of
said officers.
C. If approved by the Chief of Police, all such employment for any period
beyond 10 hours of service per officer and event shall be reduced to an
agreement and approved by City Council of the City of Vineland by
resolution. Any request for service of any period less than 10 hours per
officer and event shall be approved by the Chief of Police.
D. All requests for services of off-duty officers in the Vineland Police
Department for a period of 10 hours of service per officer and event
shall be forwarded to the Chief for posting not less than 10 days before
such services are required; however, should the need for services be as
a result of an unforeseen and emergent circumstance in the sole
discretion of the Chief of Police and Mayor based upon the
circumstances and the impact upon the manpower of the Vineland
Police Department, such services may be provided. [Amended
1-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2018-80]
E. Any police officer, when so employed, shall be considered an employee
of the City of Vineland; provided, however, that wages earned for such
outside employment shall not be applied toward the pension benefits of
law enforcement officers so employed nor shall hours worked for such
outside employment be considered in any way compensable as
overtime.
§ 123-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-37
1:135
§ 123-38. Payment for services.
F. Any and all procedures, including scheduling, relative to the operation
of this article shall be set forth as policy of the Department by the Chief
of Police and Director of Public Safety.
G. In the event the Mayor and governing body determine it to be in the
best interest of the City, the administration of the off-duty police officers
may be assigned to a duly experienced administrative services company
to be administered in accordance with this Article VII, excepting
therefrom any function assigned to the Chief of Police in accordance
with this chapter, any other ordinance or applicable policy of the
Vineland Police Department. Nothing herein shall prohibit the City from
entering into contracts for off-duty police services to private individuals
or entities separate from an administrative services company and set
rates different than as is set forth herein. Said assignment or separate
contract shall be by a written contract recommended by the Chief of
Police and approved by the governing body. [Added 1-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 2018-80]
A. Any written agreement entered into pursuant to § 123-37A herein shall
require the employer to pay to the City of Vineland an amount equal to
10 hours per officer in advance of said services and shall continue to
maintain payments in an amount equal to 10 hours per officer in
advance at all times during said service period.
B. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty police officer
for a period of less than 10 hours per officer and event shall pay the full
amount of the fee due to the City of Vineland in advance of said service,
in the discretion of the Chief of Police, which shall be based upon the
need for such services in an expeditious manner and time constraints
within which to require payment to be made as well as other criteria
which the Chief of Police deems is necessary to consider. In the event
that the Chief of Police waives the full payment amount in advance of
said service, then, in that event, the entity requesting the service shall
make payment for said service in an expeditious fashion. Failure to
make payment in an expeditious fashion in accordance herewith shall
be a criteria considered in the future by the Chief of Police in waiving
the requirement that the entity requesting the service pay the full
amount of the fee due to the City of Vineland in advance of said service.
[Amended 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-107]
C. Subject to Subsection B hereinabove set forth, the Chief of Police shall
not post a request for services from any person or entity unless all fees
and compensation required herein have been paid in full. [Amended
1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-107]
D. In the event any person or entity fails to make payments in accordance
herewith, services of off-duty police officers shall cease and requests for
further or future services shall not be considered until all payments due
as provided herein have been paid. Termination of services shall be
§ 123-37 VINELAND CODE § 123-38
1:136
§ 123-39. Rate of compensation. [Amended 10-25-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-49; 1-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-2; 5-24-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-14; 1-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2018-80]
Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty police officers
are established as follows:
without notice to the person or entity requesting. Failure to make
payment shall be deemed notice.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the person or entity requesting such
services to assure that all payments have been made in accordance
herewith.
A. Rate of compensation for private persons or entities, including school
districts or other governmental entities, shall be equal to the overtime
rate of the highest paid Sergeant in the Department at the time the
services are to be performed and shall remain the same rate throughout
the term of the services being performed for that private person or
entity.
B. An additional fee of $8 per hour shall be added to the above hourly rate
of compensation to be paid in accordance herewith. Said amount
represents administrative costs, overhead and out-of-pocket expenses
necessary to carry out this article.
§ 123-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-39
1:137

ARTICLE VIII
Police Chaplain
[Adopted 8-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-34]
§ 123-40. Position created.
The position of Police Chaplain for the City of Vineland Police Department is
hereby created in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141. The position will be
a volunteer position. The position of Chaplain shall be under the Director of
Public Safety and subject to the control of the Chief of Police.
§ 123-41. Qualifications. [Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-22]
Any person appointed as Chaplain shall be an ordained clergyman in good
standing in the religious body from which he/she is selected. The Chaplain
shall have basic training and shall be a certified Police Chaplain
credentialed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City of
Vineland Police Department.
§ 123-42. (Reserved)40
§ 123-43. Duties.
The duties of Police Chaplain shall include but not be limited to assisting
the City of Vineland Police Department in death notifications, station house
adjustments and any other duties that may be assigned by the Chief of
Police.
§ 123-44. Rank and salary.
Any person appointed as Chaplain shall serve in that capacity without rank
or salary.
§ 123-45. Term of office.
A person appointed as Chaplain shall serve during the term of the Mayor
and shall continue to serve until he/she is either replaced or reappointed.
§ 123-46. Appointment. [Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-25]
The Chief of Police may recommend to the Mayor persons that he/she
believes meet the qualifications of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141 as well as the rules
and regulations of the City of Vineland Police Department with reference
to Chaplains, if any. All applicants for the position of Chaplain shall be
reviewed by the Chief of Police, Senior Police Chaplain and Chaplain liaison
to determine his/her qualifications in accordance with this article and shall
make recommendations to the Mayor regarding the appointment as
40.Editor’s Note: Former § 123-42, Number appointed, which provided a maximum number of
Chaplains allowed, was repealed 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-25.
§ 123-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-46
1:139
Chaplain. The Mayor shall appoint Chaplains in accordance with this article
with the advice and consent of City Council.
§ 123-46 VINELAND CODE § 123-46
1:140
Chapter 129
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS
§ 123-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-46
1:141

ARTICLE I
Award of Professional Service Agreements and Contracts Without
Competitive Bidding
[Adopted 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-741 (Ch. 99, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 129-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any natural or legal person, business corporation,
professional services corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
limited partnership, business trust, association or any other legal
commercial entity organized under the laws of this state or any other state
or foreign jurisdiction. The definition of a business entity includes:[Added
3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-20]
CANDIDATE —
All principals who own or control more than 10% of the profits or assets
of a business entity or 10% of the stock in the case of a business entity
that is a corporation for profit, as appropriate;
A.
B. Any subsidiaries directly or indirectly controlled by the business entity;
Any political organization organized under Section 527 of the Internal
Revenue Code that is directly or indirectly controlled by the business
entity, other than a candidate committee, election fund, or political
party committee; and
C.
If a business entity is a natural person or that person's spouse residing
therewith.
D.
A. Any individual seeking election to a public office of the City of Vineland.
An individual who shall have been elected or failed election to an office
for which he sought election and who receives contributions and makes
expenditures for purposes of furthering his election campaign.
B.
An individual who has received funds or other benefits or has made
payments solely for the purposes of determining whether the individual
should become a candidate as defined herein. "Candidate" shall also
mean any group of candidates for office of the City of Vineland who
have petitioned the Municipal Clerk to designate them as running
mates pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:45-10. Any contribution to one member
of the group shall represent a contribution to all of the group members
individually.
C.
41.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2006-20, adopted 3-28-2006, stated: "Ordinance 2005-7, as
amended, shall be changed and hereinafter referred as An Ordinance Restricting and
Controlling the Award of Professional Service Agreements and other Contracts without
Competitive Bidding."
§ 129-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-1
1:143
CONTRIBUTIONS — All loans and transfers of money or other thing of
value, excluding personal services other than paid personal services, to
or by any candidate's committee, political committee, political party
committee and all pledges or other commitments or assumptions of liability
to make any such transfer for purposes of promoting a candidate for
election to public office of the Mayor or City Councilperson in the City of
Vineland. For purposes of this article, all pledges or other commitments or
assumptions of liability to make any such transfer for purposes of promoting
a candidate shall be deemed to have been made upon the date when such
commitment is made or liability assumed.
FAIR AND OPEN PROCESS — At a minimum that:[Added 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-20]
POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE — Any PAC that is organized for the
primary purpose of promoting or supporting City of Vineland municipal
candidates or municipal office holders within four calendar years
immediately preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS ENTITY — A business entity, as defined herein,
that provides services by individuals who are required to be professionally
licensed under the laws or regulations of the State of New
Jersey.[Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-20]
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AGREEMENT — An agreement or contract
with the City of Vineland to procure services or any material or equipment
from or for the acquisition, sale or lease of any land or building from
or to any professional business entity without competitive bidding as an
exception to the Local Public Contract Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and
40A:11-5(1)(a)(ii).
VIOLATIONS — Shall exist where a professional business entity receiving
a professional service agreement or a business entity receiving a contract
in excess of $17,500, except a contract that is awarded pursuant to a fair
and open process as defined herein:[Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-20]
The contract or agreement shall be publicly advertised in the official
newspaper of the City of Vineland or on the Internet website
maintained by the City of Vineland in sufficient time to give notice in
advance of the contracts or agreement;
A.
The contract or agreement is awarded under a process that provides
for public solicitation of proposals or qualifications and awarded and
disclosed under criteria established in writing by the City of Vineland
prior to the solicitation of proposals or qualifications; and
B.
C. The proposal is publicly opened and announced when awarded.
A. Made or solicited a contribution contrary to the terms of this article;
B. Knowingly conceals or misrepresents a contribution given or received;
§ 129-1 VINELAND CODE § 129-1
1:144
§ 129-2. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
Makes or solicits contributions through intermediaries for the purpose
of concealing and misrepresenting the source of the contribution;
C.
Makes or solicits any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign or campaign
committee of any candidate or holder of any elected office of the City of
Vineland;
D.
Fund contributions made by third parties, including consultants, family
members or employees; and
E.
Engages in any exchange of contribution to circumvent the intent of
this article.
F.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the City of
Vineland, or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, as the case may
be, shall not enter into an agreement for professional services, or
otherwise contract to procure services, including banking services/
relationships or insurance coverage services, without competitive
bidding (collectively, "professional services agreement"), from any
professional business entity, where the aggregate value of the
transaction exceeds $17,500, if that entity has solicited or made any
contribution to a campaign committee of or to any individual candidate
or holder of public office for the government of the City of Vineland
having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract or any City
of Vineland party committee or to any PAC that is organized for the
primary purpose of promoting or supporting the City of Vineland
municipal officeholders within four calendar years immediately
preceding the date of the contract or agreement. [Amended
8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-58]
B. No professional entity which enters into any professional services
agreement with the City of Vineland, or any department thereof, or the
rendition of professional services or any other service contract,
including services/relationships or insurance coverage services,
without competitive bidding (collectively, "professional services
agreement"), where the aggregate value of the transaction exceeds
$17,500, shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution of money or
pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contribution, to any City of
Vineland candidate or holder of the public office of the government of
the City of Vineland having ultimate responsibility for the award of the
contract, or to any City of Vineland party committee, or to any PAC that
is organized for the primary purpose of promoting or supporting City of
Vineland municipal candidates or municipal officeholders prior to the
completion of the contract or agreement. [Amended 8-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-58]
§ 129-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-2
1:145
§ 129-3. Restrictions on awarding contracts for goods, services or
equipment to political contributors. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-20]
C. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The City Council of the City of Vineland, if the contract requires
approval or appropriation from the Council.
(2) The Mayor of the City of Vineland, if the contract requires approval
of the Mayor or if a public officer who is responsible for the award
of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
A. Any other provisions of the law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
City of Vineland or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, as the case
may be, shall not enter into an agreement or contract with a business
entity for goods, services or equipment or to sell property where the
aggregate value of the transaction exceeds $17,500, except a contract
that is awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, as defined herein,
if that business entity has solicited or made a contribution to a
campaign committee of or to any individual candidate or holder of
public office for the government of the City of Vineland having ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract or any City of Vineland party
committee or to any PAC that is organized for the primary purpose of
promoting or supporting the City of Vineland municipal office holders
within four calendar years immediately preceding the date of the
contract or agreement award.
B. No business entity which enters into any agreement for goods, services
or equipment or to sell property where the aggregate value of the
transaction exceeds $17,500, except a contract that is awarded
pursuant to a fair and open process, as defined herein, shall knowingly
solicit or make any contribution of money or pledge of a contribution
including in-kind contribution to any City of Vineland candidate or
holder of the public office of the government of the City of Vineland
having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract or to any
City of Vineland party committee or to any PAC that is organized for the
primary purpose of promoting or supporting City of Vineland municipal
candidates or municipal office holders prior to the completion of the
contract or agreement.
C. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The City Council of the City of Vineland, if the contract requires
approval or appropriation from the Council.
(2) The Mayor of the City of Vineland, if the contract requires approval
of the Mayor or if a public officer who is responsible for the award
of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
§ 129-2 VINELAND CODE § 129-4
1:146
§ 129-4. Contributions made prior to the effective date. [Amended
3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-20]
No contributions made by a professional business entity or any business
entity to any municipal candidate for Mayor or Council or municipal party
committee or PAC referenced in this article shall be deemed a violation of
this section, nor shall an agreement for property, goods or services, of any
kind whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by
the professional business entity or business entity prior to January 1, 2006.
§ 129-5. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
[Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-20]
§ 129-6. Breach of contract and penalty. [Amended 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-20]
A. Prior to awarding any professional service agreement or any contract
or agreement for goods, services or equipment or to sell property in
which the aggregate value of the transaction exceeds $17,500, except a
contract that is awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, as defined
herein, including banking or insurance coverage service with any
professional business entity or business entity, the City of Vineland or
any of its purchasing agents, as the case may be, shall require the
professional business entity or business entity to provide a written
certification indicating the following:
(1) That it has not made a contribution as defined herein.
(2) If a contribution has been made:
(a) Provide the person, persons, campaign committee or political
action committee to whom such contribution was made.
(b) Provide the date such contribution was made.
(c) Provide the amount of each contribution so made.
(3) The reason or reasons that such a contribution would not prohibit
this award of the professional service agreement or contract in
which the aggregate value of the transaction exceeds $17,500
pursuant to this article.
B. The professional business entity or business entity shall acknowledge
by certification that it has a continuing duty to report any contribution
that occurs during the term of the professional service agreement or
contract. The certification required under this subsection shall be made
prior to the execution of the professional service agreement or contract
with the City of Vineland and shall be in addition to any other
certifications that may be required by any other provision of the laws of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 129-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-6
1:147
§ 129-7. Exemption. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-20]
A. All City of Vineland professional services agreements and/or contracts
shall provide that a violation of this article shall be an event of default
and breach of the terms of any contract. This subsection shall not apply
to contracts or agreements with business entities where the anticipated
value is less than $17,500 or which were awarded pursuant to a fair and
open process, as defined herein.
B. Any professional business entity or business entity who knowingly fails
to reveal a contribution made in violation of this article or otherwise
commits a violation, as defined herein, shall be disqualified from
eligibility for future City of Vineland contracts for a period of four
calendar years from the date of the violation.
A. This article shall not prohibit the awarding of a professional services
agreement or other contract or agreement contrary to the terms of the
article where there shall exist an emergency which requires the
immediate delivery of goods or the performance of services. Pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6, no contract shall be entered into on an emergent
basis unless the circumstances meet all of the following requirements:
(1) An actual or imminent emergency must exist requiring the
immediate delivery of the article or the performance of the service;
(2) The emergency condition must affect the public health, safety or
welfare and require the immediate delivery of the article or the
performance of the service to alleviate such effect;
(3) The emergency purchasing procedures may not be used unless the
need for the articles or services could not have been reasonably
foreseen or the need for such articles or services has arisen
notwithstanding a good faith effort on the part of the contracting
unit to plan for the purchase of any articles or services required by
the contracting unit;
(4) The contract shall be of such limited duration as to meet only the
immediate needs of the emergency; and
(5) Under no circumstances shall the emergency purchasing
procedure be used to enter into a multiyear contract.
B. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this article shall not
prohibit the award of a professional service agreement without
competitive bidding or other contract or agreement to a business entity
without competitive bidding to a professional business entity or
business entity who has made a contribution to the campaign of a
candidate for the Office of Mayor or City Council who has, by popular
vote of the registered voters of the City of Vineland, lost the election for
which the contribution was made, subject to the definition of candidate
hereinabove.
§ 129-6 VINELAND CODE § 129-7
1:148
Chapter 135
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Board of Recreation Commissioners — See
Ch. 146.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
§ 135-1. Department established.
There is hereby established in the government of the City of Vineland a
Department which shall be known as the "Department of Public Works."
§ 135-2. Divisions enumerated. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-14; 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-106; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-45]
Within the Department of Public Works shall be allocated and assigned
the Division of Engineering and the Division of Public Works. Within the
Division of Public Works shall be allocated and assigned the subdivisions
of Streets, Roads and Sanitation, Street Marking and Traffic Signs, Public
Property, Recreation, Solid Waste Management, Equipment Maintenance
and Vehicle Fuel Facility, and the subdivision of Tree Cultivation and
Maintenance. Within the Division of Engineering shall be allocated and
assigned subdivisions of Engineering and Planning.
§ 135-3. Personnel.
There is hereby assigned and transferred to said Department all the
subordinate officers and employees in the City of Vineland holding their
offices and positions under tenure of office under any law of this state
or Title 11A (Civil Service) of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and
now exercising and performing any of the functions, powers and duties as
heretofore. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to affect or impair
the tenure of office, civil service or pension rights of any of the officers and
employees transferred to said Department.
§ 135-4. Property and records.
There is hereby transferred and assigned to said Department all of the
property, books, papers and records relating to any of the offices and
other governmental agencies hereinabove allocated and assigned to said
Department, except such books, papers and records as are now required by
law or the ordinances of the City of Vineland to be kept in the office of some
other officer or department of the City government.
§ 129-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-5
1:149
§ 135-5. Director of Department of Public Works. [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-45]
A. There is hereby created the office of Director of Department of Public
Works. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Vineland with the advice and consent of City Council of the City of
Vineland, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-32, and shall serve only during
the term of office of the Mayor appointing him or her and until the
appointment and qualification of his/her successor and shall be subject
to removal as provided by law. Vacancies in the office of Director shall
be filled in the same manner as the original appointment but for the
unexpired term only.
B. Salary. The Director shall receive an annual salary, to be paid in the
same manner as other department heads and officers of the City of
Vineland. The current salary is set forth in Chapter 157, Salaries and
Compensation. The position of Director of the Department of Public
Works shall be considered a part-time position.42
C. Qualifications. The Director shall also possess a general knowledge of
road networks, drainage systems, street marking and traffic control
devices and heavy equipment maintenance. The Director shall also
possess a general knowledge of the public buildings and grounds, parks
and parking lots in the City of Vineland and shall possess good public
relation skills, good organizational skills and experience with human
resources program planning and budgeting.
D. Powers and duties of Director. The Director shall have general
administrative authority over the Department of Public Works. In
addition to the functions, powers and duties that are hereby or may
hereafter be conferred and imposed upon him by law and the
ordinances of the City, the Director shall:
(1) Approve the appointment of the subordinate officers and
employees of the Division of Engineering with the advice and
consent of the City Engineer.
(2) Approve the appointment of subordinate officers and employees of
the Division of Public Works with the advice and consent of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
(3) Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to the
Department appropriation.
(4) Provide such informational reports on the work of the Department
as may from time to time be required by the Mayor.
(5) Establish policies and procedures for the administration of
divisional activities.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 135-5 VINELAND CODE § 135-5
1:150
§ 135-6. Division of Public Works. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-14; 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-106]
(6) Be responsible for all financial and budgetary matters of the
Department.
(7) Perform such other duties as directed by the Mayor.
A. Superintendent of Public Works. There is hereby created the position of
Superintendent of Public Works pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6a et
seq. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be the supervisor of the
Division of Public Works and shall be directly responsible to advise the
Director of Public Works and other municipal elected officials and
employees in the proper compliance and administration of various laws,
regulations, technical practices, operations and management
techniques with regards to the Division of Public Works and related
activities conducted by the municipality.
B. Salary. The Superintendent of Public Works shall receive an annual
salary to be paid in the same manner as salaries of all other City
employees with a salary range as set forth in Ordinance No. 8 and
amendments thereto. The position of Superintendent of Public Works
shall be considered full-time.
C. Qualifications. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be a certified
public works manager, as defined by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6(g). The
Superintendent of Public Works shall also be subject to the residency
requirements of municipal Ordinance No. 94-09, Chapter 151 of the
Code of the City of Vineland. The Superintendent of Public Works shall
also possess a thorough knowledge of road networks, drainage systems,
street marking and traffic control devices, heavy equipment
maintenance and operation and local public contracts law. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall also have the ability to efficiently
organize and schedule work to give clear assignments and instructions
to groups and individuals, to prepare suitable reports and to keep
needed records and files.
D. Powers and duties of the Superintendent of Public Works. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall, in addition to the functions,
powers and duties that are hereby or may hereafter be conferred and
imposed upon him/her by law and the ordinances of the City of
Vineland, pursuant to the policies adopted by the Director:
(1) Direct the operation of the Division of Public Works, including the
activities of the staff, and coordinate all the work and activities of
the aforesaid subdivisions.
(2) Report, at least monthly, to the Director in such form as shall be
prescribed by the Director on the operation of the Department
during the preceding month and make such other reports as may
be requested by the Director.
§ 135-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-6
1:151
§ 135-7. Subdivision of Streets, Roads and Sanitation. [Amended
1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-106]
(3) Assist in executing plans for the effective utilization of available
funds, personnel, equipment, materials and supplies.
(4) Organize and develop suitable work programs for the varied
functions of the Division.
(5) Give suitable assignments and instructions to individuals and
groups and supervise their work.
(6) Make investigations of complaints and take proper action to see
that needed repairs are made with a minimum delay.
(7) Inspect and check work in progress or completed to see that proper
procedures are followed.
(8) Keep needed records and files and prepare suitable reports.
(9) Prepare and obtain approval and implement a capital improvement
program for the City's infrastructure in coordination with the City
Engineer, the Planning Board of Adjustment and the Business
Administrator related to the Division of Public Works and its
subdivisions.
(10) Prepare and assist in the preparation of loan and grant applications
to state and federal government agencies for City projects and
inform the Director of Public Works, the Mayor and City Council of
all available financial aid.
(11) Provide technical assistance, labor and equipment to other
divisions within the Department as expeditiously as possible based
upon the priority of the assistance needed by the other divisions.
A. Subdivision established. Within the Division of Public Works there shall
be a Subdivision of Streets, Roads and Sanitation.
B. Functions of the Subdivision. Under the direct supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Works, the Subdivision of Streets, Roads and
Sanitation shall:
(1) Maintain and repair all City streets and roads, culverts and drains.
(2) Undertake and administer road construction projects and road
surfacing and resurfacing projects which are to be performed by
Division personnel.
(3) Provide for the cleaning of streets, roads, City-owned and Cityleased
parking lots, culverts and drains.
(4) Clear snow and ice from the streets and City-owned and City-leased
parking lots and provide any other street services as may be
necessary for the safe and efficient operation of traffic.
§ 135-6 VINELAND CODE § 135-7
1:152
§ 135-8. Subdivision of Public Property. [Amended 2-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-14]
(5) Assign appropriate and trained operators and equipment to provide
regular and periodic inspections of the drainage system and to
clear the drainage system of any obstructions to provide for proper
drainage of road surface water to ensure safe passage over the
municipality's road network.
(6) Enforce the provisions of Vineland Code Chapter 320, Drainage
Systems.
(7) Provide for compliance with federal, state and any other
regulations pertaining to stormwater discharge.
(8) Collect leaves gathered and deposited by private owners on or
along the public streets in the manner set forth in rules and
regulations established by the City Engineer and on file with the
City Clerk.
(9) Be responsible for the control of obnoxious growths, trash and
debris on vacant City-owned properties.
(10) Where directed by the City Engineer, the Director of Health or their
designees, in accordance with established policies and procedures,
provide for the cutting of brush and hedges or the removal of
obnoxious growths, trash and debris on privately owned properties
at the expense of the owner.
(11) Maintain the municipal landfill and composting facilities under the
supervision of the City Engineer.
A. Subdivision established. Within the Division of Public Works, there shall
be a Subdivision of Public Property.
B. There shall be created the position of Manager of Public Property.
C. Functions of the Subdivision. Under the direct supervision of the
Manager of Public Property and the general supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Works, the Subdivision of Public Property
shall:
(1) Operate and maintain public buildings owned or leased by the City.
(2) Provide custodial and janitorial services for all City-owned and
City-leased buildings.
(3) Maintain and landscape City grounds and parks, including parking
lots owned or leased by the City.
(4) Maintain and landscape grounds surrounding City-owned or Cityleased
buildings.
§ 135-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-8
1:153
§ 135-9. Subdivision of Recreation.
§ 135-10. Subdivision of Solid Waste Management. [Amended
8-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-51; 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-106;
5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-26]
(5) Provide equipment and facilities for parades and events and
supervise post-parade event maintenance.
(6) Maintain public playground equipment and recreational facilities,
including the preparation of sports fields and courts in coordination
with the Recreation Division.
(7) Assist the Recreation Commission in the development of parks and
playgrounds.
(8) Operate and maintain the municipality-owned trolley in accordance
with the regulations governing the use of said trolley and its area of
operation.43
A. Subdivision established. Within the Division of Public Works, there shall
be a Subdivision of Recreation.
B. Functions of the Subdivision. Under the direct supervision of the
Superintendent of Recreation and under the general supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Works, the Subdivision of Recreation shall,
subject to the policies and rules of the Recreation Commission:
(1) Plan, promote, organize and administer comprehensive recreation
programs and services for the community.
(2) Schedule the use of park and recreation facilities in coordination
with the Recreation Commission and enforce the provisions of
regulations of the City applicable thereto.
A. Subdivision established. Within the Division of Public Works there shall
be a Subdivision of Solid Waste Management.
B. Functions of the Subdivision. Under the direct supervision of the
Assistant Director of Solid Waste Management and the general
supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works, the Subdivision of
Solid Waste Management shall:
(1) Enforce the provisions of Chapter 620 of the Vineland City Code in
accordance with established rules and regulations on file with the
City Clerk and in accordance with the County of Cumberland Solid
Waste Management Plan.
(2) Implement recycling programs and procedures established by the
City of Vineland.
43.Editor's Note: Original § 103-9, Subdivision of Grounds, Parks and Municipal Trolley,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-14.
§ 135-8 VINELAND CODE § 135-10
1:154
§ 135-11. through § 135-13. (Reserved)44
§ 135-14. Repealer.45
The following ordinances are hereby repealed:
(3) Provide, operate and maintain facilities for collection and disposal
of solid waste, including but not limited to licensed composting
sites and postclosure maintenance of the municipal landfill.
(4) Prepare and assist in the preparation of loans and grant
applications to state and federal government agencies for City
projects and inform the Director of Public Works, the Mayor and
City Council of all available financial aid.
A. Ordinance No. 22, adopted by the City Council of the City of Vineland
on August 26, 1952 (1990 Vineland Code Chapter 91, Article I, City
Engineer).
B. Ordinance No. 84-58, adopted December 26, 1984 (1990 Vineland Code
Chapter 36, Division of Engineering).
C. Ordinance No. 84-33, adopted September 25, 1984 (1990 Vineland
Code Chapter 126, Department of Streets and Roads).
D. Ordinance No. 93-37, adopted April 27, 1993 (1990 Vineland Code
§ 126-7.1, Division of Street Marking and Traffic Signs).
E. Ordinance No. 84-23, adopted June 28, 1984 (1990 Vineland Code
Chapter 378, Recycling).
F. Ordinance No. 385, adopted June 27, 1961 (1990 Vineland Code
Chapter 296, Landfills).
G. Ordinance No. 1044, adopted October 26, 1976 (1990 Vineland Code
Chapter 102, Department of Public Buildings and Grounds).
44.Editor’s Note: Former § 135-11, Subdivision of Equipment Maintenance and Vehicle
Fueling Facility; § 135-12, Division of Engineering, as amended; and § 135-13, Subdivision
of Planning, were repealed 10-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-71. For current provisions, see
Ch. 5.
45.Editor's Note: Former § 103-14, Division of M unicipal Utilities, as amended 1-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 2007-106, was repealed 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-45.
§ 135-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-14
1:155
Chapter 139
PURCHASING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Claims approval — See Ch. 19.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 50.
Department of Law — See Ch. 84.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 157.
§ 139-1. Creation; membership.
There is hereby created a Purchasing Board of the City of Vineland
consisting of five members, namely, the Purchasing Agent, the City Clerk
and the Business Administrator or their designated alternates, one member
of the City Council and one member of the Legal Department.
§ 139-2. Receipt and unsealing of bids; records.
The Purchasing Board shall be authorized to receive such bids as may be
presented and immediately proceed to unseal them and publicly announce
the contents in the presence of the parties bidding or their agents, if they
choose to be then and there present, and shall also make proper record of
the prices and terms upon the minutes of the body.
§ 139-3. Minutes; compliance with state law.
The Purchasing Board shall keep full, complete and accurate minutes on all
bids received and shall comply with the applicable provisions of state law.
§ 139-4. Advertisements for bids.
All advertisements for bids under N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. shall designate
the time and place of the meeting at which the Board shall receive bids.
Whenever possible, the advertisement for bids shall designate an hour for
receiving bids between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. from Monday
through Friday, and no bids shall be opened previous to the hour designated
in the advertisement, and none shall be received thereafter.
§ 139-5. Referral of bids to Business Administrator.
After the bids are received, read and recorded, they shall be turned over to
the Business Administrator for tabulation and recommendation to the City
Council.
§ 135-14 VINELAND CODE § 139-6
1:156
§ 139-6. Limitation of powers.
The Purchasing Board herein established shall not be authorized to
purchase materials and supplies pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9 but shall
exercise only those powers hereinbefore enumerated.
Chapter 146
RECREATION COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Police Department — See Ch. 123.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 151.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 507.
§ 146-1. Creation; members; terms of office. [Amended 2-9-1971 by
Ord. No. 788]
There shall be and hereby is established and created a Board of Recreation
Commissioners in the City of Vineland, which shall consist of seven persons,
citizens and residents of the City of Vineland. The sixth and seventh
appointees shall hold office for periods of four and five years, respectively,
from the day in the year in which said appointment is made and until
his or her successor is duly appointed and has qualified. Thereafter, these
appointments shall be for terms of five years.
§ 146-2. Appointment of members; terms of office; vacancies;
compensation.
The Mayor, in his discretion, shall appoint, with the advice and consent of
the Council of the City of Vineland, the members of the Board of Recreation
Commissioners. The Commissioners first appointed shall hold office for one,
two, three, four and five years, respectively, from the day in the year in
which said appointment is made and until his or her successor is duly
appointed and has qualified. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms
of five years, and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. The
members shall receive no compensation for their services.
§ 146-3. Powers and authority.
Said Board, with the approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of
Vineland, may acquire lands for public playgrounds and recreation places,
by gift or purchase, and shall from time to time select lands for public
playgrounds and recreation places and, when deemed necessary or
advisable by such Board, select lands for an approach or approaches by way
of ingress thereto and egress therefrom, of such size and dimensions as it
shall think suitable, regard being had to the population of the neighborhood.
§ 139-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-3
1:157
It shall, in addition to the foregoing powers, have, subject to the approval
of the Mayor and Council of the City of Vineland, all the powers which
are granted to boards of recreation commissioners with respect to surveys,
maps, estimates, acquisition of lands and suitably equipping the same with
buildings, stands, seats and other structures and apparatus for such
playgrounds and recreation purposes as provided in Sections 3 and 4 of
Chapter 12 of Title 40 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 146-4. Authority to improve lands.
Said Board may cause any lands acquired for the purpose to be laid out and
improved as a public playground, recreation place or an approach thereto.
§ 146-5. Title of acquired lands; leases of land.
The title to all lands acquired or taken under the provisions of Sections 1 to
8 of Chapter 12 of Title 40 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated shall vest
in the City of Vineland, and all leases of land for such purposes shall be in
the name of the City of Vineland.
§ 146-6. Provision of funds; collection of fees.
§ 146-7. Control of land; adoption of rules and regulations:
violations and penalties.
Said Board shall have full control of all lands, playgrounds and recreation
places acquired or leased under the provisions of Sections 1 to 8 of Chapter
12 of Title 40 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated and may adopt suitable
rules, regulations and bylaws for the use thereof and the conduct of all
persons while on or using the same, and any person who shall violate any
of such rules, regulations or bylaws shall be deemed and adjudged to be a
disorderly person.46
A. In order to provide the funds, in whole or in part, necessary to improve,
maintain and police the playgrounds or recreation places under its
control, the Board of Recreation Commissioners may arrange and
provide for the giving of outdoor exhibitions, concerts, games and
contests and may use and employ such playgrounds or recreation
places for the purpose of giving thereon outdoor exhibitions, concerts,
games and contests.
B. Said Board may charge and collect a reasonable admission fee for each
person entering such playground or recreation place during the time or
times when the same is being used or employed for such purposes but
shall not use or employ any such playground or recreation place for
such purpose for a greater period than eight hours in any week nor on
more than two days in any one week, and when any such playground or
recreation place is used for such purpose, no admission fee shall be
charged or collected from children under 12 years of age.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 146-3 VINELAND CODE § 146-8
1:158
§ 146-8. Appointment of Secretary and assistants; compensation.
Said Board may appoint a secretary or clerk and such number of custodians,
supervisors and assistants for the several playgrounds and recreation
places as it shall think necessary, but the salaries or other compensation of
all such officers, custodians and assistants shall be fixed and determined by
the Council of the City of Vineland.
§ 146-9. Preservation of order. [Amended 12-26-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-87]
The appointed custodians, supervisors and assistants shall notify the Police
Department in situations requiring police assistance.
§ 146-10. Annual report.
Said Board shall make an annual report on or before the first day of January
and submit the same to the Council of the City of Vineland, which report
shall contain a comprehensive and detailed report covering operations,
receipts, disbursements and expenditures for the full year.
§ 146-11. Appropriations.
The Council of the City of Vineland shall annually fix, determine and
appropriate a sum sufficient for the care, custody, policing and maintenance
of such playgrounds and recreation places and for the expenses of said
Board, which shall be raised by taxation in the same manner as other taxes.
Chapter 151
RESIDENCY PREFERENCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 24.
Emergency management — See Ch. 36.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 50.
Fire Department — See Ch. 56.
Department of Health — See Ch. 62.
Department of Law — See Ch. 84.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Police Department — See Ch. 123.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 135.
§ 151-1. Definitions; residence standards.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONA FIDE RESIDENT — A person having a permanent domicile within
the City of Vineland and which has not been adopted with the intention of
§ 146-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-1
1:159
again taking up or claiming a previous residence acquired outside the City
of Vineland's boundaries.
RESIDENCE — A single legal residence. The following standards shall be
used in determining legal residence:
§ 151-2. Residency preference in hiring.
Preference in hiring shall be given to prospective officers and employees
who are bona fide residents of the City of Vineland. When hiring is based
upon merit as determined by suitable hiring tests or other objective criteria,
a resident shall be given preference over a nonresident when, in the
discretion of the appointing authority or designee, all other measurable
criteria are equal. The preference granted by this section shall in no way
diminish, reduce or affect the preference granted pursuant to any other
provision of law.
§ 151-3. Compliance with state law.
City of Vineland employees and officials shall comply with N.J.S.A. 52:14-7,
which requires municipal employees and officials to live within the State of
New Jersey.
A. Whether the locations in question are owned or rented.
Whether time actually spent in the claimed residence exceeds that of
other locations.
B.
Whether the relationship among those persons living in the residence
is closer than those with whom the individual lives elsewhere. If an
individual claims a residence of a parent, relative or friend because of
marital separation, a court order or other evidence of separation may
be requested.
C.
Whether, if the residence requirement of the anticipated or actual
appointment was eliminated, the individual would be likely to remain in
the claimed residence.
D.
Whether the residence recorded on a driver's license, motor vehicle
registration or voter registration card and other documents is the same
as the claimed legal residence. Post office box numbers shall not be
acceptable.
E.
Whether the school district attended by a child(ren) living with the
individual is the same as the claimed residence.
F.
§ 151-1 VINELAND CODE § 151-3
1:160
Chapter 157
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 24.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 50.
Fire Department — See Ch. 56.
Department of Health — See Ch. 62.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 110.
Police Department — See Ch. 123.
§ 151-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-3
1:161

ARTICLE I
Mayor
§ 157-1. Compensation. [Amended 2-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-547;
2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13]
The salary of the Mayor of the City of Vineland shall be $45,000 per annum,
commencing January 1, 2017, and commencing January 1, 2018 shall be
$60,000 per annum, paid in the same manner as salaries of all other city
employees. In addition to salary, $1,000 per annum shall be appropriated
quarterly for travel allowances, and shall be paid upon the submission of
properly signed vouchers and $1,500 per annum, shall be appropriated for
other general expenses and shall be paid upon the submission of properly
signed vouchers. The Mayor shall be available for the performance of his/
her duties at all times without additional compensation.
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed Ord. No. 2008-40, adopted 6-24-2008, slated
to take effect 7-1-2012, which increased the compensation of the Mayor.
§ 157-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-1
1:163

ARTICLE II
City Council
[Amended 2-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-548]
§ 157-2. Compensation for members. [Amended 2-23-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-8; 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13]
The salary of each member of City Council shall be $7,500 per annum,
commencing January 1, 2017, and commencing January 1, 2018 shall be
$10,000 per annum, paid in the same manner as salaries of all other city
employees. In addition to salary, $1,000 per year shall be appropriated for
travel allowances, and shall be paid upon the submission of properly signed
vouchers.
§ 157-3. Council President. [Amended 2-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-13]
The President of City Council, by virtue of additional duties, shall be paid an
additional $750 per annum, commencing January 1, 2017, and commencing
January 1, 2018 shall be $1,000 per annum, paid in the same manner as
salaries of all other city employees.
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed Ord. No. 2008-40, adopted 6-24-2008, slated
to take effect 7-1-2012, which increased the compensation of the Council and Council
President.
§ 157-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-3
1:165

ARTICLE III
Various Officials
§ 157-4. Department Directors. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-42; 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-42; 4-11-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-27; 7-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-49]
Department Directors may be full-time City employees in another title.
Directors shall receive salaries as specified hereunder, to be paid in the
same manner as salaries of all other City employees. The salary of the
following directors shall be fixed by the Council in the compensation
schedules heretofore adopted or hereafter to be adopted in the Schedule of
Classified/Unclassified Positions and Applicable Salary Ranges in the Civil
Service of the City of Vineland:
§ 157-5. Other officials. [Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-63;
12-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-62]
Other City officials shall receive salaries as specified hereunder to be paid
in the same manner as salaries of all other City employees as follows:
A. Director of the Department of Administration.
B. Director of the Fire Department.
C. Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections.
D. Director of the Department of Law.
E. Director of the Department of Municipal Utilities.
F. The salary of the Director of Public Safety shall be $7,500 per year.
G. The salary of the Director of the Department of Public Works shall be
$5,000 per year.
H. The salary of the Director of Health shall be $5,000 per year
commencing January 1, 2017.
I. The salary of the Director of Finance shall be $5,000 per year
commencing January 1, 2017.
J. The salaries of the Directors of Public Safety, Department of Public
Works, Department of Health and Department of Finance shall be paid
as stipends and not part of the salary of the individual in the event an
employee of the City of Vineland is appointed as director of the
aforementioned departments.
K. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no director of the City
of Vineland shall be entitled to compensatory time or overtime as
defined in the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act.49
49.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq.
§ 157-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-5
1:167
A. The salary of any managerial executive, which is not set by this chapter
or a collective bargaining agreement, shall be fixed by the Council in
the compensation schedules heretofore adopted or hereafter to be
adopted in the Schedule of Classified/Unclassified Positions and
Applicable Salary Ranges in the Civil Service of the City of Vineland.
Salary adjustments for such managerial executives shall not be less
than salary adjustments granted to nonuniformed supervisors covered
by a collective bargaining agreement. Terms and conditions of
employment for managerial executives shall not be less than those
received by nonuniformed supervisors.
B. The salary of any confidential employee, which is not set by this chapter
or a collective bargaining agreement, shall be fixed by the Council in
the compensation schedules heretofore adopted or hereafter to be
adopted in the Schedule of Classified/Unclassified Positions and
Applicable Salary Ranges in the Civil Service of the City of Vineland.
Salary adjustments for such confidential employees shall not be less
than salary adjustments granted to blue-collar and clerical employees
covered by a collective bargaining agreement. Terms and conditions of
employment for confidential employees shall not be less than those
received by blue-collar and clerical employees.
C. If an employee is covered by an individual employee agreement, then
salaries and other terms and conditions of employment shall be
governed by the individual employee agreement.
D. The salary of the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be $1,000 per year.
E. The salary of the Deputy Tax Assessor shall be $1,000 per year.
F. The salary of the Municipal Treasurer shall be $500 per year. In the
event the Municipal Treasurer is unavailable to perform assigned
duties, the appointing authority shall designate an employee to assume
said duties.
§ 157-5 VINELAND CODE § 157-5
1:168
ARTICLE IV
Appointed Board Members
§ 157-6. Planning Board. [Amended 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
The salary of the Planning Board Solicitor shall be $13,000 per year. The
salary shall be paid in lieu of any and all other legal fees for those duties
and responsibilities required in accordance with the bylaws of the Planning
Board, including but not limited to attendance at all Board and committee
meetings, correspondence and meetings with the Planning staff, and
providing legal opinions as requested by the Planning Board and City
Planner. In addition thereto, the Solicitor shall be paid as follows:
§ 157-7. Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 6-7-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-26; 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
The salary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment Solicitor shall be $10,000
per year. This salary shall be paid in lieu of any and all other legal fees for
those duties and responsibilities required in accordance with the bylaws of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, including but not limited to attendance at
all Board and committee meetings, correspondence and meetings with the
Planning staff and Zoning Officer, and providing legal opinions as requested
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, City Planner and Zoning Officer. In
addition thereto, the Solicitor shall be paid as follows:
A. On an hourly basis at a rate set by the appointing authority for any
pending or anticipated litigation in which the Board or its members may
be a party; and
B. Those fees for services as specified in Ordinance No. 86-38, as
amended, and Chapter 425, Article I, § 425-5A(14), (29), (30) and (31).
A. On an hourly basis at a rate set by the appointing authority for any
pending or anticipated litigation in which the Board or its members may
be a party; and
B. Those fees for services as specified in Ordinance No. 86-38, as
amended, and Chapter 425, Article I, § 425-5A(14), (29), (30) and (31).
§ 157-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-7
1:169
Chapter 165
WARDS
§ 157-7 VINELAND CODE § 157-7
1:170
ARTICLE I
Division into Wards
[Adopted 7-28-1952 by Ord. No. 14 (Ch. 138, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 165-1. Number restricted; fixing of boundaries.
The City of Vineland shall forthwith be divided into not fewer than six wards
nor more than 10 wards, the lines and boundaries of which shall be fixed
and defined by Commissioners appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
consent of the Council of this City, in accordance with the statute in such
case made and provided.
§ 165-2. Appointment of Commissioners; fixing of boundaries.
After the passage of this article, the Mayor shall, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, appoint four Commissioners who shall be
residents and legal voters of this City, and not more than two of whom shall
be of the same political party, to fix and define the lines and boundaries of
such wards.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-2
1:171

ARTICLE II
Descriptions and Boundaries
[Adopted 9-15-1952 by Ord. No. 25 (Ch. 138, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 165-3. Wards created.
The City of Vineland is hereby divided into six wards.
§ 165-4. First Ward.
The First Ward shall comprise all that territory and its inhabitants in the
City of Vineland lying in the area within the following described boundaries:
Beginning at the intersection of the center of Scotland Run with the
northerly City line, thence:
A. Along the northerly City line southeastwardly to the center of Wheat
Road;
B. Along the center of Wheat Road westwardly to the center of
Pennsylvania Railroad;
C. Along the center of Pennsylvania Railroad southwardly to the center of
Park Avenue;
D. Along the center of Park Avenue westwardly to the center of Delsea
Drive;
E. Along the center of Delsea Drive northwardly to the center of Almond
Road;
F. Along the center of Almond Road westwardly to the center of Maurice
River;
G. Along the center of Maurice River northwardly to the center of
Weymouth Road;
H. Along the center of Scotland Run northwardly to the northerly City line
and place of beginning.
§ 165-5. Second Ward.
The Second Ward shall comprise all that territory and its inhabitants in the
City of Vineland lying in the area within the following described boundaries:
Beginning at a point in the center of Maurice River and the southerly City
line, thence:
A. Along the City line southeastwardly to the center of the Pennsylvania
Reading Seashore Line;
B. Along the center of said railroad northwardly to the center of Chestnut
Avenue;
C. Along the center of Chestnut Avenue westwardly to the center of West
Avenue;
§ 165-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-5
1:173
D. Along the center of West Avenue northwardly to the center of Landis
Avenue;
E. Along the center of Landis Avenue eastwardly to the center of the
Pennsylvania Railroad;
F. Along the center of the Pennsylvania Railroad northwardly to the
center of Park Avenue;
G. Along the center of Park Avenue westwardly to the center of Delsea
Drive;
H. Along the center of Delsea Drive northwardly to the center of Almond
Road;
I. Along the center of Almond Road westwardly to the center of Maurice
River;
J. Along the center of Maurice River southwardly to the City line and the
place of beginning.
§ 165-6. Third Ward.
The Third Ward shall comprise all that territory and its inhabitants in the
City of Vineland lying in the area within the following described boundaries:
Beginning at the intersection of the centers of Landis Avenue and West
Avenue, thence:
A. Along the center of Landis Avenue eastwardly to the center of East
Avenue;
B. Along the center of East Avenue southwardly to the center of Chestnut
Avenue;
C. Along the center of Chestnut Avenue westwardly to the center of
Seventh Street;
D. Along the center of Seventh Street southwardly to the center of Paul
Street;
E. Along the center of Paul Street westwardly to the center of the
Pennsylvania Railroad;
F. Along the center of the Pennsylvania Railroad northwardly to the
center of Chestnut Avenue;
G. Along the center of Chestnut Avenue westwardly to the center of West
Avenue;
H. Along the center of West Avenue northwardly to the center of Landis
Avenue and place of beginning.
§ 165-7. Fourth Ward.
The Fourth Ward shall comprise all that territory and its inhabitants in the
City of Vineland lying in the area within the following described boundaries:
§ 165-5 VINELAND CODE § 165-7
1:174
Beginning at the intersection of the centers of Landis Avenue and the
Pennsylvania Railroad, thence:
A. Along the center of Pennsylvania Railroad northwardly to the center of
Wheat Road;
B. Along the center of Wheat Road eastwardly to the northerly City line;
C. Along the City line southeastwardly to the center of Brewster Road;
D. Along the center of Brewster Road southwardly to the center of Landis
Avenue;
E. Along the center of Landis Avenue westwardly to the center of the
Pennsylvania Railroad and place of beginning.
§ 165-8. Fifth Ward.
The Fifth Ward shall comprise all that territory and its inhabitants in the
City of Vineland lying in the area within the following described boundaries:
Beginning at the intersection of the centers of East Avenue and Landis
Avenue, thence:
A. Along the center of Landis Avenue eastwardly to the center of Main
Road;
B. Along the center of Main Road southwardly to the center of Sherman
Avenue;
C. Along the center of Sherman Avenue westwardly to the center of the
Pennsylvania Railroad;
D. Along the center of the Pennsylvania Railroad northwardly to the
center of Paul Street;
E. Along the center of Paul Street eastwardly to the center of Seventh
Street;
F. Along the center of Seventh Street northwardly to the center of
Chestnut Avenue;
G. Along the center of Chestnut Avenue eastwardly to the center of East
Avenue;
H. Along the center of East Avenue northwardly to the center of Landis
Avenue and place of beginning.
§ 165-9. Sixth Ward.
The Sixth Ward shall comprise all that territory and its inhabitants in the
City of Vineland lying in the area within the following described boundaries:
Beginning at the intersection of the center of Brewster Road with the
northerly City line, thence:
A. Along the northerly City line southeastwardly to the center of
Manumuskin River;
§ 165-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-9
1:175
B. Along the center of Manumuskin River southwardly to the center of
Forge Avenue;
C. Along the center of Forge Avenue northwestwardly to the Maurice
River Township line;
D. Along the Maurice River Township line southwestwardly to the
southerly City line;
E. Along the southerly City line northwestwardly to the center of the
Pennsylvania Railroad;
F. Along the center of the Pennsylvania Railroad northwardly to the
center of Sherman Avenue;
G. Along the center of Sherman Avenue eastwardly to the center of Main
Road;
H. Along the center of Main Road northwardly to the center of Landis
Avenue;
I. Along the center of Landis Avenue eastwardly to the center of Brewster
Road;
J. Along the center of Brewster Road northwardly to the northerly City
line and place of beginning.
§ 165-9 VINELAND CODE § 165-9
1:176
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 200
ADVERTISING, DECEPTIVE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 230.
§ 200-1. Untrue or deceptive advertising.
Any person, firm, corporation or association who, with intent to sell or in
any wise dispose of merchandise, securities, service or anything offered by
such person, firm, corporation or association, directly or indirectly, to the
public for sale or distribution or with intent to increase the consumption
thereof or to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation
relating thereto or to acquire title thereto or an interest therein, shall make,
publish, disseminate, circulate or place before the public in this City, in a
newspaper or other publication or in the form of a book, notice, handbill,
poster, bill, circular, pamphlet or letter, billboard, sign, radio broadcast or
in any other way, an advertisement of any sort regarding the merchandise,
securities, service or anything so offered to the public, which advertisement
of fact is untrue, deceptive or misleading, shall be guilty of an offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 200-2. Sale by businesses.
It shall be deemed deceptive advertising and a violation of the provisions of
this chapter for any person, firm, corporation or association engaged in the
business of buying and selling new or secondhand articles or merchandise
or other property, real or personal, or engaged in the business of furnishing
any kind of service to advertise by means of liner ads in a newspaper or
otherwise such articles, property or service for sale in a manner indicating
or intended to indicate that the sale is being made by a householder
or private party not engaged in such business, and every person, firm,
corporation or association engaged in any such business shall, in
advertising goods, property or service for sale, either through liner ads or
otherwise, affirmatively and clearly indicate that the seller is engaged in
such business and is not a private party.
§ 200-3. Used or rejected merchandise.
It shall be deemed deceptive advertising and a violation of the provisions of
this chapter for any person, firm, corporation or association, in a newspaper
or other publication or by any advertisement or publication in any other
manner hereinbefore set out in § 200-1, to offer to the public for sale or
distribution any merchandise which is secondhand or used merchandise or
§ 165-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:177
which is defective in any manner or which consists of articles or units or
parts known as "seconds" or blemished merchandise or which has been
rejected by the manufacturer thereof as not first-class unless there is
conspicuously displayed in direct connection with the name and description
of such merchandise and each specific article, unit or part thereof, an
unequivocal statement, phrase or word which will clearly indicate that
such merchandise or each article, unit or part thereof so advertised is
secondhand, used, defective or consists of seconds or is blemished
merchandise or has been rejected by the manufacturer thereof as not firstclass,
as the fact may be, and such statement, phrase or word shall be
printed or lettered, as the case may be, in type or lettering as large as that
used in any other part of the advertisement, including the caption thereof.
§ 200-4. Conduct of sales.
§ 200-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No.
90-79]
Any person who shall violate the terms of this chapter, whether as principal
or agent or employee of another, shall, upon conviction in the Municipal
Court of the City of Vineland, be subject to a fine not exceeding $200 or
to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, and each day such
violation shall be continued shall be taken and construed to be a separate
and distinct offense.50
A. It shall be deemed deceptive, untrue and misleading advertising within
the intent and meaning of this chapter for any person, firm, corporation
or association to advertise the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, in
any manner, as a Sheriff's sale, Constable's sale, United States
Marshal's sale or as a trustee's sale, administrator's sale, executor's
sale, bankruptcy sale, receiver's sale or like sale, unless the person,
firm, corporation or association so advertising is a public official or is
acting under an order of or at the direction of a court of competent
jurisdiction; and it shall also be deemed a violation of this chapter for
any person, firm, corporation or association to advertise, in any manner,
as an insurance sale, bankrupt sale, mortgage sale, removal sale,
closing-out sale, going-out-of-business sale, quitting-business sale,
assignee's sale or a sale of goods, wares or merchandise damaged by
fire, smoke, water or otherwise, or any type of a sale generally known in
mercantile circles as a "distress merchandise sale" if such advertiser
shall subsequently add any goods, wares or merchandise to the stock on
hand at the time any of the types of sales enumerated herein are first
announced.
B. For the purpose of this section, the word "sale" shall be construed to
mean that any goods, wares or merchandise offered to the public are to
be sold for less than the prevailing regular retail price on the same or
comparable goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 200-3 VINELAND CODE § 200-5
1:178
Chapter 205
AGRICULTURAL ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 425.
§ 205-1. Prioritization of uses.
The agricultural use of land within agricultural zoned areas shall be
prioritized with respect to the right of use of said land.
§ 205-2. Notification of prospective purchasers.
Landowners located within areas zoned for agricultural use shall notify
prospective purchasers of their said land that the same is located within an
agricultural zone and subject to the provisions and protections of N.J.S.A.
4:1C-1 et seq. (the Right to Farm Act).
Chapter 211
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 123. Fire prevention — See Ch. 372.
§ 211-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment and the
maintenance of an efficient, effective and uniform police alarm system
within the City of Vineland and to provide standards and regulations for
the various alarm equipment, devices or systems, including dialers, and
local alarms designed to summon the Vineland Police Department at police
headquarters or any other agency so as to elicit a response or action by
the Vineland Police Department. This chapter will provide penalties for false
alarms and any violations of this chapter, thereby protecting the emergency
services of the community from misuse.
§ 211-2. Scope.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person(s), business by
any individuals, partnership, corporation or other entity thereof who
owns, sells, leases, maintains, services, repairs, alters, replaces, moves
50.Editor's Note: See Art. II, General Penalty, of Ch. 1, General Provisions, for additional
provisions.
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-2
1:179
§ 211-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ALARM AGENT LICENSE — Written permission duly granted by the City of
Vineland for any person(s) who is (are) employees of any alarm business,
either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following:
selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving or installing any alarm system or causing the same to be moved or
installed in or on any building, structure or facility.
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER — Any person, firm, corporation or other
entity engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing any
alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered,
replaced, moved or installed in or on any building, structure or facility.
ALARM USER PERMIT — Written permission duly granted by the Chief of
Police or his designate for the installation of a local alarm or police alarm
system or any type of device which, when activated, will alert others of
an unauthorized entry requiring urgent attention and to which the City of
Vineland Police Department is expected to respond.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees in
attendance at all times receive prerecorded voice messages or visual or
audio sounds to report an emergency at a stated location and who have
the duty to relay immediately, by live voice, any such emergency message
over a telephone line to the communications center of the Vineland Police
Department.
ARMED-ROBBERY ALARM — An alarm system signaling an armed robbery
or an attempted armed robbery by a local alarm system or police alarm
system and/or all devices, such as bells, horns, sirens, lights, buzzers and
whistles, which are designated to alert others and which will require urgent
attention and to which the City of Vineland Police Department is expected
to respond.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building, structure or facility and emits a warning
or installs any alarm system or causes the same to be moved or installed
in or on any building, structure or facility, designed to alert the public
of an unlawful act requiring urgent attention and to which the City
of Vineland Police Department is expected to respond. Local alarm
systems with interior or exterior annunciators attached to any building,
structure or facility, which, when actuated, will require a response from
the City of Vineland Police Department, will also be included in this
chapter.
B. This chapter will also govern all alarm systems which require permits;
establish fees; provide for punishment of violations and establish a
system of administration.
§ 211-2 VINELAND CODE § 211-3
1:180
signal audible outside the building and is designed to attract attention,
which is activated by a criminal act or other emergency, requiring police to
respond.
AUTOMATIC ALARM SHUTOFF — A timing mechanism that will disengage
the audible alarm after a maximum of 15 minutes after actuation.
AUTOMATIC DIGITAL DIALER — A device which is interconnected to the
telephone lines and is preprogrammed to select a predetermined telephone
number and transmit by coded message indicating a need for emergency
response by police.
AUTOMATIC VOICE TELEPHONE DIALER — A device which is
interconnected to the telephone line and is preprogrammed to select a
predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message indicating
a need for emergency response by police.
CENTRAL STATION PROTECTIVE SERVICE — A protective system or
groups of systems operated privately for customers by person(s), firm(s)
or corporation(s) which maintain supervisors and accept prerecorded
messages from automatic protection devices at a central station having
trained operators and guards in attendance at all times that have a duty
to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message, including
the relaying of messages by telephone line or digital display unit or any
other electrical or mechanical means to the communications center of the
Vineland Police Department.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the City of Vineland or his
designate, the Police Alarm Coordinator.
CITY — The City of Vineland.
CONTRACTOR ALARM LICENSE — Written permission duly granted by the
City of Vineland to sell, lease, maintain, service, repair, alter, replace, move
or install any alarm system or cause to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced,
repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on
any building, structure or facility.
DAY — A calendar day.
DESIGNATED TRUNKLINE — A telephone line leading into the
communications center of the City of Vineland Police Department that is for
the primary purpose of handling emergency messages which originate from
automatic digital dialers and are transmitted directly or indirectly through
an intermediary.
EMERGENCY — A police, fire or medical emergency.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm signal eliciting a response by the City of
Vineland Police Department when a situation requiring a response by the
City of Vineland Police Department does not in fact exist, but does not
include any alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to the control by the
business alarm operator or alarm user. If doubt exists as to the cause of
the false alarm, the Chief of Police or his designee shall make a decision
§ 211-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-3
1:181
regarding the circumstances of the activation. Multiple alarms received
by the Police Department before the system can be deactivated within a
reasonable period of time shall be considered a single alarm.
INTERMEDIARY — A central protective agency or answering service.
KEY — To use a telephone line or equipment for transmitting a message,
either directly or indirectly, by an automatic protection device.
LEASE BURGLAR ALARM — A wired electrical circuit leased from the
telephone company for transmitting alarm signals from protected premises
to a monitoring station and/or the communications center of the City of
Vineland Police Department.
LICENSE — See definitions of "alarm agent license" and "contractor alarm
license" of this section.[Added 4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-25]
LINE SECURITY — A system that detects attempts to alter the
characteristics or the integrity of the communication line between the
protected premises and the alarm-monitoring center and/or the
communications center of the City of Vineland Police Department.
MEDICAL EMERGENCY — An emergency involving the health of a person.
NOTICE — Written notice given by personal service upon the addressee
or given by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
person(s) to be notified at his last known address. Service of such notice
shall be effective upon completion of a personal service or upon the placing
of the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service.
PERMIT — Written permission duly granted to the applicant by the City of
Vineland upon payment of the required fee.
PERMITTEE — Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
who or which shall be granted a permit as provided herein and his, her or
its agents and representatives.
PERSON — The natural person(s), firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
POLICE ALARM COORDINATOR — The individual(s) designated by the
Chief of Police of the City of Vineland Police Department to investigate
business alarm license applications, alarm agent licenses, alarm permits
and police alarm licenses and to investigate any violation of this chapter.
POLICE ALARM LICENSEE — The recipient or holder of such license,
hereafter referred to as the "police alarm licensee," shall have exclusive
use and control of the police alarm console, except for the use of the City
of Vineland buildings, properties and structures. The police alarm licensee
shall make, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and rules and
regulations adopted thereunder, all installations and reconnects and pay the
maintenance fees established by this chapter.
POLICE BUREAU — The City of Vineland Police Department.
POLICE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The police communications room
and other rooms which house auxiliary communications equipment.
§ 211-3 VINELAND CODE § 211-3
1:182
PRIMARY TRUNKLINE — A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the City of Vineland Police Department that is for the purpose
of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis and which line is
identified by a specific listing among the white pages of the New Jersey Bell
Telephone Company for Cumberland County and vicinity.
PROPRIETOR ALARM — An alarm which is not serviced by an alarm
business.
SECONDARY TRUNKLINE — A telephone line leading into the main
switchboard of the City Hall of Vineland and/or the communications center
of the City of Vineland Police Department that is for the purpose of handling
administrative and other calls on a person-to-person basis.
§ 211-4. User permit required.
No person(s), individual(s), partnership, corporation or other entity thereof
will install, connect, maintain or cause to be installed, connected or
maintained any local alarm, police alarm system, armed-robbery alarm,
emergency or other alarm equipment, device or system in or to the City of
Vineland Police Department or any central station or answering service or
install or attach to any building, structure or facility any device designed
to detect an unauthorized entry or unlawful act which will alert others
and require urgent attention and to which the City of Vineland Police
Department is expected to respond without first obtaining a burglar alarm
permit.51
§ 211-5. User permit application procedures.
A. Burglar alarm user permits shall contain the name, address and
telephone number of the applicant and the name, address and
telephone number of each premises and customer or person(s) to be
served by the proposed installation or connection. The applicant shall
include a minimum of two persons' names who can be contacted in the
event of an active alarm, other than the permittee, who can assist the
City of Vineland Police Department in its response.
B. Burglar alarm user permits will be issued after application has been
made to the City of Vineland Police Department. All applications for a
burglar alarm permit required under this chapter shall be made, in
writing, to the Chief of Police of the City of Vineland Police Department
on a form provided therefor and shall be accompanied by an application
and processing fee of $10.
C. Upon application for a permit, the Chief of Police of the City of Vineland
Police Department shall cause an investigation and records to be made
and thereafter, provided that the applicant has complied with all of the
terms of this chapter and rules and regulations made, promulgated and
adopted pursuant thereto, shall issue a permit. All information
51.Editor's Note: Copies of the alarm permit application are on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 211-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-5
1:183
§ 211-6. Conditions for grant of user permit; violations and
penalties; fee waiver.
§ 211-7. Contractor license required.
No person(s), individual(s), partnership, corporation or other entity thereof
will sell, lease, maintain, service, repair, alter, replace, move or install any
alarm system or cause the same to be moved or installed in or on any
furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept confidential and shall
be for the authorized use of the Police Department only.
D. Permit fees for present subscribers to the existing alarm system and
who own or had installed or connected any type of system before the
effective date of this chapter shall be waived.
A. No permit or license shall be granted except upon the following terms
and conditions:
(1) The applicant shall furnish and complete within 30 days all
information required relating to the application and the alarm
equipment, device or system to be installed or connected.
(2) The applicant shall maintain his equipment in good condition and
repair.
(3) No permit shall be transferred or assigned in any manner.
(4) The permit is accepted upon the express condition that the
permittee shall indemnify and hold the City of Vineland harmless
from and on account of any and all damages arising out of the
activities of the permittee, its alarm contractor or alarm agent.
(5) Each separate building, store, premises, place or location shall
require a separate permit and a separate installation to connect to
the City of Vineland Police Department alarm console.
(6) The applicant or permittee, upon acceptance of such permit,
thereby agrees to hold and save harmless the City of Vineland and
its agents or employees from any liability whatsoever in connection
with such alarm equipment, devices or systems, the operation and
maintenance of which shall be the sole responsibility of the
person(s) having the same installed or connected. Any changes in
permit information will be the responsibility of the alarm owner to
provide to the police within 30 days.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this section of this chapter
shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of $50 for each violation.
C. Exception. An alarm user who is over the age of 65 or is disabled and is
the primary occupant of a residence, and where no business is
conducted at the residence, may obtain a burglar alarm user permit
from the City of Vineland without paying the above-stated fee.
§ 211-5 VINELAND CODE § 211-7
1:184
building, structure or facility without first making application for an alarm
contractor license52 and receiving clearance before engaging in any of the
above-described services or businesses in the City of Vineland.
§ 211-8. Contractor license fee; renewal.
§ 211-9. Contractor license application procedures and
requirements.
A. Upon the initial filing of an application for a business alarm license
hereinabove referred to, the applicant shall pay unto the Chief of Police
of the City of Vineland Police Department a fee of $50, exclusive of
fingerprinting costs, which costs shall be billed separately at the
prevailing rate charged by the New Jersey State Police, to defray the
costs of investigation, inspections, maintaining records and other
administrative expenses.
B. Each year thereafter, said alarm contractor license may be renewed
upon the request of said licensee at an annual renewal fee of $15,
exclusive of fingerprinting costs, which costs shall be billed separately
at the prevailing rate charged by the New Jersey State Police. All alarm
contractor licenses shall hereunder expire on December 31 of the year
in which issued, and all licenses for renewal thereof must be submitted,
in writing, to the Chief of Police on or before January 31 of the
succeeding year, together with the aforesaid renewal fee.
A. Upon filing an application for a license, the applicant for an alarm
contractor license shall complete a form provided therefor by the Chief
of Police, which shall include the name, address and telephone number
of the applicant and such other information as may be required from
time to time under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief
of Police.
B. The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the
applicant for an alarm contractor license to determine the qualifications
and responsibility of such applicant and the quality and reliability of
equipment, devices or systems to be installed or connected by said
alarm contractor licensee, as well as the liability of such alarm
contractor licensee to comply with the rules and regulations to be made
and promulgated by the Chief of Police.
C. No corporation, sole proprietor, partner, joint venture, trustee,
executor, administrator, employee, fiduciary or stockholder with a fivepercent
or greater incorporation (except a corporation whose stock is
publicly traded and registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission or with the State Securities Commission) applying for a
license shall have been convicted of a felony or pleaded nolo contendere
to a felony charge or indictment.
52.Editor's Note: Copies of the alarm license application are on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 211-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-9
1:185
§ 211-10. Devices and systems to conform to rules and regulations.
All alarm equipment, devices and systems shall conform to the rules and
regulations made and provided herein by the Chief of Police and the City
Council.
§ 211-11. Suppliers to furnish instructions.
Each alarm supplier who, after the effective date of this chapter, sells or
leases in the City of Vineland any alarm system shall furnish operating
instructions and a manual to the buyer or leaser.
§ 211-12. Installation requirements; deactivation.
Every alarm supplier selling, leasing or furnishing to any user or a user who
privately installs an alarm system which is located on premises within the
City shall be:
D. The applicant shall furnish an insurance certificate annually confirming
that the applicant has in force general liability insurance coverage in an
amount of not less than $300,000. An applicant who self-insures such
coverage shall furnish evidence of financial ability.
E. The alarm contractor licensee hereunder shall be required to maintain
complete and accurate records of each and every of such alarm
equipment, device or system installed, connected, maintained, leased
or serviced within the City of Vineland and shall notify the Chief of
Police within 30 days of all installations, connections and maintenances
on forms furnished by the Chief of Police.
F. The information shall include:
(1) The name, residence and telephone number of the owner or the
user.
(2) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number at that address.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of any other person or
firm who is authorized to respond to an emergency and gain access
to the address where the device is installed.
(4) The name and telephone number of any person, firm or
corporation, if any, other than the alarm supplier, who is
responsible for maintenance and repair of the system.
(5) The type of system, i.e., holdup, burglary, fire or medical
emergency.
A. Permitted to install only equipment that is listed by Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., as being electrically safe and meeting the City
requirements for the alarm system. Wiring for the alarm system must
conform to all applicable City codes.
§ 211-9 VINELAND CODE § 211-12
1:186
§ 211-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 211-7 through 211-14 shall be
subject to a penalty not to exceed the amount of $500.
§ 211-14. Notification for tests.
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of any alarm system
without first notifying the Alarm Coordinator of the City of Vineland Police
Department.
§ 211-15. Applicability of contractor license provisions.
The provisions of §§ 211-7 through 211-14 do not include person(s) who
engage in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location
and who neither visit the location where the alarm system is to be installed
nor designed the scheme for the physical location and the installation of the
alarm system in a specific location.
§ 211-16. Agent license required.
No person(s) who is (are) employed by an alarm business, either directly
or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling, leasing,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, alerting, replacing, moving or installing
any alarm system or causing the same to be moved or installed in or on any
building, structure or facility, shall engage in any of the listed services or
businesses without first making application for an alarm agent license53 and
receiving clearance.
§ 211-17. Agent license fee; renewal.
B. Required to cause each alarm system installed to be provided with
standby battery power, which shall automatically and immediately take
over in the event of a power failure.
C. Required to install equipment in such a way as to neutralize electrical
surges on the alarm system.
D. Required to deactivate any alarm system within a reasonable period of
time when multiple false alarms are received.
A. Upon initial filing of an application for the alarm agent license
hereinabove referred to, the applicant shall pay unto the Chief of Police
of the City of Vineland Police Department a fee of $50, exclusive of
fingerprinting costs, which costs shall be billed separately at the
prevailing rate charged by the New Jersey State Police, to defray the
costs of investigation, inspections, maintaining records and other
administrative expenses. Each year thereafter, said alarm agent license
may be renewed upon the request of said licensee at an annual renewal
53.Editor's Note: Copies of the alarm license application are on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 211-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-17
1:187
§ 211-18. Agent license application procedures.
§ 211-19. Police alarm license.
There is hereby established within the City of Vineland a police alarm
license, which shall be granted and hereafter referred to as the "police
alarm license" and which will be issued by the City of Vineland in
accordance with and as provided by the terms of this chapter.54
§ 211-20. Responsibilities of police alarm licensee.
fee of $15, exclusive of fingerprinting costs, which costs shall be billed
separately at the prevailing rate charged by the New Jersey State
Police.
B. All alarm agent licenses hereunder shall expire on December 31 of the
year in which issued, and all applications for the renewal thereof must
be submitted, in writing, to the Chief of Police on or before January 31
of the succeeding year, together with the aforesaid renewal fee.
A. Upon filing of an application for a license, the applicant for an alarm
agent license shall complete a form provided therefor by the Chief of
Police, which shall include the name, address and telephone number of
the applicant and such other information as may be required from time
to time under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of
Police.
B. The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the
applicant for an alarm agent license to determine the qualifications,
responsibility and reliability of the equipment, device or system to be
installed or connected by said alarm agent licensee, according to
regulations to be made and promulgated by the Chief of Police.
A. The recipient or holder of said license, hereinafter referred to as the
"police alarm licensee," shall have exclusive use and control of the
police alarm console and related equipment, except for the use by the
City of Vineland Police Department and police dispatchers, and shall
make, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules
and regulations adopted thereunder, all installations and connections of
such police, burglar, automatic, emergency or other alarm equipment,
devices or systems to the police alarm console and other related
equipment in the City of Vineland Police Department's headquarters
building, 111 North Sixth Street, as may be inspected and approved by
the Chief of Police of the City of Vineland and for which a permit shall
have been issued.
B. The police alarm licensee shall be required to furnish, supply and
provide all necessary materials, equipment and labor in accordance
54.Editor's Note: Copies of the alarm license application are on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 211-17 VINELAND CODE § 211-20
1:188
§ 211-21. Charges to police alarm subscribers.
§ 211-22. Grant of police alarm license; duration; renewal.
with plans and specifications prescribed by the Chief of Police and
approved by the City Council of Vineland for completion of the
installation in police headquarters of the police alarm console and
related alarm equipment, which shall include facilities for present and
future subscribers' installations and connections thereto, as described
in the bidding specifications.
C. The police alarm licensee shall assume all liability and agree to
indemnify and save harmless the City of Vineland, its agents, servants
and employees, including the City of Vineland Police Department and
police dispatchers, for any acts in connection with the installation,
connection, operation and maintenance of the police alarm console and
other related alarm equipment and the installation and connection
thereto and in conjunction therewith and shall furnish annually to the
City of Vineland Clerk an insurance certificate indicating liability
coverage in an amount of not less than $500,000.
D. The police alarm licensee shall post and keep posted during the term of
the license, with the City of Vineland Clerk, a performance bond or
other security satisfactory to the City of Vineland City Council and in a
form satisfactory to the City of Vineland Solicitor guaranteeing
performance of the obligations of the licensee and shall also furnish to
the City of Vineland Clerk satisfactory evidence of insurance covering
the police alarm console apparatus, equipment and materials installed
and connected by the licensee during the period or term of the license.
A. The police alarm licensee for the police alarm console and related
equipment shall be permitted to charge new subscribers thereto and a
maximum connection fee and, one year after initial installation, a
maximal annual maintenance fee as established by the competitive bid
as awarded to the police alarm licensee. Present subscribers connected
to the police alarm panel on or before the effective date of this chapter
shall be continued on the system for a period of six months from the
effective date of this chapter without charge to the subscriber, after
which time a transfer fee specified in the competitive bid will be
payable to the police alarm licensee for continued connection to the
police alarm console. One year after the effective date of this chapter,
the annual maintenance fee will then apply to these present subscribers
and annually thereafter.
B. Any or all City of Vineland buildings, structures and facilities now
connected to the police alarm panel or to be installed or connected in
the future will pay an installation fee, but no annual maintenance fee, to
the police alarm licensee.
A. The police alarm license shall be granted or issued by the City Council
of the City of Vineland after public advertisement for bids and bidding
§ 211-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-22
1:189
§ 211-23. Armed-robbery alarms; automatic voice telephone dialers;
automatic digital dialers.
therefor, taking into consideration the qualifications, ability,
experience, financial and other references, responsibility and location
of the applicant for said license, as well as the proposed services and
protection offered to the City of Vineland and subscribers to the police
alarm console; the amount of fees to be charged to such subscribers;
and the recommendations of the Chief of Police; and selecting the bid
proposal most advantageous both to the subscribers and to the City of
Vineland.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, the police alarm license issued
hereunder shall be for the term of three years from the date of approval
and issuance by the City of Vineland Council and shall be subject to the
terms and conditions of this chapter and rules and regulations from
time to time promulgated and adopted pursuant to this chapter.
C. Renewal of a police alarm license or award of a new license, should the
license be terminated in accordance with this chapter, shall be in
accordance with the provisions and procedures hereinabove set forth in
this chapter.
A. This section will deal with the rules and regulations pertaining to any
device or system designed to signal an armed robbery or attempted
armed robbery by a local alarm system or any police alarm system,
automatic dialer or digital dialer. Any and all devices, such as bells,
horns, sirens, buzzers and whistles, designed to alert others and to
which the City of Vineland Police Department is expected to respond
shall comply with this section.
B. Armed-robbery alarms.
(1) Any armed-robbery alarm connected to the police alarm panel will
have a separate channel or system to advise the City of Vineland
Police Department that the alarm is being activated due to an
armed robbery or an attempted armed robbery and not a burglary.
(2) Only lending institutions must comply with the City of Vineland
Police Uniform Financial Institution Alarm Response Procedure.
Copies of this procedure will be supplied upon issuance of an
armed-robbery alarm permit.
(3) All lending institutions will supply this City with a list of all
employees and establish a training date with the City of Vineland
Police Department for all employees and management staff on the
City of Vineland Police Uniform Financial Alarm Response
Procedure.
(4) All subscribers of armed-robbery alarms will be prohibited from
using an armed-robbery alarm system or device for any other
reason than to notify the City of Vineland Police Department of any
§ 211-22 VINELAND CODE § 211-23
1:190
other type of crime or unlawful act or for any other purpose than to
alert or advise of an armed holdup, armed-robbery or an attempted
armed holdup or armed robbery. Activating the system for any
other purpose than those described above will be a violation of this
section. Any violation of this section as the result of improper use
of an armed-robbery alarm system will result in a fine for the first
violation, and after more violations, § 211-24 of this chapter shall
apply.
(5) Telephone lines will be installed if for any reason the main
telephone line for any place of business or any building, structure
or facility so equipped with an armed-robbery alarm is not in
operation during any time that the business, building, structure or
facility is closed. This will include drive-ins and cash-register areas
open after closing hours.
C. Automatic voice telephone dialers.
(1) No automatic voice telephone dialers shall be permitted to be
programmed to the City of Vineland Police Department
communications center from the date of the passage of this
chapter.
(2) All burglar alarm users presently utilizing automatic voice
telephone dialers which are presently programmed to call the
primary trunkline of the City of Vineland Police Department
communications center shall have the period of one year to change
to a system compatible with the City of Vineland Police Department
communications center.
D. Automatic digital dialers.
(1) Automatic digital dialers, also known as "digital communicators,"
shall be preprogrammed to the designated trunkline of the police
alarm console located at the City of Vineland communications
center and will be supplied by the police alarm licensee, with the
exception of those that are preprogrammed to private central
stations.
(2) Codes.
(a) Each digital dialer will be programmed using the following
codes:
[1] Code No. 1: fire.
[2] Code No. 2: holdup.
[3] Code No. 3: burglary.
[4] Code No. 4: medical.
§ 211-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-23
1:191
§ 211-24. Permit and license revocation.
§ 211-25. False alarms; sanctions.
(b) All other codes are optional, but the number of codes shall not
exceed eight per alarm.
(3) All equipment shall be approved and/or certified by the Federal
Communications Commission for use.
A. Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police for any violation of or
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any rules or
regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and approved by the
Vineland City Council, including the following:
(1) The user permittee, alarm contractor licensee or alarm agent
licensee willfully failed to and did not comply with a request by the
Alarm Coordinator to proceed within an eight-hour period to the
location of the alarm user permittee's alarm and render services.
(2) The user permittee, alarm contractor licensee or alarm agent
licensee willfully and knowingly installed or maintained a faulty
alarm device. An inordinate number of false alarms shall be prima
facie evidence that such alarm device is knowingly a faulty device.
(3) The user permittee, alarm contractor licensee or alarm agent
licensee has breached the terms and conditions of the permit.
(4) The user permittee abuses the purpose of his alarm or uses that
alarm for any other purpose than that for which it is designed.
B. No permit or license shall be revoked or suspended without giving the
permittee or licensee 15 days' notice, in writing, of such action and an
opportunity to show cause before the Chief of Police or his designee
why such action should not take place.
C. Any person aggrieved by the action or determination of the Chief of
Police or his designee in the denial of a permit and/or license or the
suspension or revocation of any permit or license by the Chief of Police
or his designee shall not prevent prosecution in Municipal Court for
violations of any provisions of this chapter.
A. In case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the City of Vineland police in a manner prescribed
by the rules and regulations herein made and provided. In addition, in
the case of a false alarm, the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation
to be made and keep records of said alarm on file. For such false alarms,
the City Council prescribes the following penalties:
(1) For the first and second alarms in any given calendar month, a
warning shall be issued.
§ 211-23 VINELAND CODE § 211-25
1:192
§ 211-26. Revoked user's permit.
A revoked user's permit shall be obtained from the Chief of Police by
application and shall be issued upon the payment of a fee of $25 for the first
revoked user's permit. The second revoked user's permit shall be issued
upon the payment of $50, and the third revoked user's permit shall be
issued upon the payment of $100. Any additional revoked user's permit shall
(2) For the third false alarm in the same calendar month, a fine of $25
shall be paid to the City of Vineland.
(3) For the fourth alarm in the same calendar month, a fine of $50 shall
be paid to the City of Vineland.
B. False alarms from any alarmed premises shall not exceed more than 10
in one month without alarm permit revocation, suspension or increased
fines until such time as it can be shown by the permittee that the alarm
can now function properly and without false alarms. This proof will be
submitted to the Chief of Police's office or his designate.
C. During any suspension or revocation of any alarm permit, the police
alarm licensee will disconnect any direct or indirect or any automatic
device or system from the police alarm console owned by the suspended
or revocated permittee.
D. An automatic voice telephone dialer or a local alarm system with a bell,
buzzer, whistle, siren or horn or any other device designed to alert
others and require urgent attention from the City of Vineland Police
Department may not be responded to by the City of Vineland Police
Department.
E. During the suspension or revocation of any alarm permit, the permittee
will agree, upon receiving the alarm permit, not to hold the City
responsible for any action resulting from its suspension or revocation.
F. Where the investigation of the City of Vineland Police Department
discloses continued abuse of the privilege of connection to the police
alarm console and the services of the City of Vineland Police
Department in responding to alarms and disregard by the permittee in
taking remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the City of Vineland
reserves the right to require disconnection from the police alarm
console and to refuse to respond to the alarm subscriber's location for a
limited time or permanent time by the Chief of Police or his designee,
provided that no such permits shall be revoked or suspended without
giving the permittee an opportunity to show cause before the Chief of
Police or his designee why such action should not take place.
G. On new installations, a grace period of 60 days shall be permitted prior
to the imposition of any penalty to give the user the opportunity to
become familiar with said alarm system. [Added 4-26-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-21]
§ 211-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-26
1:193
be issued only by application to the City of Vineland. Revoked user's permits
shall be for a term of one year.
§ 211-27. Prohibited equipment and procedures. [Amended
4-26-1988 by Ord. No. 88-21]
The following alarm equipment and alarm procedures are prohibited under
this section:
§ 211-28. Specifications for police alarm licensee. [Amended
6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-32]
A. All alarm devices or systems designed to alert others of an unlawful
entry or any unlawful act by giving visual or audio signal automatically
or designed to set off any buzzer, bell, siren, light or any other type of
alerting device must be designed to have an automatic shutoff after 15
minutes, with the exception of those installations required to meet the
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., insurance rating requirements, which
installations must be designed to have an automatic shutoff after 30
minutes. Installation of any system without an automatic shutoff is
prohibited. Audible alarms without such a timing mechanism shall be
unlawful in the City of Vineland and must be disconnected by the owner
or user within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter, with the
exception of the installation of systems with direct dialer connection to
the City of Vineland Police Department, which installations shall be
limited to those installed prior to enactment of this chapter.
B. Any testing of any alarm system or device without following the
provisions of this chapter will be prohibited.
A. A bid solicitation for the supply, installation, operation and maintenance
of an advanced electronic alarm receiving system shall be received at
the communications center of the City of Vineland Police Department,
located at 111 North Sixth Street, Vineland, New Jersey.
B. Title and lease rights to the equipment shall remain with the contractor
at all times, and at the end of the contract term or upon earlier
termination of the contract, the contractor will cause the equipment to
be removed from the premises and the premises to be left in the same
condition as prior to the installation, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
C. The successful bidder will be determined by the lowest monthly charge
to all persons wishing to connect to the alarm-receiving equipment and
complying with the specifications and requirements contained herein.
D. The length of the contract solicited by this bid shall be three years.
E. The billing of the initial hookups and monthly charges and the collection
thereof will be the exclusive responsibility of the contractor.
F. No persons other than the contractor and the Chief of Police, police
dispatchers, Police Alarm Coordinator and the Chief of Police's
§ 211-26 VINELAND CODE § 211-28
1:194
designee shall have access to the alarm-receiving equipment located at
the City of Vineland Police Department headquarters, 111 North Sixth
Street, Vineland, New Jersey.
G. All existing customers connected to the Vineland Police Department
communications center alarm-receiving equipment, as well as future
customers, are guaranteed by the contractor the opportunity to connect
to the alarm-receiving equipment, provided that they are in compliance
with this chapter and all fee requirements.
H. Any increase in the monthly fee and installation fees must be approved
by the City Council of the City of Vineland.
I. An unlimited number of hookups without monthly fees but with a
charge of an installation fee will be permitted for the City of Vineland,
the purpose being for the municipal complex itself, schools and other
nonprofit community groups as the City of Vineland Council sees fit to
approve.
J. The contractor agrees to notify the Chief of Police, Police Alarm
Coordinator or designee 24 hours in advance prior to connection of all
customers in order to secure his approval based upon compliance with
this chapter. The contractor must agree to file every quarter a complete
list of installations and a complete list of any or all disconnects during
the same quarter of the year.
K. The contractor agrees to never permit the connection or continued
operation of a customer who is in violation of this chapter.
L. The police alarm console and all related equipment shall be approved
by the Federal Communications Commission as certified police
connection equipment.
M. The police alarm licensee shall be certified and listed with
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., as a certified contractor for
maintenance of police connections.
N. The police alarm licensee shall provide service 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, to the police alarm console. When service is required for
the system, the police alarm licensee shall acknowledge the request for
service within 30 minutes and be on location at police headquarters
within four hours' time from placing the initial call for service.
O. The police alarm licensee will be available and must complete any
request for service or new installation from any subscribers whose
installations, equipment and procedure fulfill the requirements of this
chapter within 48 hours of each request.
P. All electrical work shall conform to the requirements of applicable
building codes. Connection to the New Jersey Bell Telephone Company
lines shall be in accordance with the Federal Communications
§ 211-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-28
1:195
Chapter 216
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 511.
Commission's regulations and New Jersey Bell Telephone Company's
tariffs.
Q. All equipment to be installed must be able to fit into the allotted space
as provided by the City of Vineland Police Department for use by the
police alarm licensee.
R. The police alarm licensee shall provide a list of all other New Jersey
municipalities where the bidder is currently performing a similar
service and all New Jersey municipalities where the bidder has ever
performed a similar service.
S. The police alarm licensee shall provide a list of all material and major
components of the alarm system he proposed to install under these
specifications.
T. The police alarm licensee shall furnish proof of the Underwriters'
Laboratories' certificate as an approved contractor with his bid.
§ 211-28 VINELAND CODE § 211-28
1:196
ARTICLE I
Licensed Premises
§ 216-1. Annual license fees. [Amended 3-27-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-47; 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-68; 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
Annual license fees shall be as follows (increase of 3% annually, rounded
to the nearest whole dollar, until the maximum amount permitted by New
Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations is reached):
§ 216-2. Definitions. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No.2010-14]
The meanings of words and terms defined by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and
N.J.A.C. 13:2-1.1 et seq., shall apply. Said meanings and other definitions
relating to specific use will be found in the appropriate sections of this
chapter.
CLERK — The Municipal Clerk of the City of Vineland.
GOVERNING BOARD OR BODY — The City Council of the City of Vineland.
RETAIL AREA — Retail area shall consist of that portion of the facility
normally accessible to the public and shall exclude all areas limited to
employee uses.
§ 216-3. Number of licenses permitted. [Amended 4-22-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-26]
A. Plenary retail consumption.
(1) For year 2016: $1,157.
(2) For year 2017: $1,192.
(3) For year 2018: $1,228.
(4) For year 2019: $1,265.
(5) For year 2020: $1,303.
B. Plenary retail distribution.
(1) For year 2016: $561.
(2) For year 2017: $578.
(3) For year 2018: $595.
(4) For year 2019: $613.
(5) For year 2020: $631.
C. Club (maximum amount permitted by Alcoholic Beverage Control
regulations): $188.
§ 216-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-3
1:197
§ 216-4. Distance restriction. [Amended 2-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-5; 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
A. No new plenary retail consumption license shall be issued in the City of
Vineland unless and until the number of licenses outstanding is less
than that which is permitted by N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.14, or amendments
thereto; provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent
renewals or person-to-person or place-to-place transfers of licenses
issued and outstanding on the effective date of this article.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this article shall be deemed
to prevent the issuance of a new license to a person who files
application therefor within 60 days following the expiration of the
license renewal period if the State Commissioner shall have
determined, in writing, that the applicant's failure to apply for a
renewal of his license was due to circumstances beyond his control.
B. Not more than six plenary retail distribution licenses shall be issued
and outstanding at the same time in the City of Vineland. [Amended
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-58]
C. No new club licenses shall be issued in the City of Vineland unless and
until the number of such licenses outstanding is fewer than 14;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent renewals or
person-to-person or place-to-place transfers of club licenses issued and
outstanding on the effective date of this article.
A. For those properties located in the B-3 Zoning District of the City of
Vineland having a minimum of 15 acres of contiguous lot area upon
which is located a regional shopping center having a minimum of
60,000 square feet of commercial retail floor area, the total number of
plenary retail consumption licenses shall not exceed one license for
each 60,000 square feet of commercial retail floor area, up to a
maximum of four licenses. This restriction shall not apply to any
freestanding premises for which there is a plenary retail consumption
license located on the property upon which there is a regional shopping
center.
B. Anything to the contrary hereinbefore notwithstanding, and for the
benefit not of property but of persons attendant therein, no license shall
be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within 200 feet of any
church or public schoolhouse or private schoolhouse not conducted for
pecuniary profit, except to manufacturers, wholesalers, hotels, clubs
and fraternal organizations which owned or were actually in possession
of the licensed premises prior to enactment of this chapter. The
protection of this section may be waived at the issuance of the license
and at each renewal thereafter, by the duly authorized governing body
on authority of such church or school, such waiver to be effective until
the date of the next renewal of the license. Said 200 feet shall be
measured in the normal way that a pedestrian would properly walk
from the main entrance of said church or school to the main entrance of
the premises sought to be licensed. The prohibition contained in this
§ 216-3 VINELAND CODE § 216-4
1:198
§ 216-5. Merchandising restriction; certain licenses not granted.
§ 216-6. Closed hours. [Amended 12-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-90]
section shall not apply to the renewal of any license where no such
church or schoolhouse was located within 200 feet of the licensed
premises as aforesaid at the time of the issuance of the license, nor to
the issuance or renewal, or both, of any license where such premises
have been heretofore licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages or
intoxicating liquors, and such church or schoolhouse was constructed
or established, or both, during the time said premises were operated
under said previous license.
C. Multiple premises on the same City tax lot. More than one licensed
premises shall be permitted on the same City tax lot, provided that the
distance set forth in this section shall apply to each such licensed
premises.
A. No plenary retail distribution license shall be issued to permit the sale
of alcoholic beverages in or upon any premises in which any mercantile
business, including a grocery store, supermarket or convenience store,
is carried on; provided, however, that this shall not prohibit a plenary
retail distribution licensee from selling cigars and cigarettes and like
tobacco products and such accessories to tobacco products as pipes,
lighters, lighter fuel and parts, humidors, tobacco pouches, cigar and
cigarette holders and cases, pipe-cleaning gear, filters, pipe holders and
ashtrays at retail as an accommodation to customers; or from selling
nuts, pretzels, potato chips and all other similar snack items, foodstuffs,
prepared cocktails and items such as ice cubes, paper products,
including plates, mats, napkins and playing cards, drinking glasses,
containers and other home bar accessories, including but not limited to
the exclusion of similar items, pourers, stirrers, mixers, glass pitchers
and squeezers; or from selling sliced, processed meats and cheeses,
breads, pickles, cold salads and other similar delicatessen items,
provided that the area used for the preparation and sale of these
delicatessen items shall not exceed 25% of the total square footage of
the retail sales area of the licensed premises.
B. No seasonal retail consumption licenses shall be issued or granted for
any premises within the City of Vineland.
C. No limited retail distribution license shall be issued or granted for any
premises within the City of Vineland.
A. Retail distribution licensees and retail consumption broad package
privilege (Broad C) licensees operating as a package goods store may
sell spirituous liquors in original containers (package goods) for offpremises
consumption between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
and for wine and malt beverage products in original containers
(package goods) sales may begin at 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
§ 216-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-6
1:199
§ 216-7. Serving of beverages.
No licensee shall serve any alcoholic beverages or allow, permit or suffer
service of any alcoholic beverages in any room or place on the licensed
premises that is not open to the public generally; provided, however, that
this regulation shall not apply to club licensees, nor shall it apply so as to
prohibit a hotel licensee from serving guests in their rooms or in private
dining rooms.
§ 216-8. Light and view requirements.
All licensed premises in which is located a bar, bar area or service bar, as
defined herein, shall provide sufficient lighting in the room in which the bar,
bar area or service bar is physically located so a view of the interior of said
room may be had from the public means of ingress and egress to said room.
Further, the interior of said room in which the bar, bar area or service bar is
located shall be arranged in such a manner that a clear view of the interior
may be had from the public means of ingress and egress to said room.
§ 216-9. Condition of premises.
Licensees must at all times keep the licensed premises in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition.
§ 216-10. Persons under the age of 21 on premises; exception.
[Amended 4-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-26]
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer any person under the age of 21
years to frequent, loiter or remain in any room or rooms on the licensed
All sales shall cease between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
any day of the week.
B. Retail consumption licensees, including club licensees, may sell and
serve any alcoholic beverage by the glass for on-premises consumption
beginning at 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week. All sales shall cease
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
On New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, retail consumption licensees,
including club licensees, may remain open for the sales and service of
alcoholic beverages by the glass for on-premises consumption
beginning New Year's Eve and 6:00 a.m. enclosed on the day at 5:00
a.m.
C. During the hours that sales of alcoholic beverages are hereinabove
prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall also be closed and no
person other than the licensee and his bona fide employees shall be
permitted to remain thereon, but this closing-of-premises requirement
shall not apply to bona fide hotels, to restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A.
33:1-1t, to clubs provided for in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12, Subdivision 5, and
State Regulation No. 7, or to other establishments where the principal
business is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 216-6 VINELAND CODE § 216-10
1:200
premises used or devoted to the sale, service or consumption of alcoholic
beverages, unless such person is accompanied by his or her own parent,
guardian or spouse who has attained the age of 21; provided, however, that
this regulation shall not apply to restaurants or private and public dining
rooms in hotels.
§ 216-11. Consumption by persons under the age of 21 or persons
under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs on premises.
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any
person under the age of 21 years or to any persons who show outward signs
of being under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs or where said
licensee knows or should have known said persons are under the influence
of alcoholic beverages or drugs.
§ 216-12. Prohibited patrons; narcotics or other unlawful drugs;
illegal activity or enterprise.
§ 216-13. Prohibited activities.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any lewdness, immoral activity or foul, filthy or obscene language or
conduct or any brawl, act of violence, disturbance or unnecessary noise or
engage in or allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises any
A. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed
premises the habitual presence of any known prostitute, gangster,
racketeer, notorious criminal or other person of ill repute.
B. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed
premises any unlawful possession of or any unlawful activity pertaining
to:
(1) Narcotic drugs;
(2) Controlled dangerous substances as defined by New Jersey
Controlled Dangerous Substance Act (N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.);
(3) Controlled dangerous analogues as defined by the Comprehensive
Drug Reform Act of 1987 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-1 et seq.);
(4) Any prescription legend drug in any form, which is not a narcotic
drug or a controlled dangerous substance or analogue as so
defined;
(5) Drug paraphernalia as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:36-1.
C. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer the licensed premises to be
accessible to any premises upon which any illegal activity or enterprise
is carried on or the licensed premises or business to be used in
furtherance or aid of or accessible to any illegal activity or enterprise.
§ 216-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-13
1:201
activity which is prohibited by federal, state, county or local laws; nor shall
any licensee allow, permit or suffer the licensed place of business to be
conducted in such manner as to become a nuisance.
§ 216-14. Lotteries.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any lottery to be conducted or any ticket or participation right in any lottery
to be sold or offered for sale; nor shall any licensee possess, have custody
of, or allow, permit or suffer any such ticket or participation right in or upon
the licensed premises; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to
bingo, raffles or New Jersey State Lottery, or tickets or participation rights
therein being conducted pursuant to appropriate license under the Bingo
Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-24), Raffles Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-50),
State Lottery Law (N.J.S.A. 5:9-11) or other activity authorized by state law.
However, in any incidence of bingo at licensed premises, no licensee, during
the period between the commencement of the first and the conclusion of
the last game, shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service, delivery, or consumption of any alcoholic beverage in or upon any
part of the licensed premises where the bingo or any part thereof is being
conducted.
§ 216-15. Gambling.
§ 216-16. Immoral materials.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises or
have in his possession or distribute or cause to be distributed any matter
containing any obscene, indecent, filthy, lewd, lascivious or disgusting
printing, writing, picture or other such representation.
§ 216-17. Intoxication of licensees or workers.
No licensee shall work in any capacity in or upon the licensed premises
while actually or apparently under the influence of alcohol or drugs or allow,
permit or suffer any person actually or apparently under the influence of
alcohol or drugs to work in any capacity in or upon the licensed premises.
A. No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer any pool selling,
bookmaking or any unlawful game or gambling of any kind or any slot
machine or device in the nature of a slot machine which may be used for
playing for money or other valuable things.
B. No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer in or upon licensed
premises any gambling paraphernalia including but not limited to any
slip, ticket, book, record, document, memorandum or any other writing
pertaining in any way to any lottery, pull selling, book making or
unlawful game or gambling of any kind.
§ 216-13 VINELAND CODE § 216-18
1:202
§ 216-18. Entrance by persons under the age of 21.
It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of 21 to enter any premises
licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of
purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 216-19. Consumption or purchase by persons under the age of 21.
It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of 21 to consume any
alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase
for him or her any alcoholic beverage.
§ 216-20. Misrepresentation of age by persons under the age of 21.
It shall be unlawful for a person to misrepresent or misstate his or her age
or the age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any retail licensee
or any employee of a retail licensee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic
beverage to a person under the age of 21.
§ 216-21. Hotel and motel exceptions.
§ 216-22. Additional licensing requirements for hotels and motels.
In addition to the regulations as set forth in the licensing for premises other
than hotels and/or motels, the regulations for hotels and/or motels to be
granted plenary retail consumption licenses shall include that any bar on
the premises shall have ingress and egress through the lobby and from the
court or parking area of the hotel and/or motel in question, that there shall
be no street entrance to the bar and that there shall be no advertisement on
the outside of the hotel and/or motel in question to indicate that there is a
bar situate therein. Periodic or postal-card advertisement of the existence of
the bar at the hotel and/or motel in question shall not be prohibited. In the
event that the hotel and/or motel in question has a restaurant in a building
separate from the main body of the hotel and/or motel in question, in which
would be served alcoholic beverages, there may be displayed on the outside
of the restaurant building a sign, not to exceed three feet in length and
A. Plenary retail consumption licenses in excess of the quota as set forth in
this article and the amendments thereto may be issued to hotels and/or
motels of 100 sleeping rooms or more where the same are constructed
in the City of Vineland.
B. Said licenses shall be granted, controlled and regulated in accordance
with this article of this chapter of the Code of the City of Vineland and
the amendments thereto and shall not in any way change or alter the
aforesaid article, except that the granting of new licenses to hotels and/
or motels and the distances set forth in this article and the amendments
thereto shall not apply to hotels and/or motels in the consideration for
the granting of said licenses.
§ 216-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-22
1:203
one foot in height, reading "cocktails." In such case, no public bar may be
maintained in said restaurant, but a service bar or service bars only.
§ 216-23. Bona fide clubs.
Club licenses shall be issued only to bona fide clubs as defined herein,
except as provided in N.J.A.C. 13:2-8.5. No license shall be issued to any
club unless it has been in active operation in the State of New Jersey for
at least three years continuously immediately prior to the submission of its
application for a license.
§ 216-24. Previous period of possession and use of club quarters.
Except as provided herein or in N.J.A.C. 13:2-8.5, no license shall be issued
to any club unless it shall have been in exclusive possession and use of the
clubhouse or club quarters for at least three years continuously immediately
prior to the submission of its application for a license. A bona fide club
which has been in active operation in this state for the period of time
required as aforesaid but which has been deprived of continuous possession
in use of its clubhouse or club quarters by reasons of foreclosure, loss of
lease, eminent domain, fire, casualty or other removal for a cause other
than the violation of the laws of state or of municipal ordinance shall not
be prevented thereby from obtaining a club license upon presenting to
the satisfaction of the issuing authority proof of said fact and proof that
possession of suitable premises has been obtained.
§ 216-25. Exceptions to eligibility requirements.
Any constituent unit chartered or otherwise, duly in franchise, chapter
or member club of a national or state order, organization or association,
which is in possession of suitable premises shall not be prevented from
obtaining a club license by reason of the fact that the unit, chapter or
member club has not been in active operation in this state for at least three
years continuously or has not been in the exclusive, continuous possession
and use of a club house or club quarters for the same period of time,
provided that said unit chapter or member of club obtains and submits to
the issuing authority a certificate stating that said unit, chapter or member
club has been duly credentialed by a national or state order, organization or
association which has been in active operation in this state for at least three
years continuously immediately prior to submission of the application for a
license.
§ 216-26. Sales restricted of members.
A. No club licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage to any person not a
bona fide member of the club or a bona fide guest of such member.
B. All club licensees shall have and keep on the licensed premises a true
record of all scheduled dinners, luncheons, receptions, dances, parties,
§ 216-22 VINELAND CODE § 216-26
1:204
§ 216-27. Sale for on-premises consumption only.
No club licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages in the original containers
for off-premises consumption.
§ 216-28. Hours of permissible sale and consumption.
No club licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery or consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the
licensed premises during hours or on days when plenary licensees are
prohibited from such activities.
§ 216-29. Licensee training and certification requirements.
All holders of plenary or limited retail distribution licenses issued under
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-12 et seq. shall specifically comply with the
regulations contained in N.J.A.C. 13:2-22 et seq.
§ 216-30. Closing requirement during public emergencies or crime
investigations.
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage at retail or allow, permit or
suffer the consumption of any alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises
or allow, permit or suffer the retail licensed premises to be open during
any period for which any duly constituted state, county or municipal law
enforcement authority, because of a public emergency or investigation of
crime, has ordered the licensed premises to be closed unless accepted by
such authority to permit continuing conduct of business other than the sale
of alcoholic beverages.
catered events and similar affairs held at the club-licensed premises
and attended by nonclub members.
§ 216-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-30
1:205

ARTICLE II
Consumption in Public
§ 216-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any fluid or solid capable of being converted
into a fluid, suitable for human consumption, and having an alcohol content
of more than 1/2 of 1% by volume, including alcohol, beer, lager beer,
ale porter, naturally fermented wine, treated wine, blended wine, fortified
wine, sparkling wine, distilled liquors, blended distilled liquors and any
brewed, fermented or distilled liquors fit for use for beverage purposes or
any mixture of the same and fruit juices.55
§ 216-32. Consumption in public prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or offer to another for
consumption any alcoholic beverage in or upon any public street, road,
alley, sidewalk, railroad right-of-way, parking lot which is generally open
to the public, park, shopping plaza or upon any outdoor facility owned or
operated by the City of Vineland.
§ 216-33. Open containers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in or
upon any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, railroad right-of-way, parking
lot which is generally open to the public, park, shopping plaza or upon
any outdoor facility owned or operated by the City of Vineland unless
such alcoholic beverage is contained within an original, sealed or closed
container.
§ 216-34. Consumption on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess in open containers or consume
or offer for consumption any alcoholic beverage in or upon any private
property within the City of Vineland unless the person possessing,
consuming or offering such alcoholic beverage is the owner or lessee of
such private property or an invitee who has the permission or consent of the
owner or lessee of such property to possess or consume alcoholic beverages
thereon.
§ 216-35. Exceptions.
A. Special permits; liability insurance.
(1) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a special permit
issued by the Council of the City of Vineland or the Division of
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-35
1:207
§ 216-36. Labeling on containers.
§ 216-37. Violations and penalties.
Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State of New Jersey when the
person possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages is doing so in
accordance with the terms and conditions of said permit and at the
location authorized by said permit. However, this exception shall
not apply to any public park or recreation area owned or operated
by the City of Vineland.
(2) Where a special permit is issued by the Council of the City of
Vineland or the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State
of New Jersey with respect to the possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages pursuant to this section, the issuance of said
special permit shall be contingent upon the applicant obtaining a
policy of liability insurance insuring for any acts or omissions
resulting directly or indirectly from the transfer and/or
consumption of alcoholic beverages with the City of Vineland
named as an insured in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 per
incident and $3,000,000 aggregate.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the
consumption, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages on premises
which are duly licensed pursuant to a retail consumption, retail
distribution, retail transit, wholesale or club license issued by the
governing body of the City of Vineland or by the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control of the State of New Jersey.
A. No licensee shall knowingly display, sell or deliver any alcoholic
beverage in an original container having a content of fill less than that
stated on the container or labeled thereof subject to such tolerance as
permitted by federal law and regulation, and no licensee shall possess
such a container except for the sole purpose of return for credit or
replacement.
B. No licensee shall manufacture, transport, possess, sell, barter, give
away, offer for sale or furnish any alcoholic beverage adulterated with
any foreign or harmful subject.
C. Nothing in this section shall prohibit licensees from storing and
temporarily retaining such beverages for the purpose of returning the
same to a manufacturer or wholesaler, provided that the container is
immediately resealed and labeled with the name and address of the
customer and the date of the return by the customer.
A. A person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof for a first offense, be punishable by a fine of not more than $200
or by imprisonment for not longer than 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
§ 216-35 VINELAND CODE § 216-37
1:208
B. Upon a second offense, a person violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than
$500 or by imprisonment for not longer than 120 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
C. For any subsequent violations, a person violating any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not longer than 120 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
§ 216-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-37
1:209
Chapter 220
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals — See Ch. 269. Peace and good order — See Ch. 511.
§ 220-1. License required.
No person, partnership, association, club or corporation shall maintain,
conduct or pursue the business or occupation of keeping any bowling alley,
billiard or pool room, ice or roller skating rink, motion-picture theater or
open-air drive-in theater without a license to do so as hereinafter provided.
§ 220-2. Application for license.
Applications for a license shall be filed with the Director of the Department
of Licenses and Inspections on forms to be furnished by the Department
of Licenses and Inspections, which forms shall require the following
information:
§ 220-3. Issuance of licenses.
All licenses herein provided for shall be granted and issued by the Director
of the Department of Licenses and Inspections. All such licenses shall be
valid from the first day of January of the year in which the license is issued
until the 31st day of December next after granting the same, unless sooner
revoked.
§ 220-4. Refusal to grant license.
The Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections may refuse
to grant a license to any person who has been convicted of a crime or a
violation of any City ordinance involving gambling.
A. The name of the applicant.
B. Address and phone number of applicant.
C. Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or
violation of a City ordinance involving gambling.
D. In the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers
and all stockholders presently holding stock and all who, for six months
prior to the making of said application, have held stock or who have
been officers.
§ 216-37 VINELAND CODE § 220-5
1:210
§ 220-5. Contents of license; transferral.
Such licenses shall bear the date of issue, the name of the person to whom
issued and the purpose for which issued and the location of the room or
building wherein the licensee is authorized to carry on and conduct any
such business. Such license may be transferred by the holder to another
address, provided that the licensee makes application, in writing, for such
transfer to the City Council.
§ 220-6. License fees.
The fees to be paid for such license to carry on and conduct any bowling
alley, billiard or pool room, ice or roller skating rink, motion-picture theater
or open-air drive-in theater, respectively, are as follows:
§ 220-7. Display of license.
The license, when granted, shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in
the place of business of the licensee.
§ 220-8. Revocation of license.
Any license granted hereunder may be revoked by the Mayor, the City
Council or the Judge of the Municipal Court after notice and due hearing
upon proof for cause.
Chapter 224
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Department of Health — See Ch. 62.
Police Department — See Ch. 123.
Noise — See Ch. 469.
A. Bowling alleys: $20 per alley.
B. Billiard or pool room: $15 per table.
C. Ice or roller skating rink: $75.
D. Indoor motion-picture theater: $50 per screen.
E. Outdoor motion-picture theater: $150.
§ 220-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:211

ARTICLE I
Animal Control56
[Adopted 12-16-1952 by Ord. No. 46 (Ch. 219, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 224-1. Definitions.
In the interpretation of this article, the following words and phrases, unless
the context shows another sense to be intended, shall be held to have the
meanings hereinafter stated:
CONFINE — To quarantine an animal in accordance with the guidelines
outlined in the Health Department policy and procedure statement and/or
notice of quarantine letter.[Added 12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-112]
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSE AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS — Any of various animals (including livestock)
domesticated by man so as to live and breed in a tame condition.[Added
10-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-88]
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or boarding dogs for sale is carried on except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of any dog, cat or other
animal, includes every person having a right (or custody) in such an animal
and every person who has such an animal in his or her keeping or who
harbors or maintains an animal or knowingly permits such an animal to
remain on or about any premises occupied by that person or who feeds such
an animal on a regular basis.[Amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8357]
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
PET SHOP — Any place of business which is not part of a kennel, wherein
animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles,
rabbits, hamsters or gerbils, are kept or displayed chiefly for the purpose
of sale to individuals for personal appreciation and companionship rather
than for business or research purposes.[Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-48]
POUND — Any establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either
under the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — An establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
56.Editor's Note: This article was retitled from "Dog Control" by Ord. No. 92-83, adopted
11-10-1992. Said ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was overridden
by Council 11-24-1992.
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-2
1:213
§ 224-2. License and registration. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No.
1065; 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-83; 10-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-88]
No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the City without first filing
an application with the Director of the Department of Licenses and
Inspections, whereupon, after paying the fee hereinafter set forth to the
Director, a license and registration tag shall be issued by the Director of
the Department of Licenses and Inspections. No license or registration shall
be issued for any dog until the owner produces a certificate of inoculation
indicating that the dog in question is protected against rabies through
December 31, or any other such date necessary to conform to the most
recent policy statement from the State Department of Health and Senior
Services regarding such matters, of the licensing year for which the
application is taken. No license shall be issued for any dog in the name of
any person who has not reached the legal age of majority.
§ 224-3. Time of licensing; attachment of tag. [Amended
11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-77]
Any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog of licensing age shall
annually, during the licensing period, apply for and procure, in the manner
set forth herein, a license and metal registration tag for each dog so owned,
kept or harbored. Such person shall place upon each such dog a collar or
harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 224-4. License fees; renewals; expiration; exemption. [Amended
12-12-1978 by Ord. No. 1143; 12-26-1979 by Ord. No. 1193;
9-22-1981 by Ord. No. 1268; 8-9-1983 by Ord. No. 83-22; 8-28-1990
by Ord. No. 90-79; 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8358; 10-10-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-78; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-77; 10-22-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-53; 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-59]
A. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee
as provided herein, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2, for the
registration tag of each dog; and for each annual renewal, the fee for
the license and the registration tag shall be the same as for the original
license and tag. Such licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof
shall expire on the last day of March of the year following the year in
which the licenses, registration tags and renewals are issued.
(1) Any person applying for such license or renewal between January 1
and the last day of March shall pay an annual fee for each spayed or
neutered dog as follows:
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-2 VINELAND CODE § 224-4
1:214
§ 224-5. License for newly acquired dog.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration
tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
Dog Licenses Spayed/Neutered
Non-Spayed/
Neutered
Municipal fee $8.80 $13.80
New Jersey
registration fee
$1 $1
New Jersey Pilot
Clinic Fund
$0.20 $0.20
Animal population
control fee
$3
Total $10 $18
(2) After the last day of March, a late fee of $3 shall be imposed for any
dog, except for dogs:
(a) Reaching the licensing age after the expiration of the licensing
period as verified by a veterinarian.
(b) Acquired after the expiration of the licensing period as verified
by a receipt.
(3) If a license or registration tag has been misplaced or lost, the
Department of Licenses and Inspections may issue a duplicate
license or registration tag for that particular dog at a fee of $1.
B. The following dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs
hereinafter provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog
shall not be required to pay any fee therefor:
(1) Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as
"Seeing Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and
commonly known as "service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf
persons and commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3.
(2) Dogs used for law enforcement activities by agencies of the City of
Vineland government and the County of Cumberland government.
(3) Dogs retired from law enforcement activities by agencies of the
City of Vineland government and the County of Cumberland
government.
C. Out-of-state residents relocating to the City of Vineland shall not be
required to pay late fees, provided that they have a valid license issued
from their prior out-of-state community.
§ 224-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-6
1:215
§ 224-6. Application requirements. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No.
1065]
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog for which a license and registration is sought and whether it is of a longhaired
or short-haired variety. It shall also state the name, street and post
office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such
dog. The information on the application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Director of
the Department of Licenses and Inspections. In addition, he shall forward
similar information to the State Department of Health and Senior Services
each month on forms furnished by such Department. Registration numbers
shall be issued in the order of the applications.
§ 224-7. Dogs brought into City.
§ 224-8. Unlawful attachment and removal of tags.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 224-9. Licenses for kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
[Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1065; 11-10-1992 by Ord. No.
92-83;60 10-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-88]
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the City any dog
licensed in another state for the current year and carrying a
registration tag and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the City for a period of more than 90 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless such
dog is licensed under § 224-11B of this article.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the City any
unlicensed dog and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the City for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless such
dog is licensed under § 224-11B of this article.
C. Any license/registration tag issued by any municipality in New Jersey
shall be accepted by the City of Vineland until said license/registration
is expired. [Added 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8359]
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish in the City a
kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Director of
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
60.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-6 VINELAND CODE § 224-9
1:216
§ 224-10. Application for establishment license; approval of Health
Officer.
The applicant shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose for which it is to be
maintained. Such application shall be accompanied by the written approval
of the Health Officer of the City showing compliance with the local and
state rules and regulations governing location and sanitation of such
establishment.
§ 224-11. Expiration and revocation of establishment license;
transferal. [Amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8361]
§ 224-12. Annual establishment license fees.
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
fewer dogs shall be $10, and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The annual license
fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fees shall be charged for a shelter or
pound.
Licenses and Inspections for a license entitling him to keep or operate
such an establishment.
B. No more than five dogs and/or five cats over the age of seven months
shall be permitted to be kept on any one property less than two acres
unless the facilities provided meet the applicable requirements of
N.J.A.C. 8:23A-1.2 et seq. (Rules Governing Animal Facility Operations),
as determined by the Local Health Department.
A. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such
licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each year and be subject
to revocation by the Council of the City of Vineland, on recommendation
of the State Department of Health and Senior Services or the
Department of Health of the City of Vineland, for failure to comply with
the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health and Senior
Services or the Department of Health of the City governing the same,
after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State
Department of Health and Senior Services or the Department of Health
of the City.
B. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs or cats owned by such licensee and kept at
such establishment. Such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
61.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-13
1:217
§ 224-13. List of licensed establishments to State Department of
Health and Senior Services. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1065]
The Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall forward
to the State Department of Health and Senior Services a list of all kennels,
pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed, within 30 days after the licenses
therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and address of each
licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 224-14. Control of dogs by establishments.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises except on a leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 224-15. Disposition of fees collected.
A. License fees and other moneys collected under the provisions of this
article, except registration tag fees, shall be forwarded to the City
Treasurer within 30 days after collection on receipt and shall be placed
in a special account separate from any other accounts of the City, to be
used for the following purposes only: for collecting, keeping and
disposing of dogs liable to seizure under this article; for local
prevention and control of rabies; for providing antirabic treatment
under the direction of the City Department of Health for any person
known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; for the payment of
damage to or losses of poultry and domestic animals, except dogs and
cats, caused by a dog or dogs; for administering the provisions of this
article; and for all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New
Jersey governing the subject; except, however, that when any Humane
Society has been contracted with by the City Council, as herein
provided, such sums which the City has, by said agreement, contracted
to pay shall be paid from said special account, and said payment shall
be deemed as costs for collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable
to seizure under this article. Any unexpended balance remaining in
such special account shall be retained therein until the end of the third
fiscal year following and may be used for any of the purposes set forth
in this section. At the end of said third fiscal year following and at the
end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be transferred from such
special account to the general funds of the City any amount then in such
account which is in excess of the total amount paid into said special
account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration tag fee of $1 for each dog, the Pilot Clinic Fund fee of
$0.20 for each dog and the Animal Population Control Fund fee for each
unspayed/unneutered dog shall be forwarded within 30 days after
collection by the Director of the Department of Licenses and
Inspections to the State Department of Health and Senior Services.
[Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1065; 11-10-1992 Ord. No.
92-8362]
§ 224-13 VINELAND CODE § 224-16
1:218
§ 224-16. Canvass by Chief of Police. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord.
No. 1065; 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-83;63 10-22-1996 by Ord. No.
96-88; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-77]
The Chief of Police shall cause a canvass to be made of all dogs and
cats owned, kept or harbored within the City limits either annually or
biennially, at the direction of the governing body. The canvass shall end
prior to September in the year of the canvass. Upon completion of the
canvass, the Chief of Police shall immediately cause a report to be filed,
on or before September 1 in the year of the canvass, with the Director
of the Department of Licenses and Inspections and the Director of the
Department of Health containing the results thereof. The report shall set
forth in separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning,
keeping or harboring unlicensed dogs or cats owned, kept or harbored by
each person, together with a complete description of each such unlicensed
dog or cat. The same information, for dogs only, must be reported to the
State Department of Health and Senior Services.
§ 224-17. Poundkeeper; seizure of animals. [Amended 11-10-1992
by Ord. No. 92-8364]
The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, establish a pound,
and the Mayor may, from time to time, as the occasion may require,
nominate and, by and with the consent of the City Council, appoint a
poundkeeper or dog warden who shall hold office at the pleasure of the City
Council, or the City Council may, by resolution, enter into a contract with
any Humane Society in the City or county or other similar association not
organized for pecuniary profit, as poundkeeper, for the collection, keeping
and retention and destruction of all strays found within the City limits,
in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such poundkeeper, dog
warden or duly authorized agent of such Humane Society so contracted
with or any police officer may seize and take into custody and impound or
cause to be taken into custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or
disposed of, as provided in this section:
A. Any animal off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring such animal, which said official or his agent or agents have
reason to believe is a stray animal.
B. Any animal off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said animal without a current registration tag on his collar, if
registration is required by ordinance.
C. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring such dog.
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-17
1:219
§ 224-18. Notice to owner of impounded animals. [Amended
11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8365]
§ 224-19. Running at large. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 1304;
11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8366]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or other domestic animal
shall suffer or permit it to run at large upon the public streets or in any
public park or in any public building or any other public place or upon
D. Any dog or other animal suspected to be rabid.
E. Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to or
observed by a certified animal control officer to be ill, injured or
creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
A. If any animal seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag or the owner or the person keeping or harboring such
animal is known, the person who by this article is authorized to seize
any such animal shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is
given on the collar or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring
such animal, if known, a notice, in writing, stating that the dog has been
seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed
within seven days after service of the notice.
B. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person upon whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's
usual or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar
or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person
at his usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the
collar. When any animal so seized has been detained for seven days
after notice when notice can be given as above set forth or has been
detained for seven days after seizure when notice has not and cannot be
given as above set forth and if the owner or person keeping or
harboring such animal has not claimed such animal and paid all
expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including maintenance
not exceeding $4 per day, and if the animal seized is unlicensed at the
time of seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring such
animal has not produced a license and registration tag for his animal, if
required by ordinance, said poundkeeper or agent of said Humane
Society or any person authorized under this article to do so may cause
the animal to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as
possible. Any impounded animal which is affected with an incurable or
contagious disease may be destroyed at once.
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
66.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-17 VINELAND CODE § 224-19
1:220
any other private premises outside the premises occupied by the owner or
keeper of said dog or other domestic animal.
§ 224-20. Proclamation to destroy dogs running at large.
It shall be lawful for the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, to
issue his proclamation authorizing the indiscriminate destruction of all dogs
found running at large in the City, except such as shall be properly muzzled
with a wire muzzle about the nose, securely fastened. Such proclamation
shall be published at least two times in a in which legal notices of the City
may be published; and after such publication, no person owning, keeping or
harboring a dog shall permit it upon the public streets, in public places or
outside the premises occupied by the owner during the period designated;
and after such publication, it shall be justification to all persons who may
destroy any such dog found running at large as aforesaid during the time
the proclamation shall remain in force and until revoked by the Mayor with
consent of the City Council.
§ 224-21. Right of entry to seize animals. [Amended 11-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-8367]
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any animal which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer or agent is in immediate pursuit of such animal, except upon
the premises of the owner of the animal if such owner is present and forbids
the same.
§ 224-22. Interference with officers.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 224-23. Noise.
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks,
howls or cries.
§ 224-24. Control of dogs in public places; exception.
A. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
it to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the City
unless such dog is accompanied by a responsible person and is securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six feet
long.
B. Nothing in this section or in this article shall be construed to prohibit or
prevent the running of any dog while used in hunting or in training, trial
67.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-24
1:221
§ 224-25. Nuisances. [Amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8369]
No person having the right and ability to prevent it shall knowingly or
carelessly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any
nuisance upon any sidewalk or on any public place, street, avenue, park,
public square or place in the City or upon the floor of any tenement house
which is used in common by the tenants thereof or upon the fences or lawns
of any premises or upon the walls or stairways of any building abutting a
public street, avenue, park or public place or upon the floor of any theater,
store, factory or of any building which is used in common by the public,
including all public rooms or places therewith connected, or upon the floor
of any public place or building used in common by the guests and patrons
thereof, nor shall any such person omit to do any reasonable and proper
act or to take any reasonable and proper precaution to prevent any such
dog from committing any such nuisance in, on or upon any of the places
or premises herein specified. If such a nuisance is immediately removed or
cleaned up, a violation shall not be deemed to have occurred.70
§ 224-26. Report of suspected case of rabies. [Added 12-26-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-112; amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8371]
Whenever a dog, cat or other animal is affected by rabies or is suspected of
being affected by rabies or has been bitten or scratched by an animal known
or suspected to be affected by rabies, the owner or person in charge of the
animal or any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the
Vineland Department of Health. The notification shall be in writing, signed
by the person making the complaint, and shall state where the animal may
be found.
or practice runs, provided that such dog is accompanied by or under the
control of the owner or other responsible person, and provided further
that such hunting, training, trial or practice runs are conducted in such
a manner as not to abridge the rights of owners of private property nor
to conflict with the fish and game laws of the State of New Jersey or any
other law, rule or regulation promulgated by the State of New Jersey
or its duly authorized agents which has as its purpose the protection,
preservation or control of game or wildlife within the State of New
Jersey.68
68.Editor's Note: Original § 219-25, Muzzling of dogs during certain months, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-112.
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
70.Editor's Note: Original § 219-27, Vicious dogs, as amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No. 90-79,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-112. See
now Art. III of this chapter, Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Dogs.
71.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-24 VINELAND CODE § 224-27
1:222
§ 224-27. Physicians' reports. [Added 12-26-1990 by Ord. No.
90-112; amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8372; 11-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-59]
Every physician shall, within 12 hours after his/her first professional
attendance upon any person bitten or scratched by a dog, cat or other
animal, report to the Vineland Police Department or the Vineland
Department of Health the name, age, sex and address of the person bitten
or scratched and the name, age, sex, color and location of the biting animal,
and the name and address of the animal owner, if known.
§ 224-28. Parent's or guardian's report of bitten or scratched child.
[Added 12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-112; amended 11-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-8373; 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-59]
The parent or guardian of a child bitten or scratched by a dog, cat or other
animal, when no physician attends such child, shall, within 12 hours after
first having knowledge that the child was so bitten or scratched, report
to the Vineland Police Department or Vineland Department of Health the
name, age, sex and address of the person so bitten or scratched, and the
name, age, sex, color and location of the biting animal, and the name and
address of the animal owner, if known.
§ 224-29. Report of bitten or scratched adult. [Added 12-26-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-112; amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8374;
11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-59]
A. If an adult is bitten or scratched by a dog, cat or other animal and no
physician attends him/her, or if he/she is incapacitated, the person
caring for him/her shall report to the Vineland Police Department or the
Vineland Department of Health the name, age, sex and address of the
person bitten or scratched and the name, age, sex, color, and location of
the biting animal, and the name and address of the animal owner, if
known.
B. The report shall be made within 12 hours after the adult was so bitten
or scratched or, if he/she is incapacitated, the report shall be made
within 12 hours after the person so caring for him/her shall first have
knowledge that the adult was so bitten or scratched.
72.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
73.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
74.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-30
1:223
§ 224-30. Confining animal which has bitten or scratched person.
[Added 12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-112; amended 11-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-8375]
The Health Department and/or Police Department may serve notice upon
the owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other animal which has
attacked, bitten or scratched a person to confine the animal, at the expense
of the owner or person in charge of it, upon the premises of the owner or
person in charge or at some other place designated in the notice for at least
10 days after the animal has attacked, bitten or scratched a person.
§ 224-31. Confining or killing animal bitten by another. [Added
12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 96-112; amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No.
92-8376]
The Local Health Department, within its jurisdiction, shall serve a notice, in
writing, upon the owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other animal
known or suspected to have been bitten by an animal known or suspected
of being affected by rabies, requiring the owner or person in charge of the
animal to kill it or confine it for a period of not more than six months.
Whenever the Health Department determines that the animal owner may
not be responsible enough or lacks adequate facilities to properly
quarantine/confine the animal, the Department may impound the animal at
an approved facility at the owner's expense.
§ 224-32. Confining animals to prevent spread of rabies. [Added
12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-112]
Whenever the Health Department or any officer or inspector thereof has
reason to believe or has been notified by the State Department of Health
and Senior Services that there is danger that rabies may spread within
the jurisdiction, the Department or the Department officer or inspector
shall serve a notice, in writing, upon all persons within the jurisdiction of
the Health Department, so far as the same may be known to the Health
Department or to such officer or inspector thereof, owning or having charge
of any dog, requiring such person to confine such dog; or the Health
Department, officer or inspector, in lieu of serving such notice in writing,
may cause a notice to be published in the official newspaper of the City.
Other animals may be included in the order whenever, in the opinion of
the Health Department, this is necessary. Whenever the Health Department
determines that the animal owner may not be responsible enough or lacks
adequate facilities to properly quarantine the animal, the Department may
impound the animal and have it quarantined at an approved facility at the
owner's expense.
75.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
76.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-30 VINELAND CODE § 224-33
1:224
§ 224-33. Permit to release animals. [Added 12-26-1990 by Ord. No.
90-112]
An animal confined under order of the Local Health Department shall not be
released until a certificate of release has been issued by the Department.
§ 224-34. Examination of animals by Health Department. [Added
12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-112; amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No.
92-8377]
The Local Health Department, within its jurisdiction, shall be permitted by
the owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other animal which has been
ordered confined/quarantined to examine the animal at any time and daily,
if desired, within the specified confinement period to determine whether
the animal shows symptoms of rabies. No person shall refuse, obstruct or
interfere with the Local Health Department in making the examination.
§ 224-35. Abnormal behavior or health of quarantined/confined
animal. [Added 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8378]
Should the animal's health or behavior be abnormal during any part of the
quarantine period, the Health Department may order the owner or person
in charge of the animal to have a licensed veterinarian establish a diagnosis
of the abnormality at the expense of the owner or person in charge.
§ 224-36. Rabies testing; expenses. [Added 12-26-1990 by Ord. No.
90-112]
Whenever the Local Health Department or State Department of Health and
Senior Services determines that rabies testing is necessary, the owner of the
animal involved shall be responsible for all expenses related to specimen
preparation and transportation. Specimen preparation shall be done only
by a licensed veterinarian or by any other person deemed by the Health
Department to have the necessary qualifications.
§ 224-37. Rabies inoculation. [Added 11-10-1992 by Ord. No.
92-8379]
Except as otherwise provided in § 224-39 hereof, no person shall own,
harbor or keep any dog or cat within the municipal limits of City of Vineland
that is not currently inoculated against rabies with rabies vaccine of a type
approved and administered in accordance with recommendations of the
United States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department
of Health, Education and Welfare. Such vaccination shall be administered
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
79.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-37
1:225
by a veterinarian duly licensed by the State of New Jersey or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
§ 224-38. Certificate of inoculation. [Added 11-10-1992 by Ord. No.
92-8380]
Any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog or cat within the municipal
limits of the City of Vineland shall obtain and keep in his possession a
certificate, issued by the veterinarian administering the inoculation,
indicating that said dog or cat has been inoculated against rabies and
indicating the date of such inoculation. Said certificate shall be exhibited
to the dog licensing official when application for a dog license is made
and shall also be exhibited upon the request of any Health Department
employee or upon the request of any member of the City of Vineland Police
Department.
§ 224-39. Exception. [Added 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8381]
The following are exempt from the provisions of § 224-37:
§ 224-40. Booster inoculations. [Added 11-10-1992 by Ord. No.
92-8382]
A. Dogs or cats which have not attained the age of seven months.
B. Any dog or cat which the Health Department declares exempt for a
specified period of time based upon the presentation of a satisfactory
certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that, because of an
infirmity or other physical condition, the inoculation of said animal shall
be deemed inadvisable for a specified period of time.
C. Dogs or cats seven months of age or older within 10 days of the date of
acquisition of said dog or cat.
A. On occasions when a domestic animal may have been potentially
exposed to a possible rabid animal, the Health Department may order a
booster inoculation against rabies based on guidelines provided by the
State of New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services. This
booster inoculation shall be of the type vaccine set forth in § 224-37 and
shall be administered accordingly by a veterinarian duly licensed in the
State of New Jersey or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to
do the same.
B. Any person who owns, keeps or harbors any dog or cat within the
municipal limits of the City of Vineland who is directed by the Vineland
80.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
81.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
82.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-37 VINELAND CODE § 224-40
1:226
§ 224-40.1. Limit on number of dogs owned. [Added 11-25-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-77]
§ 224-41. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-1986 by Ord. No.
86-26; 12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-112; 11-10-1992 by Ord. No.
92-8383; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-77]
Health Department to obtain an additional booster inoculation against
rabies for said dog or cat must do so within five days of receiving
notification of the same.
A. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain more than six dogs of
licensing age at any one time in any residence or upon its grounds.
Upon the effective date of this section, any person who lawfully and in
compliance with this article owns, keeps, harbors or maintains more
than six dogs may continue the same but shall not own, keep, harbor or
maintain any additional dog until such number of dogs is less than six,
at which point the six-dog limitation will thereafter be in effect.
B. This section shall not apply to any duly licensed business, organization
or facility that is a veterinary establishment, kennel, breeder, pet shop,
animal shelter, animal rescue or animal adoption agency.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, except those listed
in Subsection B of this section, or who violates or refuses to comply
with the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of
Health and Senior Services governing the sanitary conduct and
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds to preserve
sanitation therein and to prevent the spread of rabies and other
diseases of dogs within and from such establishments shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, to be
recovered by and in the name of the City. Any person who refuses or
neglects to pay forthwith the amount of a judgment rendered against
him and the costs and charges incident thereto shall be committed by
the court to the county jail for a period not exceeding 10 days in the
case of a first conviction, and in the case of a conviction for a second,
subsequent or continuing violation, for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with § 224-2, 224-5,
224-7, 224-9, 224-14, 224-19, 224-23, 224-24, 224-25, 224-26, 224-27,
224-28, 224-29, 224-30, 224-31, 224-32, 224-33, 224-34, 224-35,
224-36, 224-37 or 224-40 of this article shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $500 or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or to both, for each offense, in the discretion of the
court.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
an additional fine of $50 if that violation pertains to a dog or domestic
83.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-41
1:227
animal that is not spayed or not neutered and is owned by the person
violating such provision.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this article for a second time
shall be subject to an additional fine of $50 for such second offense.
E. Any person who violates any provision of this article for a third time
shall be subject to an additional fine of $50 for such third offense.
F. In the event any person violates § 224-19, Running at large, of this
article in addition to any two violations of this article, whether such
violations occurred before or after such violation of § 224-19, then such
dog or domestic animal involved in such violation of § 224-19, if not
spayed or not neutered, shall be mandatory spayed or neutered at the
owner's expense. In the event that a licensed veterinarian determines
that mandatory spaying or neutering is detrimental to the health of the
dog or domestic animal, then such procedure shall not be performed.
§ 224-41 VINELAND CODE § 224-41
1:228
ARTICLE II
Piggeries
[Adopted by the City of Vineland Board of Health84 1-20-1953 by
Ord. No. 7; amended in its entirety 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 96-79
(Ch. 219, Art. II, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 224-42. When license required; compliance.
The keeping or raising of three or more pigs shall require a license. The
keeping of two pigs or one pig shall be permitted, but in such case the
premises shall be subject to all state and local health and sanitation laws
and ordinances.
§ 224-43. Timely disposal of litters.
In case a litter of pigs is born on premises not requiring a license, the young
pigs shall be disposed of within three months after the date of birth.
§ 224-44. Approval of application; plan and data required.
§ 224-45. Notice to neighbors; hearing; grounds for denial of
license.
Upon receipt of such application and plans, said Director of the Department
of Health or designee shall fix a time for the consideration of the issuance
A. No license for the breeding, raising or keeping of more than two pigs in
the City of Vineland, in the County of Cumberland, shall be granted or
issued unless the application shall be approved by the Director of the
Department of Health or designee of the City of Vineland as to location,
suitability and fitness for such use. Further, approval is subject to and
contingent upon compliance with all state, county and local laws and
ordinances.
B. The application for such license shall be accompanied by a plan giving
the complete details of the premises intended to be used for the
breeding, raising and keeping of pigs, as well as a plan of the pens or
structures intended to be erected and used in connection with the
breeding, raising and keeping of said pigs, and accompanied by the
license fee hereinafter designated, together with a description of all
buildings and dwellings within a radius of 2,000 feet from the premises
proposed to be used for the breeding, raising and keeping of pigs, and
also giving the full names and addresses of the owners of said buildings
or dwellings, as well as the distance which said pen will be located from
the nearest public road or street, dwelling house and boundary line of
adjoining properties.
84.Editor's Note: The Local Board of Health authorized by Ord. No. 7 was abolished
7-27-1954 by Ord. No. 133. However, prior legislation adopted by the Board of Health
continues in full force and effect until repealed, rescinded or amended by the City
Council. See Ch. 62, Health, Department of.
§ 224-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-45
1:229
of a license therefor, which time shall not be less than 10 days nor more
than 30 days after the receipt of such application. Notice shall be sent to
the owners and occupants of all buildings and dwellings within a radius of
2,000 feet of the premises sought to be used for the breeding, raising and
keeping of pigs, informing them of the receipt of the application and of the
time set for the hearing of objections, if any, to the granting of the license.
The granting of the license will not be approved by said Director of the
Department of Health or designee whenever it appears that the granting of
the same is or may be hazardous and detrimental to human health.
§ 224-46. Time limit for action on application.
The application, plans and specifications shall be approved or rejected
within a period of 30 days from the date of filing, and when approved, the
Director of the Department of Health or designee shall issue the necessary
license therefor.
§ 224-47. Nontransferability of license.
Such license is not transferable to any person, persons, firms or
corporations and is not transferable to any other premises than those
described on the license.
§ 224-48. Fee schedule.
The nonrefundable fees to be paid for said licenses herein shall be as
follows:
§ 224-49. Piggery location.
Any premises sought to be licensed to be used for the breeding, raising
and keeping of pigs shall be so situate that the outer boundary of such
piggery shall be not fewer than 500 feet from the nearest side line of any
public road or street and not fewer than 650 feet from the nearest wall of
any dwelling occupied by a person or persons other than the licensee or
any hotel, boardinghouse, lodging house, restaurant or any other similar
establishment and not fewer than 100 feet from the boundary line of the
nearest adjoining property line owned or occupied by another person or
persons other than the licensee.
A. For each original application: $500. This fee shall include the initial
license and shall cover the cost of review of the application for
compliance with federal and state codes, City zoning and planning
ordinances, site visits, notices to neighbors, verification of code
measurements, site plan requirements, public notices, public hearings
and other related municipal expenses, including but not limited to legal
and administrative costs.
B. For each renewal: $150. The license must be renewed before the
expiring anniversary date of the initial license.
§ 224-45 VINELAND CODE § 224-50
1:230
§ 224-50. Swine management.
It is incumbent upon the licensee to secure from Rutgers Cooperative
Extension Service the most recent guidelines on swine management,
including recommendations on housing, fencing, feeding equipment, feed,
pasture, management, breeding, marking of pigs, health and sanitation. A
copy of the guidelines in effect at the time of adoption of this article is on
file with the City Clerk and with the Director of the Department of Health.
§ 224-51. Swine disease control; compliance with other standards.
A. The following rules and regulations of the State of New Jersey with
respect to swine disease control are hereby adopted by the City of
Vineland in their entirety by reference hereto:
(1) N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.3. Minimum floor space.
(2) N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.4. Drainage of buildings.
(3) N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.6. Water supply.
(4) N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.15. Garbage spillage.
(5) N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.17. Trash on premises; storage; removal.
(6) N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.18. Feeding platforms.
(7) N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.19. Solid waste disposal.
(8) N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.20. Liquid wastes.
(9) N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.21. Dead animal removal.
(10)N.J.A.C. 2:2-4.22. Rodent and insect control.
B. A copy of the rules and regulations in effect at the time of adoption of
this article is on file with the City Clerk and with the Director of the
Department of Health.
C. Any swine farmer utilizing garbage as a food source for hogs must
comply with all New Jersey Administrative Code regulations
administered by the State of New Jersey, Department of Agriculture,
which require a separate license to be acquired from the state. All other
sections of the New Jersey Administrative Code related to swine as
livestock, hog cholera, and sale of swine are administered directly by
the State of New Jersey, Department of Agriculture, and any licensed
piggery in the City of Vineland is subject to direct jurisdiction of the
state with regard to disease control.85
85.Editor's Note: Original § 219-38D, which immediately followed this subsection and which
referred to deleted Ch. 163, Animal and Poultry Waste, of the 1990 Code, was deleted at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 224-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-52
1:231
§ 224-52. Compliance of location with zoning and Planning Board
regulations.
It is the intention of this article that any location specified herein shall
also be subject, as to location, to the regulations of the Zoning Board and
Planning Board of said City.86
§ 224-53. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with or
shall violate any of the provisions of this article, in addition to the revocation
of the license issued, shall be subject, upon conviction thereof, to forfeit
and pay a penalty of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, the
amount thereof to be fixed by the City Judge of the City of Vineland or other
Judge having jurisdiction in the case, to be recovered as provided for by
statute; and in the event that said defendant (except corporations), after
execution has been issued, shall fail, refuse or neglect to pay the amount of
the judgment against him and all costs and charges incident thereto, said
defendant may, in default of said payment, be committed by said Judge to
the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 224-54. Revocation of license; notice and hearing.
§ 224-55. More restrictive laws to control.
A. In addition to the imposition of the penalty or penalties herein
prescribed, the Director of the Department of Health or designee may,
at his discretion, revoke any license or permit issued hereunder for any
violation of the provisions of this article or of the State Sanitary Code
whenever, after written notice from the Director of the Department of
Health or designee, the owner or person in charge of such
establishment fails or refuses to remedy the condition complained of.
B. Before any license or permit heretofore issued shall be revoked, the
Director of the Department of Health or designee shall fix a time and
place of hearing, which notice shall be served upon the licensee at least
five days before the date set for hearing. Such notice of hearing shall
specify the charges to be preferred against said licensee and the
purpose of the hearing. At such hearing, said licensee shall have an
opportunity to be heard in his or its own defense. After such hearing,
the Director of the Department of Health, or designee, shall render a
decision with respect to such charges.
A. In all allied matters that are regulated by the laws of the State of New
Jersey, such laws shall control where the requirements are in excess of
this article. This article shall control in all cases where the state law
requirements are less than herein contained.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use.
§ 224-52 VINELAND CODE § 224-55
1:232
B. Furthermore, the rules and regulations of the United States
Department of Agriculture, Subchapter K, Swine Health Protection,
shall apply as required in their most current form.
§ 224-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-55
1:233

ARTICLE III
Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Dogs
[Adopted 12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-113; amended in its entirety
8-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-54 (Ch. 219, Art. VI, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 224-56. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A certified Municipal Animal Control
Officer or, in the absence of such an officer, the chief law enforcement
officer of the municipality, or designee.
DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog or livestock other than poultry.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
"potentially dangerous" pursuant to this article.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared "vicious" pursuant to this
article.
§ 224-57. Seizure and impoundment of dogs.
§ 224-58. Hearing.
A. An Animal Control Officer appointed by the Vineland Police Department
shall seize and impound a dog when the Officer has reasonable cause to
believe that the dog:
(1) Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-b, to that person.
(2) Caused bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a, to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to
persons or domestic animals.
(3) Engaged in dogfighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24
and 4:22-26.
(4) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
B. The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether the
dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval of the
Municipal Health Officer, the dog may be impounded in a facility or
other structure agreeable to the owner. If the owner does not agree to
the facility or other structure approved by the Health Officer, the owner
shall be responsible for all fees involved at the facility of his own
choosing, provided that this facility is approved by the Municipal Health
Officer.
§ 224-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-58
1:235
§ 224-59. Notice of hearing.
The Municipal Court shall notify the owner of the impounded dog by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date and time of the hearing.
The Animal Control Officer shall also hand deliver a copy of the certified
mailed notice and post it at the residence of the owner. During the hearing,
the owner shall have the opportunity to present evidence to demonstrate
that the dog is not vicious or potentially dangerous.
§ 224-60. Declaration of vicious dog.
A. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Court and the
Municipal Health Officer within three working days that he has seized
and impounded a dog pursuant to § 224-57 of this article or that he has
reasonable cause to believe that a dog has killed another domestic
animal and that a hearing is required. The Animal Control Officer shall,
through a reasonable effort, attempt to determine the identity of the
owner of any dog seized and impounded. If the owner cannot be
identified within seven days, that dog may be humanely destroyed.
B. The Municipal Court shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to this article, notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner concerning the seizure and impoundment
and that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will be held to determine
whether the impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. This
notice shall also require that the owner return within seven days, by
certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating whether
he wishes the hearing to be conducted or, if not, to relinquish
ownership of the dog, in which case the dog may be humanely
destroyed. If the owner cannot be notified by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or refuses to sign for the certified letter or does not
reply to the certified letter with a signed statement within seven days of
receipt, the dog may be humanely destroyed.
A. The Municipal Court shall declare the dog "vicious" if it finds by clear
and convincing evidence that the dog:
(1) Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:11-1b, to a person; or
(2) Has engaged in dogfighting activities, as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and 4:22-26.
B. A dog may not be declared "vicious" for inflicting death or serious
bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1b upon a person if that
person was committing or attempting to commit a crime or if that
person was tormenting or inflicting pain upon the dog in such an
extreme manner that an attack of such nature could be considered
provoked. If the Municipal Court declares a dog to be vicious and no
appeal is made of this ruling, the dog shall be destroyed in a humane
§ 224-58 VINELAND CODE § 224-60
1:236
§ 224-61. Declaration of potentially dangerous dog.
§ 224-62. Schedule of compliance.
If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall
issue an order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
and expeditious manner, except that no dog may be destroyed during
the pendency of an appeal.
A. The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be "potentially dangerous" if
it finds that the dog:
(1) Caused bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a, to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person;
(2) Killed another domestic animal and poses a threat of serious bodily
injury or death to a person or poses a threat of death to another
domestic animal; or
(3) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
B. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
(1) Causing bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a, to a person if
that person was committing or attempting to commit a crime or if
that person was tormenting or inflicting pain upon the dog in such
an extreme manner that an attack of such nature could be
considered provoked; or
(2) Killing a domestic animal if the domestic animal was the aggressor.
A. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
(1) To apply, at his own expense, to the Director of the Department of
Licenses and Inspections for a special municipal potentially
dangerous dog license, municipal registration number and red
identification tag issued pursuant to § 224-65 of this article. The
owner shall, at his own expense, have the registration number
tattooed upon the dog in a prominent location. A potentially
dangerous dog shall be impounded until the owner obtains a
municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal registration
number and red identification tag.
(2) To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
hereunder.
(3) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
§ 224-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-62
1:237
§ 224-63. Liability of owner; subsequent hearing.
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and
bottom, to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping or digging and is within a fence of at least six
feet in height separated by at least three feet from the confined
area. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock
the enclosure to prevent the entry of the general public and to
preclude any release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by
an unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous dogs
shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the
Animal Control Officer and having a minimum tensile strength
sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the potentially
dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than three feet
from the owner and under the direct supervision of the owner.
B. May require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
(1) To maintain liability insurance in an amount determined by the
Municipal Court to cover any damage or injury caused by the
potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which may be
separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision requiring the municipality in which the owner resides to
be named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of being
notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination
or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
(2) To tether the dog within the enclosure with a tether approved by
the Animal Control Officer and having a minimum tensile strength
in excess of that required to fully secure the dog and of a length
which prohibits the dog from climbing, jumping or digging out of a
confined area.
A. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous and all appeals
pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be
liable for the costs and expenses of impounding and destroying the dog.
The owner shall incur the expense of impounding the dog in a facility
other than the municipal pound, regardless of whether the dog is
ultimately found to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
B. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to the
time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New Jersey
State Department of Health and Senior Services laboratory for rabies
testing.
C. If the Municipal Court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain the right to convene a
hearing to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially
dangerous for any subsequent actions of the dog.
§ 224-62 VINELAND CODE § 224-64
1:238
§ 224-64. Owners' responsibilities; violations and penalties.
§ 224-65. City's responsibilities.
The Department of Licenses and Inspections shall:
A. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
(1) Comply with the provisions of this article in accordance with a
schedule established by the Municipal Court, but in no case more
than 60 days subsequent to the date of determination.
(2) Notify the Department of Licenses and Inspections, Police
Department and the Animal Control Officer if a potentially
dangerous dog is at large or has attacked a human being or killed a
domestic animal.
(3) Notify the Department of Licenses and Inspections, Police
Department and the Animal Control Officer within 24 hours of the
death, sale or donation of a potentially dangerous dog.
(4) Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner
that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous.
(5) Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a
different municipality, notify the local health department, licensing
authority, police department or force and animal control officer of
that municipality of the transfer of ownership and the name,
address and telephone of the new owner.
(6) In addition to any license fee required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.3, pay a potentially dangerous dog license fee to the City of
Vineland pursuant to § 224-65 of this article.
(7) Have the dog neutered or spayed.
B. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is found by clear and
convincing evidence to have violated this article or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto or to have failed to comply with a
Municipal Court's order shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 per day of the violation, and each day's continuance of the
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. The
Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this section. An
Animal Control Officer is authorized to seize and impound any
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the
provisions of this article or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto or a Municipal Court's order. The Municipal Court may order
that the dog so seized and impounded be destroyed in an expeditious
and humane manner.
A. Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag along with a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to the
§ 224-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-65
1:239
§ 224-66. Inspection.
The Animal Control Officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's
property at least monthly to determine continuing compliance with § 224-62
of this article.
§ 224-67. Fees and fines.
The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee of
$700 for each dog, and each annual renewal thereof shall be the same as
the original license and registration tag. Such licenses, tags and renewals
thereof shall expire on the last day of January of the year following the year
in which the license, registration tag and renewal are issued. All fines and
fees collected or received by the City of Vineland pursuant to §§ 224-64 and
224-65 of this article shall be deposited in a special account and used by the
City of Vineland to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 224-68. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to dogs used for law
enforcement.
Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the Municipal Court's
orders. The last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog
registration number issued by the Department of Licenses and
Inspections will be "201." The Animal Control Officer shall verify, in
writing, compliance with the Municipal Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs in the municipality.
B. Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of this article.
§ 224-65 VINELAND CODE § 224-68
1:240
ARTICLE IV
Cats
[Adopted 11-10-1992 by Section 25 of Ord. No. 92-8387 (Ch. 219,
Art. VII, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 224-69. Definitions.
In the interpretation of this article, the following words and phrases, unless
the context shows another sense to be intended, shall be held to have the
meanings hereinafter stated:
ANIMAL — For the purpose of this article, "animal" shall mean dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSE AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department within the municipal
limits of the City of Vineland or any designated representative thereof
charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and
licenses under the provisions of this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person or who feeds such a cat on a regular basis.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 224-70. License required; vaccination; exemptions.
A. License requirements. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain
any cat over seven months of age within the municipal limits of the City
of Vineland unless such cat is licensed. The provisions of this section do
not apply to cats held in a cattery or those held by a state or federal
licensed research facility or a veterinary establishment where cats are
received or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments or
licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
87.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 11-17-1992. The veto was
overridden by Council 11-24-1992.
§ 224-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-70
1:241
§ 224-71. Licensing requirements. [Amended 11-24-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-91; 10-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-88; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-78]
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization, published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Local Health
Department, upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating
that, because of an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of
therapy, the inoculation of such cat shall be deemed advisable.
A. Cats must have a license number displayed. Any person who owns,
keeps or harbors a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and
procure from the Director of the Department of Licenses and
Inspections a license and official registration tag with license number
or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or harbored and
shall place upon such cat a collar or other device with the license
number securely fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable methods of
displaying license number shall include, but are not limited to,
breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are not
transferable.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age or of any cat which attains licensing age shall make
application for a license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after
such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within the municipal limits of the City of
Vineland for no longer than 90 days.
C. Cats brought into jurisdiction.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought within the
municipal limits of the City of Vineland any cat licensed in another
state for the current year and bearing a registration tag or sleeve
and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept within
the municipal limits of the City of Vineland for a period of more
than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration
tag or sleeve for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought within the
municipal limits of the City of Vineland any unlicensed cat and who
shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept within the
municipal limits of the City of Vineland for a period of more than 10
§ 224-70 VINELAND CODE § 224-71
1:242
days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or
sleeve for each such cat.
D. Application contents; preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a long-haired or
short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office address of the
owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on said application and the registration number issued for
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Director of
the Department of Licenses and Inspections.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the municipality and shall be numbered serially and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality.
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption; requirement for license. No license, official registration tag
or sleeve for any cat shall be granted unless the owner thereof provides
evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated
with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered in
accordance with the recommendations of the United States Department
of Agriculture and the United States Department of Human Services or
has been certified exempt as provided by § 224-70 of this article. The
rabies inoculation shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian
or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to do the same. A license
shall not be issued unless the rabies inoculation certificate is valid
through December 31, or any other such date necessary to conform to
the most recent policy statement from the State Department of Health
and Senior Services regarding such matters, of the licensing year for
which application is being made.
G. License fee schedule.
(1) Any person applying for such license or renewal between January 1
and the last day of March shall pay an annual fee as follows:
[Amended 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-53; 12-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-59]
Cat Licenses Spayed/Neutered
Non-Spayed/
Neutered
Municipal fee $10 $18
Total $10 $18
(2) After the last day of March, a late fee of $3 shall be imposed for any
cat, except for cats:
(a) Reaching the licensing age after the expiration of the licensing
period as verified by a veterinarian.
§ 224-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-71
1:243
§ 224-71.1. Limit on number of cats owned. [Added 11-25-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-78]
(b) Acquired after the expiration of the licensing period as verified
by a receipt.
(c) Currently licensed in another state.
H. Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
(1) A license from another municipality shall be accepted. The person
applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay
the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of license and
registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and
said license, registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall
expire on the last day of March in the following year.
(2) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in
the licensing year for any cat within the municipal limits of the City
of Vineland. Any valid New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a
New Jersey municipality shall be accepted by this municipality as
evidence of compliance.
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Department of Licenses and Inspections may issue a duplicate license
or registration sleeve for that particular cat at a fee of $1.
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of
any health official, police officer, animal control officer or other
authorized person.
K. Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
L. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the
Treasurer of the municipality and shall be dedicated and used for the
following purposes only: for collecting, keeping and disposing of cats
liable to seizure, for local prevention and control of rabies and for
administering the provisions of this article.
M. Applicant for license. No license shall be issued for any cat in the name
of any person who has not reached the legal age of majority.
A. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain more than six cats of
licensing age at any one time in any residence or upon its grounds.
Upon the effective date of this section, any person who lawfully and in
compliance with this article owns, keeps, harbors or maintains more
than six cats may continue the same but shall not own, keep, harbor or
§ 224-71 VINELAND CODE § 224-71.1
1:244
§ 224-72. Violations and penalties.
maintain any additional cat until such number of cats is less than six, at
which point the six-cat limitation will thereafter be in effect.
B. This section shall not apply to any duly licensed business, organization
or facility that is a veterinary establishment, kennel, breeder, pet shop,
animal shelter, animal rescue or animal adoption agency.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, except those listed
in Subsection B of this section, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $500 for each offense, to be recovered by and in the
name of the City. Any person who refuses or neglects to pay forthwith
the amount of a judgment rendered against him and the costs and
charges incident thereto shall be committed by the court to the county
jail for a period not exceeding 10 days in the case of a first conviction,
and in the case of a conviction for a second, subsequent or continuing
violation, for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who violates § 224-71B of this article shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 90 days, or to both, in the discretion of the court.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
an additional fine of $50 if that violation pertains to a cat that is not
spayed or neutered and is owned by the person violating such provision.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this article for a second time
shall be subject to an additional fine of $50 for such second offense.
E. Any person who violates any provision of this article for a third time
shall be subject to an additional fine of $50 for such third offense.
F. In the event any person violates § 224-19, Running at large, of this
chapter in addition to any two violations of this article, whether such
violations occurred before or after such violation of § 224-19, then such
cat involved in such violation of § 224-19, if not spayed or not neutered,
shall be mandatory spayed or neutered at the owner's expense. In the
event that a licensed veterinarian determines that mandatory spaying
or neutering is detrimental to the health the cat, then such procedure
shall not be performed.
§ 224-71.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-72
1:245

ARTICLE V
Proper Disposal of Pet Solid Waste
[Adopted 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-28 (Ch. 219, Art. VIII, of the
1990 Code)]
§ 224-73. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 224-74. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 224-75. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 224-76. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department
and/or the Division of Code Enforcement of the City of Vineland.
§ 224-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-77
1:247
§ 224-77. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 224-77 VINELAND CODE § 224-77
1:248
ARTICLE VI
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-29 (Ch. 219, Art. IX, of the
1990 Code)]
§ 224-78. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 224-79. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the City of Vineland, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 224-80. Enforcement.
§ 224-81. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department
and/or the Division of Code Enforcement of the City of Vineland.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 224-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-81
1:249

ARTICLE VII
Feral Cats
[Adopted 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-49]
§ 224-82. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
set forth in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular, words in the singular number include the plural, and words in
the male gender include the female gender.
CAREGIVER — Any person who provides food, water or shelter to or
otherwise cares for a feral cat colony.
COMPANION CAT — As used in this article, a cat which is currently
socialized to humans.
EARTIPPING — Straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat while
the cat is anesthetized.
FERAL CAT — A cat which currently exists in a wild or untamed state.
FERAL CAT COLONY — An individual cat or group of cats that congregates.
Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any nonferal cats that
routinely congregate with a colony shall be deemed to be a part of it.
NUISANCE — Disturbing the peace by:
SPONSOR — A duly incorporated nonprofit organization with animal
welfare as part of its corporate purpose which agrees to comply with the
requirements of sponsorship as set forth in this article, provides written
notice to the City that it desires to serve as a sponsor, and is approved by
the City within its discretion.
SUITABLE SHELTER — Shelter that provides protection from rain, sun, and
other elements and is adequate to protect the health of the cat.
TNR — Trap, neuter and return.
TNR PROGRAM — A program pursuant to which cats are trapped, neutered
or spayed, vaccinated against rabies, eartipped and returned to the current
location where they congregate.
§ 224-83. Feral cat colonies permitted.
Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and caregivers shall be entitled to
maintain them in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article.
The City reserves the right to limit the number of colonies permitted in the
City of Vineland.
A. Habitually or continually howling, crying or screaming; or
The habitual and significant destruction, desecration or soiling of
property against the wishes of the owner of the property.
B.
§ 224-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-84
1:251
§ 224-84. Sponsorship of TNR Program.
The TNR Program shall be administered by one or more sponsors approved
by the Mayor and City Council (Board of Health) with the advice and
consent of the Health Director.
§ 224-85. Sponsor requirements.
It shall be the duty of the sponsor to:
§ 224-86. Feral cat caregiver requirements.
Caregivers are responsible for the following:
A. Conduct a thorough review to determine if the caregiver(s) has the
capability to meet the requirements of § 224-86;
B. Provide training to caregivers regarding proper management of a feral
cat colony, including methods to safely capture ferals and health and
nutritional needs of a colony;
C. Register feral cat colonies as provided in § 224-88;
D. Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of a colony caregiver
or of cats within a colony;
E. Ensure that records are maintained by colony caregivers on the size
and location of the colonies as well as the vaccination and spay/neuter
records of cats in the sponsor's colonies;
F. Report quarterly to the City on the following:
(1) Number of colonies in the municipality;
(2) Total number of cats in each colony;
(3) Number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered pursuant to the
TNR Program; and
(4) Number of cats and kittens placed for adoption, along with proof of
spay/neuter.
A. Submitting the feral cat colony for registration with the sponsor.
B. Taking all reasonable, good faith steps that will result in the vaccination
of the colony population for rabies and updating the vaccinations on
cats that can be recaptured.
C. Taking all reasonable, good faith steps that will result in the spaying/
neutering, by a licensed veterinarian, of 100% of the colony population.
In facilitating the spaying/neutering of cats, caregivers shall be
presumed to have acted in good faith in concluding that cats routinely
congregating within the colony are feral.
§ 224-84 VINELAND CODE § 224-86
1:252
§ 224-87. Colony cat requirements.
D. Upon request, providing the sponsor and/or ACO with descriptions of
each cat in the colony and copies of documents evidencing that the cats
have been vaccinated and spayed/neutered.
E. Providing food, water and suitable shelter for colony cats. Food shall
only be made available during daylight hours to reduce the attraction of
nocturnal rabies vectors.
F. Providing for observation by the caregiver, or a responsible party
designated by the caregiver, of the colony cats on a daily basis, and
keeping a record of any illnesses or unusual behavior noticed in any
colony cats.
G. Obtaining proper medical attention to any colony cat that appears to
require it.
H. Obtaining the approval of the owner of any property to which the
caregiver requires access to provide colony care.
I. In the event that kittens are born to a colony cat, taking all reasonable,
good faith steps that will result in the removal of the kittens from the
colony after they have been weaned, and the placement of kittens in
permanent homes, with proof of spay/neuter, or with the Cumberland
County SPCA or other shelters at no cost to the City.
J. Making reasonable efforts to find permanent inside homes for colony
cats who exhibit the potential for acclimating to such a placement.
K. Not introducing or allowing to be introduced any cats from outside the
already existing colony into the colony.
L. Reporting semiannually in writing to the sponsor on the status of the
colony, including data on the number and gender of all cats in the
colony, the number of cats that died or otherwise ceased being a part of
the colony during the year; the number of kittens born to colony cats
and their disposition and the number of cats placed in permanent
homes as companion cats.
M. Undergo training for themselves and their responsible substitutes in
the proper management of a colony as developed by the City and the
sponsor.
A. The left ear of a colony cat that has been spayed or neutered and
vaccinated shall be eartipped.
B. An electronic animal identification device (EAID) shall be inserted into
the cat in accordance with professional medical standards. The sponsor
shall be the named contact for purposes of the EAID.
§ 224-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-88
1:253
§ 224-88. Registration of feral cat colonies.
Feral cat colonies within the municipality that are not registered with the
sponsor are not entitled to any benefits or protections set forth in this
article.
§ 224-89. Disposition of colony cats.
§ 224-90. General restrictions.
§ 224-91. Violations and penalties.
A. An Animal Control Officer who has trapped a cat whose left ear has
been tipped or who bears some other distinguishing mark indicating
that the cat belongs to a feral cat colony shall scan the cat for an EAID.
If an EAID is found, the Officer shall contact the sponsor or other
person responsible for the cat.
B. Once contacted, the caregiver shall be responsible for retrieving the cat
from the ACO or, if the ACO has delivered the cat to a shelter, the
caregiver shall retrieve the cat from the shelter within seven business
days of notification or shall surrender the cat to the shelter and pay any
required release fees if the caregiver does not intend to retrieve the
cat.
A. No feral cat colony shall be permitted to be established within any area
designated by federal or state agencies as areas reserved for protected
or endangered species of birds or other wildlife, or in any federal, state
or local designated park or preserve utilized for recreation.
B. No person shall feed a feral cat other than an approved caretaker of a
registered cat colony in accordance with this article, or a responsible
substitute.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the
same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
C. Nothing shall interfere with the City's ability to:
(1) Seize/remove a cat from a colony that is creating a nuisance as
defined above if the caregiver and sponsor have failed to cure the
nuisance within 30 days of being advised in writing of its existence,
which period may be extended at the City's discretion if progress is
being made to cure the nuisance.
(2) Seize/remove a feral cat colony when the caregiver regularly fails
to comply with the requirements of § 224-86 if the sponsor has
§ 224-88 VINELAND CODE § 224-91
1:254
§ 224-92. Program review.
The Department of Health shall conduct a periodic review of the program
and recommend any revisions which may be required to the governing body.
failed to correct the situation within 30 days of being given notice
in writing delineating the failure with specificity. Said period may
be extended at the City's discretion if progress is being made to
correct the violation(s).
(3) No provisions in this article are intended to interfere with the
ability of ACOs to comply with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 or other existing
law.
§ 224-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-92
1:255
Chapter 230
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Deceptive advertising — See Ch. 200. Special sales — See Ch. 568.
§ 230-1. Definitions.
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following words and phrases,
unless the context shows another sense to be intended, shall be held to have
the following meanings:
AUCTION BLOCK — The stand or platform from which the public auction
sales are conducted.
GOODS — Any goods, wares, works of art, commodity, compound or thing,
chattel, merchandise or personal property which may be lawfully kept or
offered for sale.
PERSONAL PROPERTY and PROPERTY — Any goods, wares, works of art,
commodity, compound or thing, chattel, merchandise or personal property
which may be lawfully kept or offered for sale.
PERSON, APPLICANT or LICENSEE — Includes any individuals,
copartners, corporations or associations, and wherever a statement or
account is required to be made or done by a corporation, the same shall be
effected by its duly authorized officer.
RETAIL SALE — Any sale or offer to sell other than through bidding.
§ 230-2. License required.
No person shall act as a public auctioneer and no person shall engage in the
auction business, in whole or in part, or cause to be held any public auction
or vendue within the limits of the City of Vineland without first having had
and obtained a license as hereinafter provided for so doing.
§ 230-3. License application. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No.
1065]
A. Before any license is granted, as set forth in this chapter, the applicant
shall make application therefor to the Director of the Department of
Licenses and Inspections, in writing and under oath, on a form to be
provided by the Director of the Department of Licenses and
Inspections. Such application shall state:
(1) The full name of the applicant.
(2) His residential address.
§ 224-92 VINELAND CODE § 230-3
1:256
§ 230-4. Investigation of applicant.
The Director of Public Safety shall investigate or cause to be investigated
each and every application filed as aforesaid and is hereby vested with the
sole discretion of either granting or refusing to grant a license.
§ 230-5. Bond. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68;
8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-56]
The Director of Licenses and Inspections shall, as a condition precedent to
the granting of the license to engage in the auction business in the City
of Vineland, require the applicant to provide a bond of a surety company
authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New Jersey, in a
form approved by the City Solicitor, to be in the sum of $5,000. Such bond
shall be for the benefit of any person who shall have recovered a judgment
against anyone responsible under and by virtue of this chapter, by reason
of any damage sustained by such person as a result of having purchased
(3) The length of time of continuous bona fide residence in the City
immediately prior to making application.
(4) The places where the applicant has resided for a period of three
years immediately prior to making the application.
(5) Whether any person or corporation other than the applicant has
any interest, directly or indirectly, in the license applied for or in
the business to be conducted and, if so, state the name, residence
and interest of said person or corporation.
(6) If the applicant is a corporation, so state:
(a) The location of the registered office in New Jersey and the
name of the registered agent.
(b) The date and state of incorporation.
(c) The names and residences of all stockholders, directors and
officers.
(7) The address of place of business.
(8) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime.
(9) The experience the applicant has had as an auctioneer or as a
person engaged in the auction business.
(10) The place and the time that the applicant has been so engaged as
an auctioneer or in the auction business.
(11) The names of the persons or bonding company to furnish the bond
as hereinafter required.88
88.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding references and evaluation of character for
applicants, which immediately followed, was repealed 8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-56.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:257
any article or commodity at a public auction conducted or operated by the
licensee, due to fraud or deceit practiced in effecting such purchase to such
person, and such bond to be for the protection of persons and property and
for the preservation of the safety and property of the City.
§ 230-6. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
[Amended 8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-56]
§ 230-7. Duration of license.
Every license required by this chapter which shall be granted shall entitle
the licensee to operate in the City of Vineland from the date of the issuance
of such license to the first day of January following the issuance thereof, and
all renewals of such licenses shall be for a period of one year from the first
day of January to the first day of January of the succeeding year. No license
shall be renewed unless all the terms and conditions of this chapter have
been fully complied with.
§ 230-8. License fees. [Amended 8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-56]
The fee for a license in accordance with this chapter shall be $100 per day
or any portion thereof during which an auction is taking place, including
any preauction viewing of goods being sold. The fees shall be payable upon
the presentation of the application and shall be returned in the event that
such license is not granted.
A. Any applicant for a license may be denied by the Director of Licenses
and Inspections, or any license issued may be suspended or revoked by
the Mayor for the following causes:
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
(4) The applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
(5) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude in the State of New Jersey or any other
state.
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any City official by
filing a written request for a hearing before the City Council with the
City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the notice of denial, suspension
or revocation of the license. The hearing shall be held within 20 days
after the request is filed with the City Clerk.
§ 230-5 VINELAND CODE § 230-9
1:258
§ 230-9. (Reserved)89
§ 230-10. Sale by licensed auctioneer.
No person, except a licensed auctioneer or such a person authorized by
§ 230-12 of this chapter, shall sell or offer for sale any goods or merchandise
in any manner similar to that of a public auction or by public outcry, even
though no competitive bids are solicited.
§ 230-11. Display of auctioneer's name during sale. [Amended
8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-56]
Each auctioneer shall, during the sale or any preauction viewing of goods
being sold, cause his or her name to be conspicuously displayed on a sign at
the place where he or she is conducting an auction sale.
§ 230-12. Presence of auctioneer required.
No licensed establishment shall operate without a licensed public
auctioneer, except that each licensed establishment may conduct its own
business on such licensed premises through its proprietor or one of its
proprietors, if a partnership, or one of its officers, if a corporation, without
any further license.
§ 230-13. Bona fide bids; terms of sale.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to accept anything other than bona
fide bids, and such auction sales are to be so conducted as to dispose
of merchandise to the highest bidder, unless terms otherwise are publicly
announced immediately before the sale.
§ 230-14. Misrepresentation of merchandise.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer in describing goods or merchandise
that are being auctioned to, directly or indirectly, either by act of
commission or omission, knowingly misrepresent the goods or merchandise
being auctioned.
§ 230-15. Books and records.
Every auctioneer or person engaged in the business of selling goods at
auction in the City, whether acting in his own behalf or as the officer, agent
or representative of another, shall, upon the receipt or acceptance by him
of any personal property or goods for the purpose of sale at auction, before
offering the same or any part thereof for sale at auction, write or cause
to be written in a book to be kept by him for that purpose the following
information:
89.Editor’s Note: Former § 230-9, Suspension or revocation of license, was repealed
8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-56.
§ 230-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-15
1:259
§ 230-16. Applicability. [Amended 8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-56]
Nothing herein contained shall apply to the sale of real property at auction
nor to sales conducted by trustees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators,
receivers or other public officers acting under the judicial process, or the
sale of farm produce conducted by farmers' cooperative associations.
§ 230-17. Inspection of books.
The books and entries therein made as provided by the preceding section
shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of the Director of
Public Safety and the Chief of Police of the City and of any person who shall
be duly authorized, in writing, for that purpose by either of them and who
shall exhibit such written authorization to the auctioneer.
§ 230-18. Hours of operation. [Amended 8-22-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-56]
It shall be unlawful to hold any public auction sale between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
A. The name and address of the person who employed him to sell such
goods at auction.
B. The name and address of the person for whose benefit, behalf or
account the property is to be so sold.
C. The name and address of the person from whom the auctioneer
received or accepted the property.
D. The name and address of the owner of the property immediately prior to
such receipt or acceptance.
E. The location and the street number, if any, of the property immediately
prior to its receipt or acceptance.
F. The date of the receipt of acceptance.
G. The place, with the street number, if any, in which the property is to be
kept until sold or offered for sale at auction.
H. The place, with street and number, if any, in which the property is to be
sold or offered for sale at auction.
I. A description of the property to be sold and the quantity thereof.
[Amended 8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-56]
J. The terms and conditions upon which the auctioneer receives or
accepts the property for sale at auction.
§ 230-15 VINELAND CODE § 230-19
1:260
§ 230-19. Name of auctioneer to appear on advertisements.
Every advertisement of an auction sale to be held in the City shall have the
name of the auctioneer conducting such sale appended or signed thereto.
§ 230-20. Capping or shilling; blind packages.
§ 230-21. Sales on streets and sidewalks.
No licensed auctioneer or other person shall sell or attempt to sell at public
auction any goods, chattels or personal property in or upon any street or
sidewalk in the City.
§ 230-22. Retail sales from auction block.
No merchandise shall be sold at retail from the auction block.
§ 230-23. (Reserved)90
§ 230-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-68]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter or
any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
General Penalty.
Chapter 239
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police department — See Ch. 123.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 630.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
A. It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to use or employ or permit to be
used or employed what is commonly known as a "capper" or shill or fake
bidders.
B. It shall be unlawful to sell what are commonly known as "blind
packages" or articles which cannot be seen by bidders before the bids
are made.
90.Editor’s Note: Former § 230-23, Attracting attention to sale, was repealed 8-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-56.
§ 230-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-1
1:261
§ 239-1. Riding on designated sidewalks prohibited; exemption.
[Amended 5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20; 3-24-1998 by Ord. No.
98-22]
No person shall ride or operate a skateboard, unicycle, bicycle, tricycle,
motorized bicycle or similar machine on the sidewalks which are located
on either side of Landis Avenue from the westerly curbline of Myrtle Street
to the easterly curbline of West Avenue. This prohibition shall not apply to
a person who walks a unicycle, bicycle, tricycle or motorized bicycle along
or upon the sidewalks of either side of Landis Avenue in order to wheel
said unicycle, bicycle, tricycle or motorized bicycle to a public street, to a
vehicle or to cross the area where riding is prohibited, nor shall it apply
to any person who carries a skateboard for the same purpose. This section
shall not apply to members of the Bicycle Patrol Unit of the City of Vineland
Police Department.
§ 239-2. Posting of signs. [Amended 5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20;
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68]
In order to properly notify the public of the prohibition against riding
bicycles or similar instrumentalities or using skateboards on the sidewalks
of either side of Landis Avenue as set forth in § 239-1 of this chapter, the
Department of Public Works shall place proper signage along the sidewalks
on either side of Landis Avenue, with not fewer than one sign on each block.
§ 239-3. Adoption of New Jersey Bicycling Manual. [Added
2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-591]
The City of Vineland hereby adopts the New Jersey Bicycling Manual to
provide information required by bicyclists to ride on roadways and other
public places within the City where such operation is permissible and
incorporates the same herein by reference. The New Jersey Bicycling
Manual shall be on file in the office of the Clerk.
§ 239-4. Helmets required for persons under 17. [Added 2-12-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-5]
All persons under the age of 17 shall adhere to the requirement to wear
helmets in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-10.1. This requirement shall
include the operation by persons under the age of 17 riding bicycles, roller
and inline skates, skateboards and similar nonmotorized vehicles.
§ 239-5. Reflective gear. [Added 2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-5]
All persons under the age of 17 riding a bicycle, roller and inline skates,
or skateboards required to wear a helmet shall wear a helmet which meets
the standards of the American National Standards Institute ANSI Z-90.4
bicycle helmet or Snell Memorial Foundation 1990 standard, as amended,
for protective headgear of use in bicycling. In addition thereto, when riding
91.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 239-3 as § 239-7.
§ 239-1 VINELAND CODE § 239-5
1:262
after sundown and/or in the rain, said helmet shall be equipped with
reflective tape or other materials adhered to the helmet in the front, sides
and rear thereof. Alternatively, or in addition thereto, said person riding
shall wear clothing which has reflective tape or other materials adhered
thereto in the front, sides and rear thereof so it is visible from all distances
within 50 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
head lamps on a motor vehicle.
§ 239-6. Lights and reflectors on bicycles. [Added 2-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-5]
All bicycles when operated after sundown and/or while raining shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible
from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear. In addition to the lamp, a
red reflector may be mounted on the rear of a type approved by the State
of New Jersey which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to
300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head
lamps of a motor vehicle. All other reflective equipment shall adhere to the
requirements of the New Jersey Bicycling Manual.
§ 239-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-68; 2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-5]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the bicycle helmet requirements in
§ 239-4 herein shall be subject to fines and penalties as provided in N.J.S.A.
39:4-10.2. Any violations of other portions of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 247
BRUSH, WEEDS, PLANT LIFE, SOLID WASTE AND DEBRIS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 446.
Nuisances — See Ch. 473.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
Solid waste — See Ch. 620.
§ 247-1. Maximum growth heights for safety; notice; fines; recovery
of costs.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 and 40:48-2.27, any owner or owners,
tenant or tenants of lands lying within the limits of the City of Vineland shall
keep all brush, hedges and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any
roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways cut to a
height of not more than 2 1/2 feet where it shall be necessary and expedient
for the preservation of the public safety.
§ 239-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-1
1:263
§ 247-2. Fire and safety hazard on premises; notice; fines; recovery
of costs.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13, no owner, owners, tenant or tenants of a
building, dwelling or lands located within the City of Vineland shall allow
the existence of brush; weeds, including ragweed; dead and dying trees;
stumps; roots; obnoxious growths; filth; garbage; trash and debris upon said
premises.
A. Any person, firm or entity who shall violate this section shall be fined in
accordance with § 247-6 herein.
B. In the event that any owner or owners, tenant or tenants of a building,
dwelling or lands lying within the City of Vineland fails or neglects to
comply with § 247-1 of this chapter, the City of Vineland reserves the
right to issue a notice through the Director of Licenses and Inspections,
Director of Public Safety, Director of the Department of Public Works or
the Director of the Department of Health, or their designees, requiring
said owner, owners, tenant and/or tenants to comply with § 247-1 within
10 days.
C. In the event that any owner or owners, tenant or tenants of a building,
dwelling or lands lying within the City of Vineland fails to comply with
an order of the City of Vineland issued pursuant to § 247-1B of this
chapter, the Director of Licenses and Inspections, Director of Public
Safety, Director of the Department of Public Works or the Director of
the Department of Health, or their designees, shall cause the same to
be cut and removed in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
The costs thereof shall be certified to the City Council, which shall
examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as
shown thereon to be charged against said lands or, in the event that
such cost is found to be excessive, to cause the reasonable cost thereof
to be charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien upon each land and shall be added to and become a form
part of the taxes assessed against said lands and be collected with and
in the same manner as the taxes next to be assessed and levied against
said lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall
be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner
as taxes.
D. The imposition and collection of the fine imposed by this chapter shall
not bar the right of the City of Vineland to seek the collection of costs of
cutting or removal in the manner as required by this chapter, and the
remedy shall be cumulative. However, the collection of costs as is
herein specified shall not be in addition to any restitution collected as is
specified in this chapter.
A. Any person, firm or entity who shall violate this section shall be fined in
accordance with § 247-6 herein.
§ 247-1 VINELAND CODE § 247-2
1:264
§ 247-3. Improper storage of certain solid waste; notice; fines;
recovery of costs.
No owner, owners, tenant or tenants of a building, dwelling or lands located
within the City of Vineland shall keep or store any solid waste in such a way
that it is accessible to and likely to be strewn about by animals, including
but not limited to dogs, cats, raccoons, birds or rodents.
B. In the event that any owner or owners, tenant or tenants of lands lying
within the City of Vineland fails or neglects to comply with § 247-2 of
this chapter, the City of Vineland reserves the right to issue a notice
through the Director of Licenses and Inspections, Director of Public
Safety, Director of the Department of Public Works or the Director of
the Department of Health, or their designees, requiring said owner,
owners, tenant or tenants to comply with § 247-2 within 10 days.
C. In the event that any owner or owners, tenant or tenants of a building,
dwelling or lands lying within the City of Vineland fails to comply with
an order of the City of Vineland issued pursuant to § 247-2B of this
chapter, the Director of Licenses and Inspections, Director of Public
Safety, Director of the Department of Public Works or the Director of
the Department of Health, or their designees, shall cause the same to
be removed or destroyed in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter. The costs thereof shall be certified to the City Council, which
shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost
as shown thereon to be charged against said lands or, in the event that
such cost is found to be excessive, to cause the reasonable cost thereof
to be charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien upon said land and shall be added to and become and
form part of the taxes assessed against said lands and be collected with
and in the same manner as the taxes next to be assessed and levied
against said lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the
same manner as taxes.
D. The imposition and collection of the fine imposed by this chapter shall
not bar the right of the City of Vineland to seek the collection of costs of
removal or destruction in the manner as required by this chapter, and
the remedy shall be cumulative. However, the collection of costs as is
herein specified shall not be in addition to any restitution collected as is
specified in this chapter.
A. Any person, firm or entity who shall violate this section shall be fined in
accordance with § 247-6 herein.
B. In the event that any owner or owners, tenant or tenants of a building,
dwelling or lands lying within the City of Vineland fails or neglect to
comply with § 247-3 of this chapter, the City of Vineland reserves the
right to issue a notice through the Director of Licenses and Inspections,
Director of Public Safety, Director of the Department of Public Works or
the Director of the Department of Health, or their designees, requiring
§ 247-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-3
1:265
§ 247-4. Improper disposal of brush, trash, debris, etc.
§ 247-5. Service of notice or summons.
For purposes of this chapter, service of all notices and/or service of
summons may be made in the following manner:
said owner, owners, tenant or tenants to comply with § 247-3 within 72
hours after the owner, owners, tenant or tenants have received written
notice to that effect.
C. In the event that any owner or owners, tenant or tenants of a building,
dwelling or lands lying within the City of Vineland fails to comply with
an order of the City of Vineland issued pursuant to § 247-3 of this
chapter, the Director of Licenses and Inspections, Director of Public
Safety, Director of the Department of Public Works or the Director of
the Department of Health, or their designees, shall cause the same to
be removed or destroyed in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter. The costs thereof shall be certified to the City Council, which
shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost
as shown thereon to be charged against said lands or, in the event that
such cost is found to be excessive, to cause the reasonable cost thereof
to be charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien upon said land and shall be added to and become and
form part of the taxes assessed against said lands and be collected with
and in the same manner as the taxes next to be assessed and levied
against said lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the same offices and in the same
manner as taxes.
D. The imposition and collection of the fine imposed by this chapter shall
not bar the right of the City of Vineland to seek the collection of costs of
removal in the manner as required by this chapter, and the remedy shall
be cumulative. However, the collection of costs as is herein specified
shall not be in addition to any restitution collected as is specified in this
chapter.
A. No owner, owners, tenant or tenants of any building, dwelling or lands
lying in the City of Vineland shall cause or allow any brush, weeds, dead
or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash or
debris to be removed from the property of said owner, owners, tenant or
tenants and be deposited upon any City or county right-of-way or
easement or upon neighboring property. All such brush, weed, etc.,
shall be collected and either removed from the premises or
containerized in proper containers for removal by any appropriate
sanitation service.
B. Any person, firm or entity who shall violate this section shall be fined in
accordance with § 247-6.
§ 247-3 VINELAND CODE § 247-5
1:266
§ 247-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-96]
A. Personal service upon the owner, owners, tenant or tenants in
accordance with Rule 4:4-4 of the Rules of the Courts of New Jersey.
B. Simultaneous mailing by the Court, by the representative of the City of
Vineland issuing the summons or by an agency or individual authorized
by law to serve process. Simultaneous mailing shall mean mailing the
summons simultaneously by ordinary mail and certified mail with
return receipt requested to the owner's, owners', tenant's or tenants'
last known address. Should the certified mail be returned marked
"refused" or "unclaimed," service is effective, provided the ordinary
mail has not been returned.
C. By any other means permitted by law.
A. Any owner, owners, tenant or tenants of any building, dwelling or lands
lying within the City of Vineland who have pled or are found guilty of a
violation of § 247-1, 247-2 and/or 247-4 shall be sentenced as follows:
(1) For a first offense: a fine of $100.
(2) For a second offense: a fine of not less than $500 or more than
$1,500.
(3) For a third or subsequent offense: a fine of not less than $1,500 or
more than $2,000.
(4) The continuation of such violations for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
B. Any person, firm or entity who has pled or is found guilty of a violation
of § 247-3 shall be sentenced as follows:
(1) For a first offense: a fine of not less than $500 or more than $1,000.
(2) For a second offense: a fine of not less than $1,000 or more than
$2,000.
(3) For a third or subsequent offense: a fine of not less than $1,500 or
more than $2,500.
(4) The continuation of such violations for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
C. For purposes of this section, a person shall be considered as a second or
subsequent offense if convicted of violating any section of this chapter
§ 247-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-6
1:267
§ 247-7. Fee schedule. [Added 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18;
amended 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-52]
The following hourly fee schedule shall apply unless otherwise indicated:
City Service Hourly Fee
Cutting grass with weed whacker $50
Cutting grass with push mower $60
Cutting grass with riding mower $60
Cutting grass with tractor mower $70
Backhoe services for front end
usage
$140
Backhoe services for digging $150
Front-end loader services $200
Dump truck services $175
Track excavator digging services $175
Track excavator demolition services $165
Bobcat services $80
Bucket truck services $200
Chipper and chipper truck services $200
Chainsaw services $75
Arm mower services $100
Sweeper services $100
Jet-Vac services $100
Trash compactor truck services (not
including tipping fee)
$125
Tree stumper and truck services $175
Cut saw services for metal $75
Cut saw services for concrete and
asphalt
$85
Sign making and installation (not
including sign or post cost)
$75
Jackhammer services $100
Air compressor and truck services $125
Hand held air blower services $75
Walk behind air blower services $85
Gas generators for electric $65
within one year of the date of the previous violation and who was fined
for the previous violation.
§ 247-6 VINELAND CODE § 247-7
1:268
City Service Hourly Fee
Temporary on-site lighting $50
Masonry services $75
Masonry services with cement mixer
(not including material)
$100
Licensed weed spraying $125
Boarding up window or door with
area of less than 32 square feet
$150 per area
Boarding up window or door with
area of 32 square feet or more
$250 per area
Stump removal without digging $200 per stump
Dumpster pickup and drop-off
services (not including tipping fee)
$250 per delivery
Big rig transportation and pickup $250 per delivery
Trash pump and related
appurtenances
$25
Hasp and lock for securing
structures
$50/flat fee
Chapter 258
BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 630.
§ 258-1. Uniform property numbering system established.
[Amended 9-27-1966 by Ord. No. 593]
There is hereby established a uniform system for numbering property and
buildings along all streets, avenues and other public ways within the City of
Vineland. Excepted from the provisions of this chapter shall be properties
located within the City within the area bounded by Delsea Drive on the
west, Main Road on the east, Oak Road on the north and Walnut Road on
the south, but not including said Delsea Drive, Main Road, Oak Road and
Walnut Road, excepting such portions of said area as may be peculiarly
inconsistent with the numbering of immediately adjacent areas.
§ 258-2. Baselines.
The baselines for the uniform system for numbering property and buildings
within the City of Vineland shall be defined as follows and shall be described
§ 247-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-2
1:269
on a map entitled "Property Numbering Baseline Map of the City of
Vineland."
§ 258-3. Diagonal streets.
All buildings on diagonal streets shall be numbered the same as buildings
on north-south streets if the diagonal is in a north-south direction and shall
be numbered the same as buildings on east-west streets if the diagonal is in
an east-west direction.
§ 258-4. Numbering. [Amended 9-27-1966 by Ord. No. 593]
The numbering of property on each street shall begin at the appropriate
baseline, and such numbers shall change from 100 to the next higher
hundred on the basis of grid lines shown on the Base Line Map. All numbers
shall be assigned on the basis of one number for each 10.56 feet of property
frontage along a street. Along streets which run in a north-south direction,
odd numbers shall be assigned to the easterly side, even numbers to the
westerly side. Along streets which run in an east-west direction, odd
numbers shall be assigned to the southerly side, even numbers to the
northerly side.
§ 258-5. Assignment and placement of numbers. [Amended
6-27-1967 by Ord. No. 627; 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-13]
After a house or building shall be assigned its respective number or
numbers under the system established by this chapter, the owner, occupant
or agent shall place or cause to be placed in front of and on each house or
A. Baseline dividing the City into north and south sections. The baseline,
hereafter to be known as the "north-and-south baseline," which shall
divide the City into a northern section and a southern section, shall be
the center line of Landis Avenue.
B. North streets and south streets. Hereafter, all streets north of the
north-and-south baseline and running generally in a northerly-southerly
direction shall be known as "north streets," and likewise all streets
south of this north-and-south baseline running generally in a northerlysoutherly
direction shall be known as "south streets."
C. Baseline dividing City into east and west sections. The baseline,
hereafter to be known as the "east-and-west baseline," which shall
divide the City into an eastern section and a western section, shall be
the center line of Railroad Boulevard, extending to the north and south
boundaries of the City. [Amended 9-27-1966 by Ord. No. 593]
D. East streets and west streets. Hereafter, streets east of the east-andwest
baseline and running in a generally easterly-westerly direction
shall be known as "east streets," and likewise streets west of the eastand-
west baseline and running in a generally easterly-westerly
direction shall be known as "west streets."
§ 258-2 VINELAND CODE § 258-5
1:270
building controlled by him the number or numbers assigned to such house
or building in accordance with the requirements of this section.
§ 258-6. Plat book to show numbers.
For the purpose of facilitating a correct numbering system, a plat book
of all streets, avenues and public ways, showing the proper numbers of
all property fronting upon all streets, avenues or public ways, shall be
prepared and shall be on file in the office of the Assessor of the City of
Vineland. These plats shall be open to inspection by all persons during office
hours. Duplicate copies of such plats shall be furnished to the City Engineer,
City Clerk, the Planning Board and such other departments or department
heads as shall need such plats. Duplicate copies of such plats shall also be
furnished to the Post Office Department.
A. Effective date of numbers. The numbers assigned under the provisions
of this chapter shall take effect one year after the adoption of this
chapter and its due publication according to law. On or before such
date, the appropriate number shall be placed on the various houses and
buildings within the City of Vineland. All numbers assigned to houses
and buildings on and after the effective date shall be placed in front of
and on such houses and buildings within 20 days after such numbers
are assigned.
B. Numbers: property owner's responsibility. The cost of numbers shall be
borne by the property owner. The numbers used shall be in Arabic
figures at least three inches (76 millimeters) high and 1/2 inch (13
millimeters) wide and shall be made of durable and clearly visible
material.
C. Placing of numbers. The numbers shall be conspicuously placed upon
each building, house or other unit and in front of each building, house
or other unit on the U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle or, if there is no
mail receptacle, upon a sign, gate or fence post or other appropriate
place clearly related to the house, building or other unit to which it
refers. Placement upon curbing shall be unacceptable. All numbers
shall be displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the
public right-of-way. (While not located on public rights-of-way, units
within mobile home parks and apartment or condominium complexes
shall be subject to this subsection and to Subsection B above. All
numbers shall be displayed in a position easily observed and readable
from the public right-of-way or driveway or parking lot from which a
unit is normally accessed. In complexes where units may not have
direct access to the outside, but rather be accessed from a common
hallway or courtyard, the identification number or letter of the building,
along with the range of units within the building, shall be displayed.)
[Amended 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
§ 258-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-7
1:271
§ 258-7. Duties of Assessor.
It shall be the duty of the Assessor to inform any party applying therefor
of the numbers or number belonging to or embraced within this chapter. In
the case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned to any building,
the Assessor shall determine the number of such building.
§ 258-8. New buildings.
Whenever any building shall be erected or located in the City of Vineland
or its urban fringe after the establishment of the uniform system has
been completed, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure the correct
number or numbers as designated from the Assessor for the property and to
immediately fasten said number or numbers so assigned upon said building
as provided by this chapter. A building permit shall not be issued for any
house, building or structure until the owner has procured from the Assessor
the official number of the premises. Final approval of any structure erected,
repaired, altered or modified after the effective date shall be withheld by
the Building Inspector until permanent and proper numbers have been
affixed to said structure.
§ 258-9. Street names.
For the purpose of clarifying and systemizing the present street names in
the City of Vineland, the Planning Board shall examine all street names
within the City of Vineland, and when it shall find duplication of street
names or similarity of street names which might cause difficulty in the
assigning of numbers, it shall then recommend appropriate name changes
to the City Council.
§ 258-10. Enforcement. [Added 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-13]
The Police Department of the City of Vineland shall confirm the visibility
of house numbers and coordinate enforcement through the Uniform
Construction Code Official with verification of numbers by the Tax Assessor.
Chapter 269
CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 216.
Amusements — See Ch. 220.
Noise — See Ch. 469.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 511.
§ 269-1. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 81 of the City of Vineland, entitled "An Ordinance Prohibiting
Carnivals in the City of Vineland," be and the same is hereby repealed.
§ 258-7 VINELAND CODE § 269-2
1:272
§ 269-2. Definitions. [Amended 3-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-19]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARNIVAL — Includes the conduct, operation, exhibition or display, by any
person or persons, corporation, firm, association or aggregation, of shows,
fares, craft shows, trade shows, benefits, church festivals, non wild or exotic
animal shows of established reputation and similar activities which may
include amusement rides and amusement activities, booths and/or other
places for the sale of food, drink and/or refreshments in any lot, park or
open place in specific locations within the City of Vineland as set forth in
this chapter, or some or any of the foregoing.
CIRCUS — Including circus or traveling carnival shows, a mobile or
stationary act or public performance conducted, sponsored, or operated by
a person holding or required to hold a Class C license under the Animal
Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. § 2131 et seq.) together with its subsequent
amendments and implementing regulations and standards adopted
pursuant to the Act, by which performances are offered from live animals
which may also include other participants including acrobats, clowns or
other human performers.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — A fixed piece of real property, owned or
leased by the person owning or caring for the wild or exotic animal, where
the wild or exotic animal eats and sleeps for more than half the calendar
year.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, joint venture, association, trust, estate, or any other legal entity,
and any officer, member, shareholder, director, employee, agent, or
representative of those.
TRAVELING SHOW — Any mobile or stationary act, circus, public show,
trade show, photographic opportunity, carnival, parade, race, performance,
or similar undertaking (collectively "performance or exhibition")
incorporating wild or exotic animals wherein the animals either have no
permanent residence or are removed from their permanent residence for a
period of more than 18 hours at a time for the purpose of performance or
exhibition.
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any or all of the following orders and families,
whether born in the wild or in captivity, and also any or all of their hybrids
with domestic species. The animals listed in parentheses are intended to act
as examples and are not to be construed as an exhaustive list or limit the
generality of each group of animals, unless otherwise specified:
Nonhuman primates and prosimians (such as chimpanzees, baboons,
monkeys, etc.): all species.
A.
Felidae (such as lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots, servals, etc.):
all species except domestic cats.
B.
§ 269-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-2
1:273
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY — An establishment that provides lifetime care for
animals that have been abused, injured, abandon, or otherwise in need.
The animals may come from sources including, but not limited to, private
owners, research laboratories, government authorities, the entertainment
industry, and zoos. An establishment shall not qualify as a wildlife sanctuary
for purposes of this chapter unless
§ 269-3. Carnivals permitted; restrictions; insurance.
Any person, firm, corporation or association shall be permitted to hold,
exhibit, conduct, produce, set up, promote, maintain or operate any carnival
in or upon any lot, tract or parcel of land in the City of Vineland under the
following conditions:
Canidae (such as wolves, coyotes, etc.): all species except domestic
dogs.
C.
D. Ursidae (such as bears): all species.
E. Marsupialia (such as kangaroos, etc.): all species.
F. Proboscidea (such as elephants): all species.
G. Crocodilia (such as crocodiles, alligators, etc.): all species.
H. Squamata: all species of snakes.
Artiodactyla (such as hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, etc.): all
species except domesticated cattle, swine, sheep, goats, llamas, or
alpacas.
I.
Perissodactyla (such as zebras, rhinos, and tapirs): all species except
domestic horses, donkeys or mules.
J.
K. Struthioniformes (such as emus): all species.
It is operated by a recognized 501(c)(3) organization or a governmental
unit;
A.
No commercial trade in animals occurs (including, but not limited
to, sale of animals, animal parts, byproducts, offspring, photographic
opportunities or public events for financial profit, or any other
entertainment purposes);
B.
C. No propagation (breeding) of animals occurs in the facility; and
D. No unescorted public visitation is allowed.
A. The site is located on a business or industrial property in a business or
industrial zone as defined in the City's Land Use Ordinance,92 or the site
is located on property owned by a not-for-profit organization.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use.
§ 269-2 VINELAND CODE § 269-3
1:274
§ 269-4. Exhibition of wild and exotic animals on City-owned
property. [Added 3-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-19]
B. Permission has been obtained from the property owner for the conduct
of a carnival.
C. Carnivals shall be limited to a period of one week per year per
organization.
D. Evidence of liability insurance shall be provided in an amount not less
than $500,000 per occurrence naming the City as an additional insured.
E. The carnival operator must provide advance notice of the event to the
Zoning Officer of the City of Vineland at least 60 days prior to the event,
setting forth the following information:
(1) Identification of the sponsors or promoters of the event.
(2) The names, addresses and daytime phone numbers of the event
coordinators (at least two persons should be named).
(3) The specific location of the event, including street address and
block and lot, along with a description or plot plan identifying
where on the property the event will be set up.
(4) Documentation evidencing written permission from the property
owner to the sponsor or promoter of the event.
(5) The dates and times of the operation of the event.
F. Licenses and permits; compliance with applicable laws.
(1) The carnival operator must obtain any and all licenses, permits and
approvals required in connection with the event, including but not
limited to the following: a permit for the use of City property, if
applicable, through the City of Vineland Recreation Commission;
inspection of carnival equipment by the Department of Licenses
and Inspections; retail food establishment licenses through the City
of Vineland Department of Health; inspection of the site and
equipment by the Fire Department; traffic control coordination
with the Police Department; and certification by the Zoning Officer
that the event is a permitted use within the zone where the event is
to be conducted.
(2) The carnival operator must also comply with any and all laws
applicable to such an event, including but not limited to the
Carnival-Amusement Rides Safety Act of the State of New Jersey
(N.J.S.A. 5:3-31 et seq.) and related statutes and all applicable
ordinances of the City of Vineland.
A. No person shall conduct, sponsor, operate, or otherwise permit a
traveling show or circus that includes wild or exotic animals as set forth
in this chapter on property owned or controlled by the City of Vineland,
§ 269-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-4
1:275
Chapter 277
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Secondhand goods — See Ch. 574.
§ 277-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, "solicitation" or "solicit" means the
request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property, financial
assistance, or other thing of any kind or value. Solicitation shall include, but
not be limited to, the use or employment of canisters, cards, receptacles
or similar devices for the collection of money or other thing of value.
A solicitation shall take place whether or not the person making the
solicitation receives any contribution.
including but not limited to park lands owned, controlled or operated
by the City of Vineland.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
(1) Institutions accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums.
(2) Any sanctuary, rescue center, or rehabilitation center accredited or
verified by the Global Federation of Animal Sanctuaries or the
American Sanctuary Association.
(3) Any wildlife sanctuary as defined in this chapter, including a
wildlife sanctuary accredited or verified by the Global Federation of
Animal Sanctuaries or the American Sanctuary Association.
(4) Outreach programs for educational and conservation purposes
operated by a recognized 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization or
governmental entities where the wild or exotic animal is not
removed from his permanent residence for more than 18 hours at
any given time.
C. This section is not intended to preclude or prevent exhibitions or
demonstrations including domestic animals such as horses, cattle,
sheep, goats, llamas and similar animals, nor is this section intended to
prevent exhibitions of domesticated farm animals such as are
frequently displayed or demonstrated by 4-H clubs or similar
organizations.
D. Further, the City of Vineland shall not contract with, agree with, nor
allow or suffer the use of City-owned properties as set forth in this
section from utilizing property owned by the City for the purposes
prohibited under this section.
§ 269-4 VINELAND CODE § 277-2
1:276
§ 277-2. Requirements for placement; use of clothing bin for
solicitation purposes.
Charitable clothing bins installed prior to the enactment of this chapter
are subject to all provisions of said chapter. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, no person shall place, use, or employ a
donation clothing bin, for solicitation purposes, unless all of the following
requirements are met:
A. The person has obtained a permit, valid for a calendar year, from the
Department of Licenses and Inspections in accordance with the
following:
(1) In applying for such a permit, the person shall include:
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible (three copies of plot plan are required).
(b) Copy of approved zoning permit.
(c) The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent.
(d) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to Subsection B of this section of any entity
which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin.
(e) Submission of written consent form, provided by Department
of Licenses and Inspections, from the property owner to place
the bin on his or her property.
(2) The Department of Licenses and Inspections shall not grant an
application for a permit to place, use, or employ a donation clothing
bin in a right-of-way.
(3) The Department of Licenses and Inspections shall not grant an
application for a permit to place, use, or employ a donation clothing
bin if it determines that the placement of the bin could constitute a
safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the
placement of a donation clothing bin within 100 yards of any place
which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable
liquids or gases.
(4) The Department of Licenses and Inspections may impose a fee for
such application, not to exceed $25, to offset the costs involved in
enforcing this chapter.
(5) An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed
upon application for renewal and payment of any fee imposed by
the Department of Licenses and Inspections for such renewal, not
§ 277-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-2
1:277
to exceed $25 annually, to offset the costs involved in enforcing
this chapter. If a permit is not renewed within the calendar year
following the original application, the application will be
considered an original application. Renewal applications must be
submitted no later than the 31st of January. Such renewal
application shall include:
(a) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible,
including three copies of plot plan and, if the person intends to
move it, the new location where the bin would be situated after
the renewal is granted and submission of notarized written
consent form, provided by Department of Licenses and
Inspections, from the property owner to place the bin on his or
her property.
(b) The manner in which the applicant has used, sold, or dispersed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
been allocated or spent, and any changes the applicant
anticipates to make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal.
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to Subsection B of this section of any entity
which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, and of any entities which may do so
during the period covered by the renewal.
(6) The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing
bin, in addition to the information required pursuant to Subsection
C of this section.
B. The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, maintains a bona fide
office where a representative of the person or other entity, respectively,
can be reached at a telephone information line during normal business
hours for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or
other entity. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine
or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office.
C. The applicant must provide and maintain the display of the following
information clearly and conspicuously on the exterior of the donation
clothing bin:
(1) The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin,
and of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin.
(2) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
§ 277-2 VINELAND CODE § 277-2
1:278
§ 277-3. Maintenance of donation bins and surrounding property.
Clothing bins shall be maintained by the applicant in a neat and orderly
fashion. Clothing and other donations shall be placed directly in the clothing
bin, and the bin shall be emptied on a regular basis or when full. Clothing
and other donations that are left outside or alongside the clothing bins shall
be placed directly in the clothing bin by the applicant or designee in a timely
manner. Failure to maintain the clothing bin as stated herein shall constitute
a violation of this chapter. The act of a donor placing clothing or other
donations outside or alongside the clothing bin may constitute a violation of
other ordinances involving property maintenance or littering.
§ 277-4. Receipt and investigation of complaints.
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin.
(3) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to,
an entity other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities which may share or profit from such donations.
(4) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
Department of Licenses and Inspections in the most recent permit
or renewal application pursuant to Subsection A(1)(c) of this
section and Subsection A(5)(b) of this section, indicating the
manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed,
and the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would
be allocated or spent.
A. The City of Vineland shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any
complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the
City of Vineland that a person has engaged in, or is engaging in any act
or practice in violation of § 2 of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61),
the person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if
the violation is not rectified or a hearing with the City of Vineland is not
requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the
expense of the person who placed the bin, and any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to notify the
person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior
of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the City of Vineland may seize the bin, remove it, or have it
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at
§ 277-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-4
1:279
§ 277-5. Violations and penalties; remedies.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of this
state, any person who violates any provision of this chapter which results in
seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
Chapter 280
CHECKS, RETURNED
§ 280-1. Fee established. [Amended 1-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-91;
4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-31]
A charge of $20 shall be added to any account owing to the City if payment
tendered on said account was by a check or other written instrument which
was returned for insufficient funds.
§ 280-2. Waiver.
The City Comptroller shall have the authority to waive said fee where
he determines that extenuating circumstances exist (i.e., a check being
returned for reasons beyond the control of the maker).
public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the
City of Vineland.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The City of
Vineland may bring this action in the Municipal Court or Superior Court
as a summary proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of
1999," P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.), and any penalty
monies collected shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the City
of Vineland.
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to § 2 of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or employing a
donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of this chapter may
apply to the City of Vineland to have that person's eligibility restored.
The City of Vineland may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest.
(2) Demonstrates that he or she made a good faith effort to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and
regulations, or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 277-4 VINELAND CODE § 280-3
1:280
§ 280-3. Future payments on returned check accounts. [Added
4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-31]
Should any payment tendered on any account owing the City of Vineland
to tendered by a check or other written instrument which was returned
for insufficient funds, all future payments to be tendered shall be in cash,
certified or cashier's check unless otherwise authorized by the Director of
the City of Vineland or his/her assignee.
Chapter 294
CONDOMINIUMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 425. Garbage and trash collection — See Ch. 620,
Art. I.
§ 280-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-3
1:281

ARTICLE I
Municipal Services
[Adopted 3-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-19 (Ch. 202, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 294-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — Any condominium, homeowners' or property owners'
association or cooperative which privately contracts for snow removal,
streetlighting, solid waste collection and disposal and roadway
maintenance, or any such organization where individual members privately
contract for the above-referenced services.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of real property ownership provided for under
the Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c. 257 (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.).
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association wherein the holder
of a share or membership interest in the corporation or association is
entitled to possess and occupy, for dwelling purposes, a house, apartment
or other unit of housing owned by the corporation or association or to
purchase a unit of housing constructed or erected by the corporation or
associations.
FEE-SIMPLE COMMUNITY — A private community which consists of
individually owned lots or units and provides for common or shared
elements or interests in real property.93
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — The form of real property ownership
provided for under the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168 (N.J.S.A.
46:8A-1 et seq.).
LOCAL PURPOSES TAX RATE — That portion of the municipal tax rate
levied in support of municipal purpose appropriations. Said rate is identified
on City of Vineland tax bills as "municipal tax."
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium,
cooperative, fee-simple community or horizontal property regime, the
residents of which do not receive any tax abatement or tax exemption
related to its construction, comprised of a community trust or other trust
device, condominium association, homeowners' association or council of coowners,
wherein the cost of maintaining roads and streets and providing
essential services is paid for by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively
of unit owners within the community. No apartment building or garden
apartment complex owned by an individual or entity that receives monthly
rental payments from tenants who occupy the premises shall be considered
a qualified private community.
93.Editor's Note: The former definition of "Garbage and Trash Collection District" which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-28.
§ 294-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-1
1:283
REIMBURSEMENT PERCENTAGE — The applicable percentage shall be
based on the statutory phase-in schedule as set forth in the Condominium
Law94 and will be applied to the eligible services as negotiated and set forth
in the reimbursement agreement.
SOLID WASTE UTILITY — An administrative entity created to transact
the collection and disposal of eligible solid waste, including designated
recyclable materials, and related support services, as provided by law. Said
Solid Waste Utility is assigned as a function of the Subdivision of Solid
Waste Management under the Division of Public Works in the Department
of Public Works.[Added 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-28]
§ 294-2. Threshold requirements.
The following threshold requirements shall be determined prior to
providing service or entering into a reimbursement agreement:
A. The master deed for the qualified private community shall be provided
to the Business Administrator to document the recorded intent of the
owner to establish and develop the property as a qualified private
community consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.,
complete with improvements intended for the common use and
enjoyment of the residents of the property.
B. The site plan for the development shall be clearly marked with the
agreed-upon public area of the property and the remaining private
areas of the property.
C. The owner shall indicate the desire or intent to dedicate the public
street areas to the City or to retain the same as private areas of the
community. It shall be the sole discretion of the City of Vineland
whether to accept or reject street areas offered for acceptance by the
City. The condition precedent to consideration of street dedication to
the City of Vineland shall be whether the streets and roads meet
existing City street standards as set forth in Chapter 425, Land Use,
with the exception of width. It is established by this section that the City
of Vineland shall bear no responsibility for maintenance of streets it
does not own through dedication and acceptance by this municipality.
D. It is herein determined that the manner and conditions under which
service shall be provided by the City of Vineland is based upon
conveyance of a deed of dedication by the owner to the City and
acceptance thereof by the Planning Board and the City Council of the
City of Vineland. Unless the streets are dedicated to this municipality,
the City will not provide service but shall enter into a reimbursement
agreement therefor acceptable to the City Solicitor and authorized by
the City Council of the City of Vineland.
94.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.6.
§ 294-1 VINELAND CODE § 294-2
1:284
§ 294-3. Reimbursement agreement.
§ 294-4. Eligible reimbursable expenses.
The governing body of the City of Vineland shall reimburse a qualified
private community for the following services or provide the following
services within a qualified private community if said streets are dedicated to
the City of Vineland in the same fashion as the municipality provides these
services on public roads and streets:
E. The Tax Assessor shall certify if the residents of the qualified private
community are the beneficiary of any existing tax abatements or tax
exemptions related to the construction thereof.
F. The Tax Assessor shall certify to the Business Administrator that the
condominium complex meets the definition of a qualified private
community as established by N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2, which definition is
recited under § 294-1 of this article.
A. In lieu of providing some or all of the services set forth in § 294-4 of this
article, the City of Vineland shall enter into a written agreement to
annually reimburse a qualified private community.
B. The amount to be reimbursed to the qualified private community shall
be used by the qualified private community to pay for the service which
the municipality chooses not to provide, and that amount shall be the
actual cost to the qualified private community of providing that service,
but not exceeding the amount which the City would have expended on
that service if it were provided directly by the municipality to the
qualified private community.
C. The City of Vineland shall be held harmless by the association and the
qualified private community property owner, if applicable, from any
lawsuit by virtue of providing service on dedicated streets or through
the reimbursement procedure. An agreement entered into pursuant to
this section shall provide for complete accounting of the amount
expended by the qualified private owner during the year for which
reimbursement is anticipated by the City of Vineland, and said
documentation must be submitted to the Chief Financial Officer before
reimbursement by the City of Vineland.
A. Removal of snow, ice and other obstructions from the roads and streets.
B. Lighting of the roads and streets, to the extent of payment for
electricity required, but not including the installation or maintenance of
lamps, standards, wiring or other equipment.
C. Collection of leaves along the roads and streets.
D. Solid Waste Utility services shall be provided, if requested, to a
qualified private community, if the property is subject to municipal
§ 294-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-4
1:285
§ 294-5. Designated representatives.
§ 294-6. Reimbursement procedures.
§ 294-7. Proof of expenditures; annual audit.
collection, as provided by Chapter 620, Article II, § 620-3. [Amended
5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-28]
A. A qualified private community shall designate a coordinator for the
purpose of negotiating and implementing an agreement with the City of
Vineland pursuant to the Condominium Services Act.95
B. A resolution of the Board of Directors of the qualified private
community appointing its designated representative and empowering
said representative to negotiate said agreement shall be filed with the
City Clerk of the City of Vineland.
C. The City of Vineland's designated Municipal Services Coordinator shall
be the Business Administrator or designee.
A. The City of Vineland shall budget annually the reimbursement
percentage required to compensate the qualified private community,
said appropriation to be subject to a cap base budget adjustment as
provided by the State of New Jersey, Director of the Division of Local
Government Services.
B. The City of Vineland shall issue a check to the qualified private
community designee by June 30 of the applicable fiscal year as
reimbursement for municipal service costs incurred by the City of
Vineland for services covered herein in the preceding calendar year.
The amount of the reimbursement check shall be calculated in
accordance with the formula established by the City of Vineland Chief
Financial Officer.
C. Reimbursement checks received by the qualified private community
from the City of Vineland shall be distributed as agreed in the
reimbursement agreement.
D. It shall be the qualified private community's responsibility to provide
the City of Vineland with a properly itemized and certified invoice for
agreed reimbursable items.
A. The City of Vineland shall be provided with required data to support
and justify eligibility for reimbursement of expenses incurred by the
qualified private community. In no event shall the qualified private
community receive more, based on City cost for services, than actually
expended during the fiscal year.
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2 et seq.
§ 294-4 VINELAND CODE § 294-7
1:286
B. The qualified private community shall furnish its fiscal year annual
audit if requested by the City of Vineland Chief Financial Officer.
§ 294-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-7
1:287
Chapter 300
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 258.
Drainage systems — See Ch. 320.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 372.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 437.
Occupancy permits — See Ch. 485.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
Sewers — See Ch. 585.
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
Water — See Ch. 710.
§ 300-1. Enforcing agency established; subcode officials designated.
§ 300-2. Construction Board of Appeals. [Amended 12-23-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-106]
A. There is hereby established in the City of Vineland a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Construction
Enforcement Agency," consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode
officials for additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department
of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part
of the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall
be the chief administrator of the enforcing agency. The Construction
Enforcement Agency shall be an agency under the Department of
Licenses and Inspections. The Construction Official, together with all
subcode officials, shall be appointed by the Department head in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43(d). [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord.
No. 1065]
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,96 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to the afore-cited authority to hold such position.
A. Establishment of Board of Appeals.
(1) There is hereby established a Construction Board of Appeals to
hear appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency in accordance
with the State Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119
96.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 294-7 VINELAND CODE § 300-2
1:288
et seq.), the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192) and P.L.
1995, c. 54.97 The Board shall exercise its functions in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23A-1.1 et seq., known as the "Rules Governing
Construction Boards of Appeals."
(2) The City Council of the City of Vineland shall annually designate
one regular member of the Board to serve as Chairperson and
another regular member of the Board to serve as Vice Chairperson.
The Vice Chairperson shall serve as Chairperson in the event of the
absence or disqualification of the Chairperson.
(3) The City Council of the City of Vineland shall appoint a Secretary to
the Board, who need not be a member of the Board.
B. Membership.
(1) The Construction Board of Appeals shall consist of five regular
members.
(a) Regular members shall be appointed for terms of four years by
the City Council of the City of Vineland.
(b) For the members first appointed, the City Council of the City of
Vineland shall designate the appointees' terms so that one
shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two
years, one for a term of three years and two for terms of four
years.
(c) Vacancies on the Board shall be filled for the unexpired term.
(d) Members may be removed by the City Council of the City of
Vineland for cause.
(e) Members of the Board shall be residents of the City of Vineland
unless there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of
qualified residents for available specific positions.
(f) No more than two regular members of the Board shall be
members of the same profession or occupation.
(2) Qualifications for regular members.
(a) At least one regular member shall be as qualified as a plumbing
subcode official.
(b) At least one regular member shall be as qualified as an
electrical subcode official.
(c) At least one regular member shall be a registered architect, or
a licensed professional engineer with building construction
experience, or other person as qualified as a building subcode
official.
97.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127.
§ 300-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2
1:289
(d) At least one regular member shall be as qualified as a fire
protection subcode official.
(e) At least one regular member shall be certified as a fire official.
(3) The requirements of Subsection B(2) above shall not be construed
as requiring that there be a separate regular member in each of the
qualification categories set forth in Subsection B(2)(a) through (e).
One regular member may satisfy these requirements with regard to
more than one such qualification category.
(4) Alternate members. The Construction Board of Appeals shall also
include at least five alternate members.
(a) Alternate members shall be appointed to staggered terms, in
the same manner as the initial appointment of regular
members.
(b) Alternate members shall be chosen so that there will be at least
one alternate member in each qualification category set forth
in Subsection B(2)(a) through (e) above.
(c) When a regular member of the Board is absent, the alternate
member in the same qualification category shall serve in that
regular member's place; provided, however, that any alternate
member who is as qualified as an elevator subcode official shall
serve in the place of any absent regular member in any case
involving the elevator safety subcode, if there is no other
regular member of the Board present who is as qualified as an
elevator subcode official.
(d) If a regular member who is not in one of the qualification
categories set forth in Subsection B(2)(a) through (e) above is
absent, or if a regular member and an alternate member who
are both in the same qualification category are absent and the
appeal does not involve that qualification category, or if
another regular member is present who meets the
requirements of the same qualification category as does the
regular member who is absent, the Chairperson of the Board
shall determine which alternate member shall vote in the place
of the absent regular member.
(e) Alternate members shall have the right to participate in all
Board deliberations but shall not vote unless serving in the
place of a regular member.
(5) Each regular or alternate member shall be qualified by experience
or training to perform the duties of a member of the Board. The
qualification of any regular or alternate member, regardless of
whether they are in one of the qualification categories set forth in
Subsection B(2)(a) through (e) above, shall be no less than that
which is required of a construction or subcode official under
§ 300-2 VINELAND CODE § 300-2
1:290
Subsection 8b of the State Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-126, Subsection b); provided, however, that Board
members shall not be required to hold construction code licensure.
(6) Whenever a change to the state regulations is made that affects the
composition of construction boards of appeals, City Council shall
only implement the change when the term of any affected
member(s) expires. This provision shall also apply in any case in
which the adoption of this section affects the composition of the
Construction Board of Appeals.
(7) No employee of the Department of Licenses and Inspections may
serve on the Board of Appeals as a regular or alternate member.
Other municipal employees may serve on the Board, provided that
they shall be disqualified from consideration of matters affecting
municipally owned or leased structures.
(8) The Board Chairperson shall annually provide the Bureau of
Regulatory Affairs of the Division of Codes and Standards with a list
of the names and addresses of the regular and alternate members
of the Board and of the Board Secretary and any other contact
person. Such information shall be updated whenever a change
occurs.
C. Rules and regulations.
(1) The following rules and regulations of the State of New Jersey with
respect to construction boards of appeal are hereby adopted by the
City of Vineland in their entirety by reference hereto:
(a) N.J.A.C. 5:23A-1.4, Post appointment educational requirements
for Board members.
(b) N.J.A.C. 5:23A-1.5, Board meetings.
(c) N.J.A.C. 5:23A-2.1, Hearing applications.
(d) N.J.A.C. 5:23A-2.2, Hearing procedures.
(e) N.J.A.C. 5:23A-2.3, Board decisions.
(2) A copy of the rules and regulations in effect at the time of adoption
of this section is on file with the City Clerk and with the Director of
the Department of Licenses and Inspections.
D. Compensation of Board members. Members of the Board of Appeals
shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for all
necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their
duties.
E. The City Solicitor shall serve as Solicitor to the Construction Board of
Appeals as required.
§ 300-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2
1:291
§ 300-3. Fees for construction permits; surcharge fee. [Last
amended 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-57]
F. The Construction Board of Appeals shall charge the following fees per
appeal:
(1) The application for an appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in the
sum of $50.
(2) An exception to this fee shall apply to the application concerning a
single-family dwelling, which shall be accompanied by a fee in the
sum of $25.
A. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in Subsection A(1) through (5) hereof and shall be paid before the
permit is issued.
(1) The building subcode fee shall be as follows:
(a) For new construction, $0.030 per cubic foot of volume for
buildings and structures of all use groups as classified and
defined in the building subcode, except that the fee shall be
$0.021 per cubic foot of volume for Use Groups F, S-1 and S-2,
and the fee shall be $0.008 per cubic foot for structures on
farms used exclusively for the storage of food or grain or the
sheltering of livestock, with the maximum fee for such
structures on farms not to exceed $1,060; provided, however,
that the minimum fee shall be $50, except for residential lawn
sheds of 200 square feet or less, for which the minimum fee
shall be $35.
(b) Fees for renovations, alterations, repairs, installation and
foundation systems for premanufactured construction,
underground storage tanks and leak detection systems shall be
based upon the estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be in
the amount of $20 per $1,000 or any portion thereof. Above
$100,000, the additional fee shall be in the amount of $15 per
$1,000 of estimated cost; however, the minimum fee shall be
$50.
(c) Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as for
new construction for the added portion.
(d) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Subsection A(1)(a) and (b) above.
(e) The fee for aboveground swimming pools shall be $50. The fee
for in-ground swimming pools and open structural towers shall
be $150.
§ 300-2 VINELAND CODE § 300-3
1:292
(f) The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $75 for oneor
two-family residences, residential accessory buildings and
structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings
under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), and $125 for all other use groups.
(g) The building subcode fee for the removal of a building or
structure from one lot to another or to a new location on the
same lot shall be based upon the estimated cost for moving, for
new foundation and for placement in a completed condition in
the new location, and shall be computed in accordance with
Subsection A(1)(b) above.
(h) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be $1 per square
foot of the surface area of the sign, provided that the minimum
fee shall be $50 for any sign permit issued. In the case of
double-faced signs, the area of the surface of only one side of
the sign shall be used for purposes of the fee computation.
(i) The fee for asbestos abatement shall be $70.
(j) The fee for lead hazard abatement work shall be $140.
(k) The fee for protection fences to be installed around swimming
pools shall be $50.
(2) The plumbing subcode fees shall be as follows:
(a) Plumbing fixtures and stacks. The fee shall be in the amount of
$15 per fixture or stack for all fixtures except as listed in
Subsection A(2)(b) below.
(b) The fee shall be $75 for the following special devices: grease
traps, oil separators, water-cooled air-conditioning units,
refrigeration units, utility service connections, utility service
disconnections, backflow preventers equipped with test ports
(double check-valve assembly, reduced-pressure-zone and
pressure-vacuum-break backflow preventers), steam boilers,
hot-water boilers (excluding those for domestic water heating),
gas piping, active solar systems, sewer pumps, interceptors
and fuel oil piping and manufactured home hookups. There
shall be no inspection fee charged for gas service entrances.
(c) For the purpose of computing this fee, fixtures or stacks shall
include but not be limited to lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop
sinks, sinks, urinals, water closets, bathtubs, shower stalls,
laundry tubs, floor drains, drinking fountains, dishwashers,
garbage disposals, clothes washers, hot-water heaters or
similar devices.
(d) For cross connections and backflow preventers requiring
inspection every 12 months, the fee shall be $45 for each such
device.
§ 300-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3
1:293
(e) The fee shall be $75 for water-pressure-booster pumps.
(f) The minimum plumbing subcode fee shall be $50.
(3) The electrical subcode fees shall be:
(a) Electrical fixtures and devices.
[1] The fee shall be as follows:
[a] For the first block, consisting of one to 50 receptacles,
fixtures or devices, the fee shall be $55.
[b] For each additional block, consisting of up to 25
receptacles, fixtures or devices, the fee shall be $15.
[2] For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles,
fixtures or devices shall include lighting fixtures, wall
switches, convenience receptacles, sensors, dimmers,
alarm devices, smoke and heat detectors, communications
outlets, light-standards eight feet or less in height,
including luminaries, emergency lights, electric signs, exit
lights or similar electric fixtures and devices rated 20
amperes or less, including motors or equipment rated less
than one horsepower or one kilowatt.
(b) For each motor or electrical device rated from one horsepower
or one kilowatt to 10 horsepower or 10 kilowatt; for each
transformer or generator rated from one kilowatt or one
kilovolt-amperes to 10 kilowatt or 10 kilovolt-amperes; for each
replacement of wiring involving one branch circuit or part
thereof; for each storable pool or hydromassage bathtub; for
each underwater lighting fixture; for household electric
cooking equipment rated up to 16 kilowatt; for each fire,
security or burglar alarm control unit; for each receptacle
rated from 30 amperes to 50 amperes; for each light-standard
greater than eight feet in height, including luminaries; and for
each communications closet, the fee shall be $15.
(c) For each motor or electrical device rated from greater than 10
horsepower or 10 kilowatt to 50 horsepower or 50 kilowatt; for
each service equipment, panel board, switch board, switch
gear, motor-control-center, or disconnecting-means rated 225
amperes or less; for each transformer or generator rated from
greater than 10 kilowatt or 10 kilovolt-amperes to 45 kilowatt
or 45 kilovolt-amperes; for each electric sign rated from
greater than 20 amperes to 225 amperes, including associated
disconnecting-means; for each receptacle rated greater than
50 amperes; and for each utility load management device, the
fee shall be $65.
§ 300-3 VINELAND CODE § 300-3
1:294
(d) For each motor or electrical device rated from greater than 50
horsepower or 50 kilowatt to 100 horsepower or 100 kilowatt;
for each service equipment, panel board, switch board, switch
gear, motor-control-center or disconnecting-means rated from
greater than 225 amperes to 1,000 amperes; and for each
transformer or generator rated from greater than 45 kilowatt
or 45 kilovolt-amperes to 112.5 kilowatt or 112.5 kilovoltamperes,
the fee shall be $125.
(e) For each motor or electrical device rated greater than 100
horsepower or 100 kilowatt; for each service equipment, panel
board, switch board, switch gear, motor-control-center or
disconnecting-means rated from greater than 1,000 amperes;
and for each transformer or generator rated greater than
112.5 kilowatt or 112.5 kilovolt-amperes, the fee shall be $425.
(f) The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently
installed private swimming pool as defined in the building
subcode, spa, hot tub or fountain shall be a flat fee of $55,
which shall include any required bonding and associated
equipment such as filter pumps, motors, disconnecting-means,
switches, required receptacles, and heaters, etc., excepting
panelboards and underwater lighting fixtures. For public
swimming pools, the fee shall be charged on the basis of
number of electric fixtures and rating of electrical devices
involved.
(g) For installations consisting of multimeter stacks, the fee shall
be based on the ampere rating of the main bus and not upon
the number of meters or rating of disconnects on the meter
stack. Individual loadside panel boards shall be charged in
accordance with above. There shall be no additional fee
charged for the concurrent installation of individual feeder
conductors, as per Subsection A(3)(c), (d) or (e).
(h) For electrical work requiring replacement of service entrance
conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee shall be based on
the designated ampere rating of the overcurrent device of the
service or feeder, as per Subsection A(3)(c), (d) or (e).
(i) The fee for yearly inspections for each pubic swimming pool,
spa or hot tub shall be $75.
(j) The minimum electrical subcode fee shall be $55.
(4) Fire protection subcode fees.
(a) Fees for sprinklers shall be as follows:
[1] For 20 or fewer heads: $70.
[2] For 21 to 100 heads: $130.
§ 300-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3
1:295
[3] For 101 to 200 heads: $245.
[4] For 201 to 400 heads: $630.
[5] For 401 to 1,000 heads: $870.
[6] Over 1,000 heads: $1,115.
(b) Fees for detectors shall be as follows:
[1] For one to 12 detectors: $50.
[2] Each additional 25 detectors: $15.
(c) Fee for each standpipe shall be $245.
(d) Fee for each independent pre-engineered suppression system
shall be $100.
(e) Fee for each nonresidential kitchen exhaust system shall be
$50.
(f) Fee for each incinerator or crematorium shall be $390.
(g) Fee for each gas- or oil-fired appliance that is not connected to
the plumbing system shall be $50.
(h) Fee for single- and multiple-station smoke or heat detectors
and fire alarm systems in any one- or two-family dwellings shall
be $25.
(i) Fee for tank installation shall be $50 per tank.
(j) The minimum fire subcode fee shall be $50.
(5) The mechanical subcode fee shall be:
(a) The fee for LPG, NG, and oil-fired hot water boilers, warm air
furnace, water heaters, etc.: $75.
(b) The fee for generators, LPG and NG: $75.
(c) The fee for tanks, oil and LPG: $75.
(d) The fee for piping connections, LPG, NG, and oil: $75.
(e) The fee for any item not listed herein shall be determined by
the Construction Official and Plumbing Subcode Official.
(6) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be charged
for the construction permit. The amount paid for this fee shall be
credited toward the construction permit fee at the time of issuance
of the construction permit.
§ 300-3 VINELAND CODE § 300-3
1:296
(a) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126c, the fee specified in
accordance with this subsection shall be waived for any county,
municipality or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
(7) Certificates of occupancy, plan review, revisions and/or prior use
letter fees.
(a) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for new construction
shall be $125 for all use groups; except for one- or two-family
dwellings, the fee for which shall be $75. For structures on
farms used exclusively for storage of food or grain or
sheltering of livestock or residential accessory buildings, the
fee shall be $50.
(b) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use shall be $250.
(c) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $200.
(d) The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate shall be $28.
(e) The fee for an asbestos removal certificate of occupancy shall
be $14.
(f) The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy (TCO): $100.
(g) The fee for a plan review revision: $50.
(h) The fee for a prior use letter: $100.
(i) There shall be no fee for a certificate of approval or certificate
of compliance.
B. Elevator subcode fees.
(1) Fees for witnessing acceptance tests and performing inspections
on new and altered elevator devices shall be as follows:
(a) Basic fees for elevator devices in structures not in Use Group
R-5 or in an exempted R-2 structure shall be as follows:
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[a] One to 10 floors: $209.
[b] Over 10 floors: $350.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $186.
[3] Roped hydraulic elevators: $209.
[4] Escalators and moving walks: $186.
[5] Dumbwaiters: $47.
§ 300-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3
1:297
[6] Stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair lifts
and manlifts: $47.
(b) Additional fees for devices equipped with the following
features shall be as follows:
[1] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $37.
[2] Counterweight governor and safeties: $93.
[3] Auxiliary power generator: $70.
(c) The fee for elevator devices in structures in Use Group R-5 or
otherwise exempt devices in R-2 structures shall be $140. This
fee shall be waived when signed statements and supportive
inspection and acceptance test reports are filed by an
approved qualified agent or agency in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.19 and 5:23-2.20.
(d) Fee for performing inspections of minor work shall be $47.
(2) Fees for routine and periodic tests and inspections for elevator
devices in structures not in Use Group R-5 or otherwise exempt
devices in R-2 structures shall be as follows:
(a) Fees for the six-month routine inspection of elevator devices
shall be as follows:
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators.
[a] One to 10 floors: $130.
[b] Over 10 floors: $168.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $93.
[3] Roped hydraulic elevators: $130.
[4] Escalators and moving walks: $130.
(b) Fees for one-year periodic inspection and witnessing of tests of
elevator devices, which shall include a six-month routine
inspection, shall be as follows:
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators.
[a] One to 10 floors: $186.
[b] Over 10 floors: $223.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $140.
[3] Roped hydraulic elevators: $186.
[4] Escalators and moving walks: $299.
§ 300-3 VINELAND CODE § 300-3
1:298
[5] Dumbwaiters: $75.
[6] Manlifts, stairway chairlifts and inclined and vertical
wheelchair lifts: $113.
(c) Additional yearly periodic inspection charges for elevator
devices equipped with the following features shall be as
follows:
[1] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $37.
[2] Counterweight governor and safeties: $75.
[3] Auxiliary power generator: $47.
[4] Alterations: $47.
(d) Fees for the three-year or five-year inspection of elevator
devices shall be as follows:
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators.
[a] One to 10 floors (five-year inspection): $316.
[b] Over 10 floors (five-year inspection): $354.
[2] Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators.
[a] Three-year inspection: $233.
(e) Fees for plan review shall be as follows.
[1] Residential: $46.
[2] Apartment dwellings and commercial buildings: $239.98
C. As required by the Department of Community Affairs, and to provide for
the training, certification and technical support programs required by
the Uniform Construction Code Act and the regulations, the
Construction Enforcement Agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge in accordance with state regulations.
Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. Said
surcharge shall be remitted to the Bureau of Construction Code
Enforcement, Department of Community Affairs, on a monthly basis as
prescribed by regulation.
D. Waiver of fees; handicapped accessibility to buildings (see N.J.S.A.
52:27D-126e).
(1) No person shall be charged a construction permit fee pursuant to
this chapter for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote
98.Editor's Note: Former § 206-8C, regarding an annual 3% increase in fees beginning in
2007, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 10-28-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-68.
§ 300-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3
1:299
§ 300-4. Access to structures. [Added 8-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-55]
In order to provide for proper emergency access to structures for fire,
police and other emergency vehicles, any application for development shall
provide the following:
Chapter 307
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 511.
§ 307-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Curfew Ordinance of
the City of Vineland."
§ 307-2. Definitions and word usage.
accessibility by the handicapped to an existing public or private
structure or any of the facilities contained therein.
(2) For the purposes of this Subsection D, "handicapped person"
means a person who has the total and permanent inability to
engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any
medically determinable physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to, any resident of
this state who is disabled pursuant to the Federal Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. § 416) or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of
1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.) or is rated as having a sixty-percent
disability or higher pursuant to any federal law administered by the
United States Veterans' Act. For purposes of this subsection,
"blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the
better eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye which is
accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that the
widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater
than 20° shall be considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/
200 or less.
A. An open and clear driveway or access lane for a minimum of 12 feet
horizontal and 12 feet vertical clearance to within 25 feet of any
principal building.
B. Said access shall be maintained clear of any obstructions or vegetative
growth.
§ 300-3 VINELAND CODE § 307-2
1:300
§ 307-3. Hours established.
It shall be unlawful for any persons 17 or less years of age (under 18) to be
or remain in or upon the streets within the City of Vineland at night during
the period ending 5:00 a.m. and beginning:
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the plural number include the singular; and
words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CITY — The City of Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey with its
principal office located at 640 E. Wood Street, Vineland, New Jersey.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 or, in equivalent phrasing
often herein employed, any person 17 or less years of age.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor:
STREET — A way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of
the public as matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in
the case of a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term "street"
includes the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway
or traffic lanes, the curbs, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved,
and any grass plots or grounds found within the legal right-of-way
of a street. The term "street" applies irrespective of what it is called
or formally named, whether alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise.
The term "street" also includes shopping areas, parking lots, public
buildings and similar areas that are open to the use of the public.
TIME OF NIGHT — Referred to herein, is based upon the prevailing
standard of time, whether Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight
saving time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the City;
prima facie the time then observed in the police station.
YEAR OF AGE — Continues from one birthday, such as the 17th, to but
not including the day of the next, such as the 18th birthday, making it
clear that 17 or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the
phrase "under 18 years of age." Similarly, for example, "13 or less years
of age" means under 14 years of age.
(1) As a natural or adoptive parent;
(2) As a legal guardian;
(3) As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
(4) As a person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
A. At 10:00 p.m. for minors 13 years of age and younger, Sunday through
Saturday; and [Amended 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3699]
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-3
1:301
§ 307-4. Exceptions.
In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a City street during the
nocturnal hours for which § 307-3 is intended to provide the maximum
limits of regulation, and a clear general guide for minors, their parents and
fellow citizens, shall not, however, be considered in violation of the Curfew
Ordinance:
§ 307-5. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain on
any City street under circumstances not constituting an exception to or
B. At 11:00 p.m. for minors 14 or more years of age, Sunday through
Thursday; at 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday.
A. When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
B. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area.
C. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly, such minor shall evidence the bona
fides of such exercise by having in his possession a written
communication, signed by such minor and countersigned by, if
practicable, a parent of such minor, with their home address and
telephone number, specifying when, where and in what manner said
minor will be on the streets at night (during hours when the Curfew
Ordinance is otherwise applicable to said minor) in the exercise of a
First Amendment right specified in such communication.
D. When the minor is not more than 50 feet from the minor's place of
residence.
E. When the minor carries a certified card of employment or worker's
permit, pursuant to state law.
F. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. This clearly exempts bona fide interstate
movement through the City of Vineland. This also exempts interstate
travel beginning in or ending in the City of Vineland.
G. When engaging in errands involving medical emergencies and
attending extracurricular school activities, activities sponsored by
religious or community-based organizations and other cultural,
educational and organized social events. [Added 6-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-36]
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 307-3 VINELAND CODE § 307-5
1:302
otherwise beyond the scope of the Curfew Ordinance. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody.
It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to
a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
§ 307-6. Enforcement.
If a police officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is on the streets in
violation of the Curfew Ordinance, the officer shall notify the juvenile that
he or she is in violation of this chapter and shall require the juvenile to
provide his or her name, address and telephone number and how to contact
his or her parent or guardian. In determining the age of the juvenile and in
the absence of convincing evidence, such as a birth certificate or driver's
license, a police officer on the street shall use his or her best judgment in
determining age. If the officer determines a person is in violation of this
chapter, he or she shall take the juvenile to the police station, where a
parent or a guardian shall be notified to come for the juvenile, whereupon
he or she shall be questioned. This is intended to permit ascertainment,
under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts and to centralize
responsibility in the person designated there and then on duty for accurate,
effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and recording, thus
making available experienced personnel and access to information and
records.
A. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide that the police officer may deliver to a parent or
guardian thereof a juvenile of tender age near home whose identity and
address may readily be ascertained or are known.
B. A police officer discharging an enforcement obligation under this
chapter shall file a written report with the Chief of Police or shall
participate to the extent of the information for which he is responsible
in the preparation of a report on the curfew violation. It is not the
intention of this section to require extensive reports, but they should
have a reasonable amount of information for gathering of information.
C. When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has come to take
charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information has been
recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If
the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then
the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the
extent that, in accordance with police regulations approved in advance
by juvenile authorities, the juvenile may be entrusted to an adult
relative, neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of a parent or
guardian, assume the responsibility of caring for the juvenile pending
the availability or arrival of a parent or guardian.
§ 307-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-6
1:303
§ 307-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 307-8. Notice.
Notice of the existence of this chapter and of the curfew regulations
established by it shall be posted in, on or about such public or quasipublic
places as may be determined by the Chief of Police in order that the
public may be constantly informed of the existence of this chapter and its
regulations.
Chapter 320
DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landis Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 80.
Fees — See Ch. 350, Art. II.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Sewers — See Ch. 585.
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
Water — See Ch. 710.
D. In the case of the first violation of a juvenile, the Chief of Police shall, by
certified mail, send to the parents or guardians of the minor written
notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will
result in full enforcement of the Curfew Ordinance, including
enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties.
A. If, after receipt of a warning notice pursuant to § 307-6 of a first
violation of a juvenile, a second curfew violation is adjudicated against
the same minor, the parents or guardians of the minor shall be subject
to prosecution under § 307-5. For the first parental offense a parent
shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than $25, and for each
subsequent offense by a parent the minimum fine shall be increased by
an additional $25, e.g., $50 for the second offense, $75 for the third
offense, and the juvenile will be required to perform community service
work in addition thereto. The Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of
Vineland, upon a finding of guilty, may sentence the parent to pay this
fine and costs of prosecution.
B. Any juvenile who shall violate any of the provisions of the Curfew
Ordinance more than three times shall be reported by the Chief of
Police to the juvenile authorities as a juvenile in need of supervision,
and the Chief of Police may proceed to file such charges with the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Family Part, Cumberland County, as he
may deem appropriate.
§ 307-6 VINELAND CODE § 320-1
1:304
§ 320-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dam, fill, obstruct or encroach upon
any sewer, drain, ditch, culvert, gutter, surface drain or system of drainage
in, under or along any street, alley or public highway or portion thereof or
in, under or along any public or private lands, which dam, fill, obstruction
or encroachment diverts and/or prevents the natural flow of any stream,
creek, brook, river, surface or other drainage waters or other watercourse
or waterway within the City of Vineland, County of Cumberland and State
of New Jersey.
§ 320-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
§ 320-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No.
90-79100]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 327
DRUG-FREE ZONES
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 320-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-3
1:305

ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 11-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-87 (Ch. 226, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 327-1. Map approved and adopted. [Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), as amended, the Drug Free School Zone Map produced on or
about February 1, 2019, by David J. Maillet, City Engineer, is hereby
approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location and
areas within the City of Vineland of property which is used for school
purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school board and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such property.
§ 327-2. Map to constitute official finding.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 327-1
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to
the location and boundaries of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, as this article shall
be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location
and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones.
§ 327-3. Notification of changes.
The School Board or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the City Engineer and the City Solicitor of
any changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of
any property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 327-4. Copies to be kept on file; availability.
The Clerk of the City of Vineland is hereby directed to receive and to keep
on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 327-1 of
this article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a
true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to
the Cumberland County Clerk and to the office of the Cumberland County
Prosecutor.
§ 327-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-5
1:307
§ 327-5. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 327-1
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of the State of New Jersey
and that, pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality, both public and private.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or school boards.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by a school or school board and was being
used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the effective date
of P.L. 1987, c.101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c.44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 327-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c.44,101 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free school zone map,
have been complied with.
101. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-1 et seq.
§ 327-5 VINELAND CODE § 327-5
1:308
ARTICLE II
Drug-Free Public Building Facility Zones
[Adopted 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
§ 327-6. Map approved and adopted.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.1), the Drug-Free Public Building Zone Map produced on or about
February 1, 2019, by David J. Maillet, City Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
City of Vineland of real property comprising a public building and which is
owned by or leased to the City of Vineland and of the areas on or within 500
feet of such property upon which a public building is situated.
§ 327-7. Map to constitute official finding.
The Drug-Free Public Building Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant
to § 327-6 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of the areas on or within 500
feet of property owned by or leased to the City which is used for public
purposes until such time, if any, as this article shall be amended to reflect
any additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of
public buildings and drug-free zones.
§ 327-8. Copies to be kept on file; availability.
The Clerk of the City of Vineland is hereby directed to receive and to keep
on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 327-6 of
this article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a
true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to
the Cumberland County Clerk and to the office of the Cumberland County
Prosecutor.
§ 327-9. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 327-6
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of the State of New Jersey
and that, pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of public buildings within the municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
the City.
§ 327-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-9
1:309
(3) That such property is and continues to be used for public purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public building.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
public building property was owned by the City of Vineland and was
being used for public purposes as of February 1, 2019.
C. Pursuant to the provision of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 327-6 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
upon which is located a public building and which is owned by or leased
to the City, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not owned by or leased to the City.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free school zone map have
been complied with.
§ 327-9 VINELAND CODE § 327-9
1:310
ARTICLE III
Drug-Free Public Parks
[Adopted 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
§ 327-10. Map approved and adopted.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.1), the Drug-Free Public Parks Zone Map produced on or about
February 1, 2019, by David J. Maillet, City Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
City of Vineland of real property comprising a public park which is owned
by or leased to the City of Vineland and of the areas on or within 500 feet of
such public park.
§ 327-11. Map to constitute official finding.
The Drug-Free Public Parks Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 327-10 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of the areas on or within 500 feet of
property owned by or leased to the City which is used for public parks until
such time, if any, as this article shall be amended to reflect any additions
or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of public parks and
drug-free zones.
§ 327-12. Copies to be kept on file; availability.
The Clerk of the City of Vineland is hereby directed to receive and to keep
on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 327-10
of this article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a
true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to
the Cumberland County Clerk and to the office of the Cumberland County
Prosecutor.
§ 327-13. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 327-10 of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as
evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of the State of
New Jersey and that, pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of public parks within the municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
the City comprising public parks.
§ 327-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-13
1:311
(3) That such property is and continues to be used as a public park.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public parks.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
public parks property was owned by the City of Vineland and was being
used as a public park as of February 1, 2019.
C. Pursuant to the provision of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 327-10 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used as a public park and which is owned by or leased
by the City, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not owned by or leased by the City or
that such property is not used as a public park.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free public park zone map
have been complied with.
§ 327-13 VINELAND CODE § 327-13
1:312
ARTICLE IV
Drug-Free Public Housing Facilities
[Adopted 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
§ 327-14. Map approved and adopted.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.1), the Drug-Free Public Housing Facilities Zone Map produced on
or about February 1, 2019, by David J. Maillet, City Engineer, is hereby
approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location
and areas within the City of Vineland of real property comprising a public
housing facility as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 and of the areas on or within
500 feet of such public housing facility.
§ 327-15. Map to constitute official findings.
The Drug-Free Public Housing Facilities Zone Map approved and adopted
pursuant to § 327-14 of this article shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of the areas on or
within 500 feet of property deemed a public housing facility as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 until such time, if any, as this article shall be amended
to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location and
boundaries of public housing facilities and drug-free zones.
§ 327-16. Copies to be kept on file; availability.
The Clerk of the City of Vineland is hereby directed to receive and to keep
on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 327-14
of this article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a
true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to
the Cumberland County Clerk and to the office of the Cumberland County
Prosecutor.
§ 327-17. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 327-14 of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as
evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of the State of
New Jersey and that, pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of public housing facilities within the municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property upon which is located public
housing facilities.
§ 327-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-17
1:313
(3) That such property is and continues to be used for public purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public housing facilities.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
public housing facilities property was being used for public housing
facilities as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 as of February 1, 2019.
C. Pursuant to the provision of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 327-14 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for public housing facilities purposes, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not a public housing facility as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free public housing zone
map have been complied with.
§ 327-17 VINELAND CODE § 327-17
1:314
Chapter 335
ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE FOR DEPLOYED MILITARY
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
§ 335-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPLOYMENT — Written military orders directed at military personnel
requiring that persons report for active duty to be served outside of the
United States and its territories to attain a task or mission for a period
in excess of 30 days. Deployment shall not mean pre-deployment postdeployment
or training. Deployment shall commence upon physical
relocation outside of the United States or its territories.
PRIMARY RESIDENCE — A person's legal residence for purposes of income
tax, driver's licenses, or voter registration, among other criteria. A person
shall not have more than one primary residence. Other determining factors
are one's mailing address and time spent at the residence per year.
VINELAND RESIDENT — A person who maintains the City of Vineland as
his/her primary residence.
UTILITY BILLS — Those electric and water utility bills incurred at the
primary residence of deployed military personnel.
§ 335-2. Reduction in electric and water bills during deployment.
All members of the military who are deployed as defined herein shall be
entitled to a reduction of 5% on their electric bill and 5% on their water bill
from the date of physical deployment on a per-month basis for their primary
residence only (utilities reduction). Should there be more than one deployed
military personnel resident residing at the same primary residence, the
utilities reduction shall not be cumulative.
§ 335-3. Qualification for utility reduction.
A. In order to qualify for the utilities reduction, the Vineland military
personnel resident must provide proof that 1) the City of Vineland is his/
her primary residence and 2) he/she must provide copies of
documentation indicating date of deployment and proof that
deployment is outside of the United States or its territories. Upon
providing adequate proof in the sole discretion of the Director of
Municipal Utilities, the military personnel resident so deployed shall
receive a reduction of his/her electric and water bills, prorated from the
§ 327-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-3
1:315
§ 335-4. Suspension of collection practices.
date of physical deployment for an initial period of not more than 60
days.
B. The military personnel resident so deployed shall further execute a
certification in the form provided by the City of Vineland that he/she
meets the qualifications as set forth herein for said utilities reduction.
C. At the expiration of the sixty-day period set forth in Subsection A above,
the utilities reduction shall discontinue and full billing shall resume,
prorated. The utilities reduction may continue thereafter on a monthly
basis, provided the military personnel resident so deployed or a
member of his/her immediate family with whom he/she resides executes
a certification of continued deployment as defined herein for each
month thereafter until the military personnel resident returns from
deployment.
D. The utilities reduction shall discontinue in the event the electric or
water billing payment is more than 30 days delinquent and no
repayment agreement has been reached between the Director of the
municipal utilities and the military personnel resident or his/her
immediate family member with whom he/she resides.
A. In the event the electric and/or water billing remains unpaid for the
primary residence of the deployed military personnel and during the
time of deployment, the City of Vineland shall suspend any and all
collection practices as well as any interest charge on the unpaid
accounts until the military personnel resident returns to the United
States from deployment.
B. The military personnel so deployed shall repay the unpaid utility bills
incurred during deployment within one year of returning from
deployment. In the event unpaid utility bills incurred during
deployment are not paid within one year, then all collection practices
shall be reinstated, including interest charged on the unpaid utility bills
commencing one year from the return from deployment to the United
States.
C. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the City of Vineland
reserves the right to secure the payment of outstanding utility bills by
municipal liens.
§ 335-3 VINELAND CODE § 335-4
1:316
Chapter 341
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 300.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 630.
§ 341-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
APPLICANT — Any public or private utility company making written
application to the City Engineer of the City of Vineland for an excavation or
road-opening permit hereunder.
EXCAVATION — The excavation, opening or any other work performed
under a permit and required to be performed under this chapter within the
public right-of-way.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has applied for and been granted and has
in full force and effect a permit issued hereunder.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
municipality, company or organization of any kind.
STREET — Any street, highway, alley, avenue or any other public way or
public ground in the City of Vineland and under control of the City of
Vineland.
§ 341-2. Permit required; emergencies.
A. It shall be unlawful, except in an emergency as set forth in Subsection
B, for any person to engage in any of the following activities unless such
person shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the City
Engineer of the City of Vineland as herein provided:
(1) To dig up, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up
any street or public right-of-way.
(2) To make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface
of any street or public right-of-way for any purpose.
(3) To place, deposit or leave upon any street or public right-of-way any
earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to
interfere with the free use of the street.
(4) To perform any other operation on any street or public right-of-way
which in any manner interferes with or disturbs the surface of such
street or public right-of-way.
§ 335-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-2
1:317
§ 341-3. Application procedure; separate permits.
§ 341-4. Permit issuance.
B. In the event that any sewer main, conduit or other utility installation in
or under any street, alley or public way shall burst, break or otherwise
be in such condition as seriously to endanger persons or property, the
owner of such sewer main, conduit or other installation shall
immediately remedy such trouble and shall immediately take all such
necessary steps to make said location safe and secure. Such owner shall
not, however, begin making permanent repairs to such street or alley
until he shall have secured a permit as hereinafter provided. Such
permit shall be applied for within five working days after such break or
serious trouble shall have developed, and the necessary permanent
repairs to the street, public right-of-way, alley or sidewalk shall be made
as directed by the City Engineer and shall be completed as soon as
practicable, but no longer than 60 days, after receipt of the permit.
C. Any person failing to apply for the permit necessary to perform any of
the activities set forth in this section shall be subject to a penalty as set
forth in § 341-17 of this chapter. [Amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No.
90-79]
A. A written application for the issuance of an excavation permit shall be
submitted to the City Engineer. The application shall state the name
and address of the applicant; the location and dimensions of the
excavation; the purpose of the excavation; the estimated dates of
commencement, completion and restoration of the excavation, which in
no case will exceed a period of six months from date of application; and
such other data as may reasonably be required by the City Engineer.
The City Engineer may authorize an extension of said six-month time
period if there is justifiable cause, i.e., weather conditions, strike or
other unforeseen circumstances.
B. The applicant has the additional responsibility of obtaining a separate
permit in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:170-69.4 to 2A:170-69.6102 when
the proposed excavation is located within 200 feet of a gas pipeline, and
all permits issued by the City Engineer are subject to the issuance of
said separate permit. The applicant is further responsible for
contacting all other local utilities to determine whether any property or
facilities of the utilities are located in the vicinity of the proposed
excavation site, and, if so, the applicant is obligated to comply with
statutes or regulations pertaining thereto.
A. Upon application and payment of the fees and deposits for which
provision is hereinafter made, the City Engineer, in his discretion, may
issue or deny a permit to excavate or open the surface of any street or
102. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:170-69.4 to 2A:170-69.6 were repealed by P.L. 1978, c. 95.
§ 341-2 VINELAND CODE § 341-4
1:318
§ 341-5. Time limitations.
§ 341-6. Conditions of permit.
public right-of-way controlled by the City of Vineland, within two weeks
of receipt.
B. No permit shall be issued for any street or right-of-way for a period of
five years after the completion of any construction or reconstruction to
it, except in an emergency situation, at the discretion of the City
Engineer.
C. No permit shall be issued for any road which has been overlaid with
bituminous concrete for a period of five years after completion of said
overlay, except in an emergency situation or at the discretion of the City
Engineer or the Mayor, as provided in § 341-15 of this chapter.
D. In nonemergency situations, the City Council of the City of Vineland, by
resolution, or the Mayor, pursuant to § 341-15 of this chapter, may
waive the five-year restriction mentioned previously.
E. The City Engineer has the discretionary power, in the case of City
streets which carry exceptionally heavy volumes of traffic, to forbid an
opening or tearing up or excavating of such a road, except in the event
of an emergency situation.
A. Permits shall become null and void unless work is commenced pursuant
to § 341-3A above. The City Engineer may, upon application by the
permittee, extend the time limit during which the permit shall be valid.
B. The applicant shall give a twenty-four-hour notice to the City Engineer
or his duly authorized representative prior to making any road
openings, except in cases of emergency as provided in § 341-2B. No
opening shall be commenced on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, unless
in cases of emergency. If done, inspection must be paid for by the
applicant at a rate set by the City.
A. Transferability. Every permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is
issued and shall not be transferable.
B. Commencement of work. Work under a permit shall commence within
six months as set forth in § 341-3A above. If work is not commenced
within that time, the permit shall automatically terminate, unless
extended in writing by the City Engineer.
C. Possession of permit. A copy of the permit, together with a copy of the
plan endorsed with the approval of the City Engineer, must be available
for inspection at the work site and shall be exhibited on demand to any
duly authorized employee of the City or to any police officer of the City
of Vineland.
§ 341-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-6
1:319
§ 341-7. Application fees and bond requirements. [Amended
8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 97-64]
D. Revocation of permit. The City Engineer may revoke a permit for any of
the following reasons:
(1) Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
rules, regulations, laws or ordinances.
(2) Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
(3) Carrying on work under the permit in a manner which endangers
life or property or which creates any condition which is unhealthy,
unsanitary or declared by any provision of this chapter to
constitute a nuisance.
E. Modification of permit conditions. In a special case, the City Council
may, by resolution, impose special conditions to which the issuance of
the permit may be subject or may decide that any provision of this
chapter shall not apply or shall be altered.
A. Fees must be paid when the application is made. The applicant shall be
charged an application fee of $25 for each permit. In addition to the
application, the applicant shall post inspection fees as follows:
(1) Opening of an improved or unimproved road, opening in the rightof-
way, behind the curb, or opening the unpaved shoulder in a
public right-of-way. An applicant shall post a minimum fee of $50
per road-opening permit and shall be required to sign the
statement to the effect that all reasonable costs by the City
associated with the inspection of a road opening related to the
permit shall be paid upon billing and proof of expenditure of the
costs to the City. In all cases, the minimum road-opening fee shall
be $50. Fees for road-opening permits in excess of $50 shall be
based on § 341-7B.
B. The road-opening-permit fee shall be charged by the City Engineer for
the issuance of a permit, which shall be in addition to all other fees for
permits or charges relative to any proposed construction work. The
permit fee shall be in an amount varying with the size of the road
opening and roadway typical section, as follows:
(1) Size of trench opening.
(a) First 16 square feet: $50.
(b) Greater than 16 square feet but less than or equal to 50 square
feet: $100
(c) For every square foot of opening greater than 50 square feet,
the fee shall be $1 per square foot.
(2) Curb and gutter installation permits.
§ 341-6 VINELAND CODE § 341-7
1:320
(a) Zero to 100 feet: $50.
(b) For every one-hundred-foot increment beyond 100 feet, an
additional fee of $25 is charged.
(3) Burial cable.
(a) Fees.
[1] Up to 1,500 feet: $50.
[2] Over 1,500 feet: $75 plus $10 for every 1,000 feet
thereafter.
(b) The fees apply to cables a maximum width of six inches in
shoulder. For cables of greater widths, trench fees apply.
(4) Maximum.
(a) Maximum road-opening-permit fees shall be based on a cap,
set by the City Engineer, as follows:
[1] Trench opening: $500.
[2] Curb and gutter installation: $500.
[3] Burial cable: $500.
(b) The maximum road-opening-permit-fee cap may be adjusted
based on special circumstances impacting the project, which
fee shall then be established by the City Engineer.
C. Performance bond.
(1) No permit shall be issued hereunder prior to the submission of a
performance bond in the amount of $90 per square yard of
excavation. This performance bond shall serve to guarantee that
the road openings will be properly closed and that the road, street
or highway will be satisfactorily reconstructed.
(2) In the alternative, a certified check in the same amount shall be
provided with the application.
D. Maintenance bond.
(1) A maintenance bond shall be posted prior to the release of the
performance bond. The maintenance bond shall be equal to 10% of
the performance bond. This maintenance bond will remain in effect
for a period of two years. This bond may be in the form of a surety
bond, cashier's check or certified check. The purpose of the
maintenance bond is to guarantee to the City of Vineland that the
permittee will satisfactorily maintain the construction, excavation
or road opening for a period of two years.
§ 341-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-7
1:321
§ 341-8. Liability.
The applicant, upon securing said permit, agrees that the City of Vineland,
its officers, employees and agents will be saved harmless from any and all
claims of any nature arising out of the construction of road- and streetopening
work covered by said permit and, further, that the City of Vineland,
in issuing said permit, shall not assume the liability in connection therewith.
In the event of any suit or claim against the City of Vineland by reason of
the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the City's giving written
notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against
the City requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the
permittee, and the permittee shall be liable for the City's costs, together
with attorneys' fees, in connection with such suits.
§ 341-9. Insurance requirements.
(2) A maintenance bond will not be required if the final restoration is
done by the county.
E. A utility company may, in lieu of giving a separate bond for each project,
annually in January of each year, post a performance bond or a
corporate bond in an amount sufficient to encompass the estimated
work to be performed by said company during the calendar year;
provided, however, that when the openings of trenches exceed the
amount of the bond posted, additional bonds and/or cash security will
be required. Bonds which are based on automatic renewal shall state
the renewal date with the certificate of renewal filed with the City.
F. A utility company or authority may also name the City as a coholder of
its performance and maintenance bonds, provided that they are of
greater or equal value, in projects done by an outside contractor.
G. All checks and bonds under this chapter shall be submitted to the City
Engineer and shall be made payable to the City of Vineland. Cash will
not be accepted. The City of Vineland will hold performance bonds until
final inspection and maintenance bonds for two years after final
acceptance.
A. Prior to performing any work under the permit, the permittee shall
deliver to the City Engineer a certificate of insurance in the sum of not
less than $1,000,000 combined single limit bodily injury and property
damage liability or a split limit of liability in the amount of $1,000,000
bodily injury and $1,000,000 property damage. The certificate of
insurance should also indicate that bodily injury and property damage
liability coverage is provided for products liability and/or completed
operations. Where applicable, the permittee shall demonstrate that the
explosion, collapse and underground exclusion has been removed from
its insurance policy. The insurance carrier will not cancel said insurance
without giving the City of Vineland at least 20 days' notice thereof in
writing. The insurance policy must remain in effect for a two-year
period following completion or be no less than coextensive with the life
§ 341-7 VINELAND CODE § 341-9
1:322
§ 341-10. Traffic; lights and barricades.
of the performance bond. Further, the City Inspector shall sign a
certificate of satisfactory completion. However, said certificate shall not
nullify the above bond conditions.
B. On projects done by outside contractors where a utility company or
authority is requiring a certificate of insurance greater than or equal to
the City's requirements, the contractor's policy must name the City as
an additional insured.
A. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that, during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as nearly
normal as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as
little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting
property and to the general public. The permittee shall keep all street
openings guarded at all times and shall have lights, barriers and
adequate safety devices as described in the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices maintained throughout the performance of the work,
and no greater part of any road shall be opened than that specified in
the permit.
B. All persons, firms or corporations granted a permit to make an
excavation, opening or trench in the public streets and highways of the
City shall, at all times, maintain suitable barricades and guards, display
proper warning signals and flags, in accordance with the current
edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, or any
supplemental or amendments thereto, and provide all necessary
watchmen to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the
work. Such barricades shall be protected by sufficient lights at
nighttime. Streets and highways must be kept open for traffic at all
times except when otherwise ordered or approved by the City Engineer
or Chief of Police. All excavations remaining open overnight shall be
further protected by an enclosure consisting of, as a minimum, a snow
fence. This regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any
other precaution reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or
property and shall not be deemed as authorization to leave a street
open when ordered to do otherwise by the City Engineer.
C. All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No public right-of-way
shall be closed to traffic without the prior consent of the City Engineer
and unless the closing is approved by the Director of Public Safety. The
Police Department shall be informed of all street closings at least 48
hours in advance. In the event that a road is closed, uniformed police
may be required to act as traffic directors, and the proper traffic control
devices shall be erected and maintained in accordance with standards
described in the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, as published by the Federal Highway Administration. The
permittee desiring to close a road to traffic shall also notify the Fire
§ 341-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-10
1:323
§ 341-11. Safety protections.
The following measures shall be taken to ensure the safety and protection
of the traveling public:
§ 341-12. Excavation and restoration specifications.
Department, school board and postal service. The permittee shall pay
for all costs associated with uniformed police service.103
D. Where flagmen are deemed necessary, they shall be furnished by the
permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained
without the aid of detours, and in the instances in which this would not
be feasible, the City Engineer will designate detours. The City shall
maintain roadway surfaces of existing roadways designated as detours
without expense to the permittee, but in case there are not existing
roadways, the permittee shall construct all detours at its own expense
and in conformity with the specifications of the City Engineer.
E. The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants, utility valves and
maintenance. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15
feet of fireplugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or fire-fighting
equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions.
A. Any portions of work areas not closed to traffic must be temporarily
patched with cold patch a minimum of two inches thick and properly
maintained until final paving is installed.
B. The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barriers to confine
earth from trenches or other excavations in order to encroach upon
roadways as little as possible.
C. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings
over excavations and across highways under improvement to
accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street
intersections.
D. The permittee must call the New Jersey Utility Opening Service at (800)
272-1000 and obtain clearances before beginning excavation.
E. It is urged that all utilities be constructed with a minimum of three feet
of cover to provide protection for the utilities in the event that future
City street or public right-of-way reconstruction, repair or modifications
necessitate excavation, undercutting or installation of facilities in the
area where the utility is located. This location will in no way relieve the
utility owner of the responsibility of relocating said utility at said utility
owner's expense in case of conflict with future construction,
reconstruction or modification of City-related facilities.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 341-10 VINELAND CODE § 341-12
1:324
A. All work shall be governed by the New Jersey State Department of
Transportation 1983 Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, with all amendments and supplements except as
supplemented herein.
B. No work shall be done in such a manner as to interfere with any water
main or sewer line or any connection with either of the same from any
building, unless that is the purpose of the excavation or permission has
been obtained in advance from the City Engineer. No work shall be
carried on in such a manner as to result in damage or destruction of any
property of the City of Vineland, unless this is necessary for completion
of the work and permission has been obtained in advance from the City
Engineer.
C. For all openings:
(1) The paved roadway surfaces shall be cut vertically with a sharp tool
on a straight line before excavating. The edges of the opening shall
be as square and clean cut as possible.
(2) The material excavated from the trench opening shall not be
replaced as backfill unless specifically permitted by the City
Engineer.
(3) All excavations shall be completely backfilled by the permittee and
shall be compacted by tamping or other suitable means in a manner
prescribed by the City Engineer. Where the City Engineer
determines that the excavated material is unsuitable for backfill,
the permittee shall backfill the excavation with sand, cinders or
other suitable material, which shall be placed in layers (not
exceeding six inches in depth) and thoroughly compacted in the
manner prescribed by the Engineer. Upon completion of the work,
the permittee shall remove any excess material and leave the
premises in a clean condition. If the Engineer determines that any
backfilled excavation has settled or caved in, he shall notify the
permittee, who shall promptly continue backfilling until the
Engineer determines that settlement is complete.
(4) Clean granular backfill shall be furnished from outside sources and
deposited in layers and compacted in such a manner and by such
matters as to achieve ninety-five-percent standard proctor density
throughout the entire backfill.
(5) If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled
with rammed concrete or pressure-grouted.
(6) The uncompleted length of a road opening allowed under a permit
at any one time shall not exceed 50 linear feet, unless approved by
the City Engineer.
(7) All openings must be backfilled immediately and final pavement
restored between 30 and 90 days.
§ 341-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-12
1:325
(8) All openings in roadside areas shall be backfilled and leveled with
clean granular material to within four inches of the adjacent grade.
After proper settlement, four inches of topsoil shall be placed and
the area fertilized and seeded. Mulching shall also be placed when
directed by the City Engineer. Should proper growth not be
achieved, the area will be reseeded as necessary.
(9) Road openings and/or trenches involving unusual or special
conditions shall be restored in accordance with and pursuant to the
direction of the City Engineer.
(10) Any opening or restoration procedure which is not in conformance
with the technical specifications listed in this chapter must be
approved by the City Engineer.
(11) Upon completion of work, the applicant will request a final
inspection by the City Engineer. If work is completed in a
satisfactory manner, a certificate of satisfactory completion will be
signed. Upon the signing of this certificate and the delivery of a
maintenance guaranty to the City Engineer, the performance
guaranty will be returned.
(12) In any case where the contractor has not complied with these
regulations to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, the Engineer,
without notice, may cause the work to be done, and the cost shall
be charged against the bonding company.
(13) Where openings are made in a roadway, disturbing more than 25%
of the roadway, the entire roadway width shall be overlaid with a
two-inch and variable thickness of FABC-1, Mix 5, pavement
applied to the entire length of the disturbed area and rolled in place
to obtain a smooth pavement surface.
(14) The City Engineer may, in his discretion, waive the paving of the
entire roadway in cases where less than 50% of the roadway is
disturbed.
(15) All traffic control devices, i.e., signs, stripes, etc., removed as a
result of said permittee's street opening shall be replaced in
conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, upon final restoration.
(16) All excess of excavated materials on any street shall be promptly
removed from the street by the person, firm or corporation
receiving the permit.
(17) Dewatering.
(a) The contractor shall furnish sufficient pumping equipment at
his own expense for satisfactory drainage whenever needed in
the trench and other excavations during the progress of the
work.
§ 341-12 VINELAND CODE § 341-12
1:326
§ 341-13. Temporary and final restoration.
(b) All water pumped and bailed from the trench or other
excavation shall be conveyed in a proper manner to a suitable
point of discharge.
(c) The flow in all sewers, drains and watercourses encountered
on the work, and in gutters alongside of or across the work
shall be entirely provided for, both temporarily and
permanently, as required, by the contractor and at his expense.
(d) Hay bales or other methods approved by the Soil Conservation
Service shall be placed at inlets to prevent sand and silt
infiltration.
A. Temporary restoration.
(1) Temporary restoration shall consist of a two-inch minimum
compacted depth of bituminous cold-patch material placed on the
base material, brought to adjacent existing grade, and shall be
maintained by the permittee. During the months when hot-mix
bituminous concrete is commercially unavailable, the trench or
excavation shall be restored using 10 inches of gravel subbase and
two inches of cold-mix bituminous concrete, RR102-Fine, or its
equal. The contractor shall, to the satisfaction of the Engineer or
his designated representative, maintain the surface of the trench
until permanent restoration is made.
(2) No permittee shall commence the final restoration of any street
foundation or surface until the settlement of the subsurface is
complete and the area is properly prepared for final restoration.
Should settlement continue to be inadequate, the City Engineer
shall determine when the work is acceptable for final restoration.
B. Final restoration of oil and stone roadways.
(1) For openings in gravel and oil and stone roads, clean granular
backfill shall be added. Eight inches of road gravel (soil aggregate
Type 1-5) shall then be added to a level 10 inches minimum below
the level of the adjacent paved surfaces. A two-inch minimum depth
of cold patch shall be placed on the base material as temporary
restoration only.
(2) The permittee shall perform the final restoration by removing the
two-inch patch and replacing it with FABC-1, Mix-5, rolled in place
to obtain a smooth pavement surface. All joints between the new
and existing pavements shall be saw cut and sealed with a tack
coat.
C. Asphalt pavement restoration, final.
§ 341-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-13
1:327
§ 341-14. Inspection.
(1) As to asphalt pavements, before placing the base course, the
opening shall be cut back six inches beyond the perimeter of the
trench opening and a tack coat applied to all joints. The tack coat
shall be asphaltic oil Grade RC-0 or emulsified asphalt 2S-2 or
equal. At least one foot of backfill shall be quarry blend, except
high-pressure liquids, i.e., water mains or services, where eight
inches of compacted gravel (soil aggregate Type 1-5) will be
acceptable. Where the existing pavement depth is greater than two
inches, the layer of crushed stone [1 1/2 inches (quarry blend)]
shall be installed at a twelve-inch depth between the gravel and
bituminous stabilized base course to obtain a minimum depth for
four inches bituminous stabilized base course (I-2 or I-3)
conforming to the standard specifications of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
(2) For openings in newly constructed or reconstructed (five years old
or less) pavements, a four-inch minimum final layer of bituminous
stabilized base (I-2 or I-3) course shall be required on all openings
and two inches FABC surface course (I-4 or I-5) as specified in the
standard specifications of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
(3) For openings in concrete or asphalt overlays on concrete,
reinforced Class C concrete shall be installed at a minimum
thickness of six inches or whatever is existing, whichever is
greater. The concrete shall be doweled into existing concrete with
No. 6 rebars 12 inches O.C. in all directions. If an asphalt overlay
existed over the concrete, then the identical thickness of
bituminous stabilized base course shall be placed over any new
concrete repairs.
D. If the work is not completed within the time specified in the permit or
any extension granted by the City Engineer or is not performed in
accordance with the regulations set forth in this section and any other
regulations that may be established by the City Engineer, then the City
may complete the work itself and restore the surface of the street. The
cost of completing the work and restoring the street shall be charged to
the permittee and may be recovered without limit by an action in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
E. The applicant shall have 24 hours to effectuate repairs to any opening
when notified by the City Engineer. Prior to final restoration, should the
applicant fail to make repairs, repairs will be made by the City, and all
costs of said repair shall be borne by the applicant. If payment is not
made, the City will notify the applicant of its intent to file against the
bond.
§ 341-13 VINELAND CODE § 341-14
1:328
§ 341-15. Penalty charge for opening newly paved street; example.
§ 341-16. Exceptions.
A. If more than three individual holes are required within a twenty-foot
length, a single trench must be used rather than the individual holes. In
no case will more than three individual holes be permitted.
B. The City shall periodically inspect all road openings and the repair and
resurfacing thereof for the purpose of determining compliance with any
conditions imposed on the issuance of the permit and the specifications.
The City may, upon the recommendation of its inspector:
(1) Order a temporary stop to any road opening.
(2) Order that the applicant perform or correct specified work in
accordance with the directions of the City Engineer.
(3) Order a stop to any work and revoke the permit, in which event the
City shall complete or cause to be completed the work and declare
the applicant's cash deposit forfeit or notify the applicant's surety
of an intent to file claim on the bond.
(4) Correct any work after notification to the applicant and the neglect
or the refusal of the applicant to make corrections as indicated and,
upon doing so, declare the applicant's cash bond forfeit or notify
the applicant's surety of an intent to file a claim on the bond.
(5) Take any other action deemed reasonable under the circumstances.
A. If, by special permission of the Mayor or his designee, a permit is issued
to open any paved or improved street surface less than five years old, a
penalty charge shall be made for the opening, except that the penalty
shall be waived in the event that the work is of an emergency nature.
The penalty charge shall be equal to 2% of the cost of restoring the
opening for each unelapsed month or fraction thereof for the five-year
restriction period.
B. Example. For an opening made with 55 months left on the moratorium,
the total permit fee shall be calculated as follows:
Cost of opening: $975.
Penalty fee: (2% x 55 months) x $975 = $1,072.50
Penalty fee: $1,072.50
Cost of opening: $975.00
Application fee: $15.00
Total permit fee: $2,062.50
A. The terms of this chapter shall not apply to a road, street, avenue,
highway or right-of-way within any subdivision approved by the
§ 341-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-16
1:329
§ 341-17. Violations and penalties; future permits.
Chapter 350
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Landis Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 80.
Drainage systems — See Ch. 320.
Sewers — See Ch. 585.
Taxation — See Ch. 647.
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
Water — See Ch. 710.
appropriate governmental bodies prior to the City of Vineland having
accepted the same for maintenance.
B. In an appropriate case of an application of a public utility for the
installation, removal, replacement or maintenance of utility poles in the
right-of-way where the cartway will not be disturbed, damaged or
substantially affected and where said activities will not create,
constitute or result in a hazard or conditions detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare, the City Engineer or his designee may waive
compliance by said utility with the terms of this chapter as may be
deemed inappropriate to the accomplishment of the intent and
purposes of this chapter.
C. The City Engineer or his designee may waive compliance with any of
the terms of this chapter in the case of an application by a federal,
state, county or municipal governmental body, department, agency or
authority.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.104
B. The municipality may withhold issuance of future permits if the
applicant has failed to restore prior street openings in compliance with
this chapter.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 341-16 VINELAND CODE § 341-17
1:330
ARTICLE I
Records of Vital Statistics
[Adopted 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. 1227; amended in its entirety
5-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
§ 350-1. Establishment of fees. [Amended 7-31-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-41]
The fees to be charged by the Registrar of Vital Statistics shall be as follows:
A. Certified copies of birth certificates, marriage certificates, civil union
certificates and domestic partnership certificates: $20.
B. Death certificates.
(1) Certified copies of death certificates: $25.
(2) Each additional copy of death certificate, provided they are ordered
at the same time: $2.
C. Corrections of vital certificates: $20.
§ 350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-1
1:331

ARTICLE II
Water and Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 87-32; amended in its entirety
7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-57 (Ch. 245, Art. II, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 350-2. Standards adopted by reference. [Amended 8-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-53]
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A, a certain document, on file in the office of the
Clerk of the City of Vineland, being marked and designated as the
"Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewerage Disposal Systems," be and
the same is hereby adopted as herein provided, and each and all provisions
of the Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewerage Disposal Systems are
hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein as
currently enacted and as may be amended.
A. The Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
previously adopted above are hereby amended to include the following
definitions:
ALTERATION (MAJOR) — An alteration as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A
that requires the certification of a New Jersey licensed professional
engineer prior to the administrative authority's issuance of an approval
to construct or alter.
ALTERATION (MINOR) — An alteration as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A that
does not require the certification of a New Jersey licensed professional
engineer prior to the administrative authority's issuance of an approval
to construct or alter.
REPAIR (MAJOR) — A repair as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A that requires
the certification of a New Jersey licensed professional engineer prior to
the administrative authority's issuance of an approval to construct or
alter.
REPAIR (MINOR) — A repair as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A that does not
require the certification a New Jersey licensed professional engineer
prior to the administrative authority's issuance of an approval to
construct or alter.
B. The Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
previously adopted above are hereby amended to include the following;
(1) The only filter material approved for use in individual subsurface
sewage disposal systems, including seepage pits, is Jersey washed
stone meeting the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9a-10.3(e).
(2) All new seepage pits installed after the effective date of this section
shall have watertight, locked or bolted cast iron lids elevated to
final grade by the use of watertight concrete risers.
(3) Existing concrete seepage pits associated with existing structures
shall be retrofitted with watertight, locked or bolted cast iron lids
§ 350-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-2
1:333
§ 350-3. Administrative authority.
The City of Vineland Department of Health shall be designated as the
administrative authority having jurisdiction over the subject matter in this
article pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A.
§ 350-4. Review of water supply system plans. [Amended 5-8-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-21105]
Fees to review plans are as follows:
Fee
Type of System Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
Replacement $155 $240 $320
New system $155 $240 $320
elevated to existing grade using watertight concrete risers
whenever the seepage pit or any component thereof is repaired,
replaced, altered or is no longer compliant with the conditions
upon which it was approved; or when lack of maintenance results
in an unsafe condition as determined by the Health Department.
(4) All seepage pits installed in Vineland must have a minimum of two
feet of filter material installed around the perimeter of pit.
(5) All concrete septic tanks installed in Vineland after the effective
date of this section must have watertight, locked or bolted cast iron
lids, elevated to final grade by the use of watertight concrete risers.
(6) An existing concrete septic tanks shall be retrofitted with a
watertight, locked or bolted cast iron lid, elevated to existing grade
using watertight concrete risers, whenever the lid and/or risers on
the existing septic tank must be repaired or replaced; whenever the
existing septic tank is a component of a system that requires
repairs or alterations to the extent that the services of a New Jersey
licensed professional engineer are required; or whenever lack of
maintenance results in an unsafe condition as determined by the
Health Department.
(7) All inspection ports of individual subsurface sewage disposal
systems must have threaded caps.
(8) All effluent filters installed in individual subsurface sewage
disposal systems must have gas deflectors.
(9) Effluent filters for all new septic tanks shall be a minimum of six
inches in diameter.
105. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that Phase 1 would be effective upon enactment,
Phase 2 would take effect one year after enactment, and Phase 3 would take effect one
year thereafter.
§ 350-2 VINELAND CODE § 350-5
1:334
§ 350-5. Resubmitting water supply system plans.
The fee to resubmit a nonpublic or public noncommunity water supply
plan for review when there are major changes from the original approved
submission shall be $50.
§ 350-6. Reinspecting water supply system.
The fee to reinspect a nonpublic or public noncommunity water supply
system caused by the failure of the permittee or agent to locate, construct
or alter the same in accordance with the permit issued or applicable
standards shall be $50.
§ 350-7. Soil borings and percolation tests. [Amended 5-8-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-21106]
The fee to witness soil profiles or permeability/percolation tests, including
plan review and routine inspection other than as described under § 350-8
below (per individual lot or disposal site), for new systems is as follows:
§ 350-8. Plan review and inspection of septic systems. [Amended
5-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21107; 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-22;
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-53]
§ 350-9. Resubmitting sewage disposal system plans.
The fee for resubmitting individual on-site sewage disposal system plans for
review when plans are returned not certified, due to noncompliance with
N.J.A.C. 7:9A or departmental policy or due to any changes from the original
approved submission, shall be $100.
A. Phase 1: $370.
B. Phase 2: $535.
C. Phase 3: $700.
A. The fee for plan review and inspection of replacement systems, major
repairs or major alterations of existing systems shall be $500.
B. The fee for minor repair or minor alterations shall be as follows:
(1) Minor repairs/alterations: $150.
(2) On-site system inspection report review: $100.
106. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that Phase 1 would be effective upon enactment,
Phase 2 would take effect one year after enactment, and Phase 3 would take effect one
year thereafter.
107. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that Phase 1 would be effective upon enactment,
Phase 2 would take effect one year after enactment, and Phase 3 would take effect one
year thereafter.
§ 350-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-10
1:335
§ 350-10. Reinspecting sewage disposal system.
The fee to reinspect an individual sewage disposal system or part thereof
caused by the failure of the permittee or agent to locate, construct or alter
the same in accordance with the permit issued or applicable standards shall
be $100.
§ 350-11. Major subdivision reviews.
The fee to review plans and inspection, including the witnessing of soil
borings or percolation tests, in connection with major subdivision reviews
shall be $100.
§ 350-12. License to operate.
§ 350-13. Inspection report prior to license renewal.
The fee for the sewerage system inspection report conducted by the
administrative authority to renew a license to operate, should the
administrative authority choose to do so, shall be $250.
A. The fee for a license to operate the related individual sewage disposal
system shall be $25.
B. The fee to renew a license to operate the related individual sewage
disposal system shall be $25.
A. The Director of the Department of Health and the Chief Financial
Officer shall review biannually the cost accounting records for services
provided herein and to adjust the fees therefor. [Added 5-8-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-21]
§ 350-10 VINELAND CODE § 350-13
1:336
ARTICLE III
Traffic Offense Discovery Requests
[Adopted 2-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-16 (Ch. 245, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 350-14. Application processing fee. [Amended 8-13-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-59; 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 97-70; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No.
99-85]
The discovery application processing fee be and the same is hereby set
at $25 per document, regardless of the volume of pages therein, as
reimbursement to the City for producing the work product, i.e., the
discovery document.
§ 350-15. Exception.
All individuals designated as "indigent" by the Municipal Court shall not
have to pay the discovery application processing fee.
§ 350-16. Establishment of fiscal procedures.
The fiscal procedures for handling of said financial transaction shall be
established by the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Vineland to assure
appropriate documentation for auditing purposes.
§ 350-17. Filing of copies.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Municipal Court and
Prosecutor, with the Municipal Court Judge and with the Vineland Police
Department.
§ 350-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-17
1:337

ARTICLE IV
Duplicate Redemption Certificates
[Adopted 7-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-64 (Ch. 245, Art. V, of the
1990 Code); amended in its entirety 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-27]
§ 350-18. Fee established.
A. The tax collector shall provide to any party entitled to redeem a
certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 54:5-54 two calculations of the amount
required for redemption within a calendar year at no cost.
B. A fee of $50 is hereby established for each subsequent calculation
requested of the tax collector. A request for a redemption calculation
shall be made in writing to the tax collector specifying the date to be
used for the calculation, which shall be the date of the notice.
C. Neither the tax collector or the City of Vineland shall be liable for an
incorrect calculation. The fee paid to the City of Vineland shall not
become part of the lien and shall not be passed on to any party entitled
to redeem pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 54:5-54.
§ 350-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-18
1:339

ARTICLE V
Duplicate Tax Bills
[Adopted 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-93 (Ch. 245, Art. VI, of the
1990 Code); amended in its entirety 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No.2009-68]
§ 350-19. Fee established.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:4-64, the Tax Collector of the City
of Vineland shall charge and collect the following for the preparation of
duplicate tax bills:
A. Five dollars for the first duplicate copy.
B. Twenty-five dollars for each additional duplicate copy requested during
the same tax year.
§ 350-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-19
1:341

ARTICLE VI
Emergency Medical Service Records
[Adopted 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-94 (Ch. 245, Art. VII, of the
1990 Code); amended in its entirety 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No.2009-68]
§ 350-20. Fee established.
For each request for emergency medical service (EMS) records issued by
the City of Vineland, a fee shall be charged as follows:
A. First page to 10th page: $0.75 per page.
B. Eleventh page to 20th page: $0.50 per page.
C. All pages over 20: $0.25 per page.
§ 350-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-20
1:343
Chapter 358
FIREARMS
§ 358-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted as a measure to safeguard the residents of the City
of Vineland and to protect their property.
§ 358-2. Discharge restricted. [Amended 12-2-1952 by Ord. No. 43;
7-26-1983 by Ord. No. 83-21; 8-13-1985 by Ord. No. 85-33]
A. No person shall, at any time, fire or discharge or cause to be fired or
discharged any firearm within the limits of the City of Vineland, except
as otherwise set forth in this section. For purposes of this chapter,
firearms shall include any handgun, rifle, shotgun, machine gun or any
other weapon by which a projectile is propelled through the combustion
of gunpowder.
B. This section shall not apply to a duly licensed hunter or trapper while
actively engaged in the sport of hunting or trapping or to farmers or
other persons acting pursuant to the authority of Title 23 of the laws of
the State of New Jersey or the regulations enacted pursuant to Title 23
or to any person acting under the authority of any other state law or
regulation, provided that no such hunter, trapper, farmer or other
person shall, at any time, fire or discharge or cause to be fired or
discharged any firearm as defined herein within 450 feet of any
occupied dwelling, public or private school, public playground or
public, commercial or industrial building, nor shall any such person
discharge any firearm upon or across any state, county or municipal
road or highway. This subsection shall not prohibit a person from
hunting within 450 feet of his own dwelling or within 450 feet of a
residential, commercial or industrial building, provided that such
person has first obtained written permission from the owner of said
building, authorizing him to discharge a firearm within 450 feet of such
building.
C. This section shall not apply to any federal, state, county or municipal
police officer or other duly appointed or elected law enforcement
officials or to members of the Armed Forces of the United States or of
the National Guard when the firing or discharging of a firearm occurs in
the actual performance of their official duties.
D. This section shall not apply to the firing or discharging of firearms
under the following circumstances:
(1) The use of a firearm for the protection of life, for the protection of
persons against bodily injury or for the protection of property.
(2) The firing or discharging of a pistol or rifle at a range equipped
with proper safeguards for the protection of life and property and
§ 350-20 VINELAND CODE § 358-2
1:344
§ 358-3. Area where use of firearms prohibited. [Amended
8-11-1970 by Ord. No. 766; 12-22-1970 by Ord. No. 784; 8-13-1985
by Ord. No. 85-33]
No person or persons shall hunt with a firearm as defined in § 358-2 above
within the following area of the City of Vineland, County of Cumberland
and State of New Jersey, bounded and described as follows: beginning at
a point at the intersection of the centers of Becker Drive and Oak Road
and extending westwardly along the center of Oak Road to the center of
Delsea Drive; thence along the center of Delsea Drive southwardly to the
center of Almond Road; thence along the center of Almond Road westwardly
to the center of Orchard Road; thence along the center of Orchard Road
southwardly to the center of Chestnut Avenue; thence along the center of
Chestnut Avenue eastwardly to the center of Delsea Drive; thence along the
center of Delsea Drive southwardly to the center of Walnut Road; thence
along the center of Walnut Road eastwardly to the center of Spring Road;
thence northwardly along the center of Spring Road to the center of Maple
Avenue; thence along the center of Maple Avenue westwardly to the center
of Becker Drive; thence along the center of Becker Drive northwardly to the
center of Oak Road and the point and place of beginning.
§ 358-4. Discharge by licensed persons. [Amended 12-2-1952 by
Ord. No. 43]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall hold a license issued by the State
of New Jersey or a federal license for the sale and dealing of firearms shall
be permitted to discharge firearms on his or their property, trying the same
for prospective purchasers.
operated by any person, organization or group organized for target
practice, provided that said pistol or rifle range is inspected yearly
and declared safe, in writing, by the Police Department of the City
of Vineland and that the operator of said range obtains liability
insurance with limits of not less than $500,000, in which the City of
Vineland is named as an additional insured, and provided, further,
that, in the event that such pistol or rifle range is open to the
general public or used for commercial purposes, its use shall be in
compliance with the Land Use Law of the City of Vineland108 or the
subject of a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(3) The firing or discharging of a shotgun by the owner or lessee of the
property for the purpose of target practice or trap shooting,
provided that the pellets from such firing or discharge cannot cross
over the property line on which the discharge of the weapon
occurs, and provided, further, that the firing or discharge of such
shotgun can be accomplished without undue risk to the person or
property of another.
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use.
§ 358-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-5
1:345
§ 358-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-1983 by Ord. No.
83-2; 8-13-1985 by Ord. No. 85-33109]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 362
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 362-1. Limitations on payment of claims.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq., no insurance company
authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey shall
pay any claims in excess of $2,500 on any real property located within
the City of Vineland unless or until the insured person submits to such
company an official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-12, certifying that all taxes, assessments or other municipal
liens or charges levied and assessed and due and payable against such
property have been paid, or unless or until the City of Vineland submits to
such company a certified copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to § 362-4
of this chapter. Search fees shall be paid by the insured.
§ 362-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any fire insurance policy
issued or renewed after the effective date hereof and after the filing of this
chapter with the State Commissioner of Insurance.
§ 362-3. Responsibility of insurance company.
With respect to fire damage claims in excess of $2,500 on any real property
located in the City of Vineland, the company to whom such claim is
submitted is hereby authorized and required, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-9,
to pay to the City of Vineland the amount of the liens appearing on the
official certificate of search for municipal liens prepared pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-12 and such other recorded liens or related charges as may be certified
to such company.
§ 362-4. Agreement for payment of municipal charges.
In the event that an agreement is entered into between the City of Vineland
and the owner of a fire-damaged property for payment of delinquent taxes,
assessments and/or municipal charges by installment payments pursuant to
Article VII of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated,
the involved insurance company, on receipt from the City of Vineland of a
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 358-5 VINELAND CODE § 362-4
1:346
certified copy of a resolution of agreement to such effect, may make full
payment on the claim to its insured.
§ 362-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to alter or affect any other remedy
available to the City of Vineland under any other law of the State of New
Jersey.
Chapter 367
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 372.
Parking lots — See Ch. 496.
Other parking restrictions — See Ch. 694.
§ 367-1. Prohibited parking.
No person shall park or stop a motor vehicle in, or in any other manner
obstruct, a properly designated fire lane, fire hydrant or Fire Department
connection. This shall apply to any public street, private street or access
lane.
§ 367-2. Enforcement.
§ 367-3. Fire lane locations.
All fire lane locations shall be recorded in a file maintained by the Fire
Prevention Bureau and shall be made available for public inspection. Copies
of said file shall also be located in the City Clerk's office, the Police
Department and the Fire Department.
A. Violations of this chapter or any provision of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.) or the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq.) which pertains to this chapter shall be enforced
by the Fire Prevention Bureau.
B. The Police Department shall assist the Fire Prevention Bureau in
obtaining information on any vehicle in violation of this chapter. The
Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the authority to have any vehicle
found in violation of this chapter impounded at the expense of the
vehicle owner.
§ 362-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-4
1:347
§ 367-4. Curb markings. [Amended 10-12-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-53]
All curbs in a fire lane shall be painted exclusively with yellow traffic
paint that meets the specifications for Type I Pure Drying Yellow Traffic
Paint for road and bridge construction of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation. An approved plan and a color sample must be submitted
to and approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau. Hash marks and curb
markings may be used in lieu of signs, as determined by the Fire Prevention
Bureau.
§ 367-5. Posting and signs. [Amended 10-12-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-53]
§ 367-6. Violations and penalties.
The Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the authority to issue any fine,
penalty or enforcement action as provided for in the Uniform Fire Safety
Act or the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code. Unless another fine, penalty or
enforcement action is expressly provided for by the aforementioned laws,
any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be issued the
following fines:
A. Whenever a fire lane is established on any property, the property owner
shall erect, replace, repair and maintain all fire lane signs and markings
on said property as specified in this section and by the Fire Prevention
Bureau. The property owner shall have 15 days to comply with this
section upon proper notice by the Fire Prevention Bureau. Said notice
shall contain a copy of this section.
B. The underside of any sign erected on a post shall be at least seven feet
from the ground or pavement. The underside of any sign mounted on a
building shall be six feet from the ground or pavement. The spacing
between signs shall be determined by the Fire Prevention Bureau. All
signs, posts and foundations shall be constructed to hold signs and
posts in a proper and permanent position. Signs shall be mounted to
resist swaying in the wind or displacement by vandalism. Sign
dimensions shall be 12 inches by 18 inches. Signs shall be white and
reflective, and all lettering shall be red and reflective. The words "NO
PARKING" shall be 7.5 inches in height, and the words "FIRE LANE"
shall be five inches in height.
A. First offense: $35.
B. Second offense: $100.
C. Third offense: $250.
D. Fourth offense: $500, and vehicle shall be impounded at the expense of
the owner.
§ 367-4 VINELAND CODE § 367-7
1:348
§ 367-7. Appeals.
Any person may appeal a fine, penalty or enforcement action issued under
this chapter by submitting a written hearing request to the City of Vineland
Construction Board of Appeals. The appeal must be filed in writing within 15
days of the date of the fine, penalty or enforcement action and accompanied
with a $50 fee payable to the City of Vineland Construction Board of
Appeals. The appeal shall include the date of the act which is the subject
of the appeal, the name, status and signature of the person submitting the
appeal, the specific violations or other act claimed to be in error, and a
concise statement of the basis for appeal.
Chapter 372
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 56.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 211.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 300.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 362.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 367.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 407.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
Security gates — See Ch. 579.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 609.
§ 367-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-7
1:349

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. 98-42110 (Ch. 256 of the 1990
Code)]
§ 372-1. Definitions. [Added 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-61;
amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-37]
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind that is in control of any building,
structure or facility where a fire alarm system is present.
FALSE/NUISANCE ALARM — [Amended 11-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-57]
FIRE INSPECTOR — A person working under the direction of the Fire
Official who is certified by the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs and appointed or designated to enforce the code by the
appointing authority of a local enforcing agency.[Amended 3-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-15; 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-56]
FIRE OFFICIAL — A person certified by the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs and appointed or designated to direct
An alarm signal from a property eliciting a response by the City of
Vineland Fire Department when such response is not necessary due to:
Mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or improper
maintenance of the alarm.
(1)
(2) Negligence or malicious intent of any alarm user.
A nuisance alarm caused by the alarm user, such as, but not limited
to, bathroom steam or chronic cooking mishaps.
(3)
A.
A false alarm shall not include:
An alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably within the control of
the alarm agency or alarm user.
(1)
The reasonable request by an alarm user for the Fire Department
to investigate an accidental alarm.
(2)
B.
Multiple alarms received by the Fire Department before the system can
be deactivated within a reasonable period of time shall be considered a
single alarm.
C.
110. Editor's Note: This ordinance specifically repealed Ord. Nos. 85-27, 92-9, 96-33, 97-22 and
97-28, former Ch. 256, Fire Prevention, of the 1990 City of Vineland Code.
§ 372-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-1
1:351
the enforcement of the code.[Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15;
11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-56]
LOCAL ENFORCING AGENCY — A municipal agency, fire department, fire
district or county fire official authorized by municipal ordinance to enforce
the act within a specific local jurisdiction.[Amended 11-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-56]
§ 372-2. Local enforcement. [Amended 9-11-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-61]
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.),
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq.) shall be locally
enforced in the City of Vineland.
§ 372-3. Enforcing agency. [Amended 9-11-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-61; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15; 10-10-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-83; 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-56]
The local enforcing agency shall be the City of Vineland Fire Department,
Fire Prevention Bureau, and shall be under the general supervision of the
Chief of the Fire Department and the direct supervision and control of the
Fire Official.
§ 372-4. Applicability.111
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act112
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the City of Vineland,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, except buildings
owned or operated by the federal government, the State of New Jersey and
interstate agencies, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 372-5. Administration. [Amended 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-61;
1-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15;
10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-83]
A. The Director of the Fire Department shall recommend for appointment
the Fire Official, who shall be appointed annually on January 1. The Fire
Official shall serve pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-203 and until
reappointment or replacement. [Amended 11-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-56]
B. The Fire Official shall serve pursuant to the terms of noncompetitive
positions established by the New Jersey Department of Personnel. The
annual salary of the Fire Official shall be $2,500. [Amended
11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-56]
111. Editor's Note: Former § 256-4, Enforcing agency, previously codified in this article, was
repealed 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-61. See now § 372-3.
112. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 372-1 VINELAND CODE § 372-5
1:352
§ 372-6. Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15, 17 and 18 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,113 any
person aggrieved by an order of the local enforcing agency shall have the
right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the City of Vineland.
§ 372-7. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 372-2 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 372-8. Inspections and fees. [Amended 11-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-56]
C. The Director of the Fire Department shall recommend for appointment
such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary for the Fire
Prevention Bureau to properly carry out its responsibilities, who shall
be appointed by the appointing authority pursuant to the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated, Title 11A, Civil Service.
D. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees of the Fire Prevention
Bureau shall be subject to removal by the Director of the Fire
Department for just cause. Any employee to be so removed shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a
designated hearing officer. [Amended 11-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-56]
A. Inspections. In addition to the life-hazard use inspections required
pursuant to the Act, the regulations of the Department of Community
Affairs also require all non-life-hazard use buildings and structures to
be inspected.
B. Registration fees.
(1) Businesses/uses that qualify as a life-hazard use will be assessed an
annual registration fee in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9 by the
New Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
(2) Businesses/uses that are non-life-hazard uses shall be assessed an
annual fire safety registration fee per business and/or use
according to the schedule below (use group as defined in the
Uniform Construction Code):
(a) New initial registration: $50.
(b) Use Group A.
[1] Occupancy of less than 50 persons: $50.
(c) Use Group B.
113. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206, 52:27D-208 and 52:27D-209, respectively.
§ 372-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-8
1:353
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(d) Use Group F.
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(e) Use Group M.
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(f) Use Group S.
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(g) Use Group U.
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(h) Use Group R-1 and R-2 hotels and motels that do not qualify as
a life-hazard use: $100.
(i) Vacant, closed or shuttered commercial buildings.
[1] Under 1,000 square feet: $100.
[2] One thousand square feet or more: $150.
(j) Private communities, such as but not limited to mobile home
parks, gated communities or developments where site
inspections are required for signage, fire hydrants, access,
etc.: $100.
(k) Self-storage facilities: $150. This fee shall include all storage
buildings and office regardless of amount of rental units.
§ 372-8 VINELAND CODE § 372-8
1:354
§ 372-9. Permits; fees; penalties.
§ 372-10. Certificates of smoke detector installation; inspections;
fee. [Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15; 10-10-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-83; 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-35; 11-12-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-73]
(l) Any business that already pays a fee for a permit required
under the Uniform Fire Code shall only be charged a
registration fee of $25.
C. Inspection fees. Any business/use that neither qualifies as a life-hazard
use or fits in a category as outlined under registration fees will be
assessed an inspection fee of $25 at the time the building is inspected.
D. Responsibility. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.2, the landlord and
tenant shall share equal responsibility for any violations, penalties or
fees associated with the enforcement of the fire code.
E. The fee for a certificate of fire code status shall be $25.
F. Applications and fees for non-life-hazard use registrations shall be
processed by the Fire Prevention Bureau.
G. Fire extinguisher training fees: If requested, the City of Vineland Fire
Department shall provide fire extinguisher training to businesses and
business/commercial entities on the proper use of different types of fire
extinguishers. The fee for such service shall be $10 per person with a
minimum session fee of $100. A session shall be limited to not more
than 50 persons per session with a limit of four sessions per day. No fee
shall be charged to any resident of the City of Vineland not associated
with training for businesses and/or business/commercial entities.
[Added 7-31-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-42]
A. Types. In addition to the registration of life-hazard uses, certain
activities and uses are required to be regulated with permits. Defined
activities and uses for each permit type are as specified in the Uniform
Fire Code.
B. Permit fees. Permit fees shall be as established by the Uniform Fire
Code. Applications and fees for permits shall be processed by the
Department of Fire.
C. Penalties. The City of Vineland shall enforce civil penalties whenever
determined necessary by the Fire Official pursuant to the Uniform Fire
Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code. [Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-15; 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-56]
A. Prior to the sale, lease or other change of occupancy for residential
purposes of any one- or two-family dwelling located in the City of
Vineland, the owner shall obtain a certificate of smoke detector
compliance from the local enforcing agency.
§ 372-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-10
1:355
§ 372-11. Monitored fire alarms. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-37]
Any person or agency responsible for monitoring automatic fire alarm or
fire suppression systems located within the City of Vineland shall
immediately notify the Vineland Fire Department upon activation of said
alarm. Exceptions to Fire Department notification shall be as follows:
B. For completed applications for a certificate of smoke detector
compliance received by the local enforcing agency at least 10 working
days prior to the change of occupant, the fee shall be $35 per
inspection.
C. For each additional inspection conducted at the same location after the
initial inspection, the fee shall be $35 and shall be paid in full prior to
the scheduling of the reinspection.
D. For completed applications for a certificate of smoke detector
compliance received by the local enforcing agency less than 10 working
days prior to the change of occupant, the fee shall be $70 per
inspection.
E. For completed applications for a certificate of smoke detector
compliance received by the local enforcing agency less than four
working days prior to the change of occupant, the fee shall be $125 per
inspection.
F. In extenuating circumstances and only with prior approval of the Fire
Official, the local enforcing agency may accept, in lieu of inspection, an
affidavit that the smoke detector(s) have been installed, tested and are
operational pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code. Such
affidavit shall be on forms provided by the local enforcing agency and
shall be notarized. The fee for such certification shall be $35.
[Amended 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-56]
G. Applications and fees for smoke detector inspections shall be processed
by the local enforcing agency.
H. The above fees apply to one-family dwellings. The applicable fees shall
be doubled for two-family dwellings.
I. In the event a resale of a dwelling occurs without the certificate of
smoke detector compliance being obtained as required herein, any
seller or seller's agent that allows, permits, facilitates or causes such
resale without obtaining a certificate of smoke detector compliance
through a smoke detector inspection shall be fined the sum of $250,
payable to The City of Vineland Fire Prevention Bureau. [Added
11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-58]
A. Verification of a fire alarm is permitted only when a homeowner or
resident promptly communicates to the satisfaction of the monitoring
§ 372-10 VINELAND CODE § 372-11
1:356
§ 372-12. False/nuisance alarms. [Added 6-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-37; amended 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15; 11-22-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-56; 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-57]
agency that a false alarm occurred and provides the appropriate
password or code.
B. Fire drills and routine testing and maintenance being conducted on said
system.
A. The Incident Commander shall prepare a report documenting each
false/nuisance alarm responded to by the Fire Department. If doubt
exists as to the cause of the false/nuisance alarm, the Fire Official or
designee shall determine the circumstances of the activation.
B. The Fire Official shall investigate and keep a record of false/nuisance
alarms responded to by the Fire Department, and the following
penalties shall apply to the person to whom the alarm is issued:
(1) For the first false/nuisance alarm in any twelve-month period, a
warning shall be issued.
(2) For up to three false/nuisance alarms in any twelve-month period, a
fine of $50 for residential and $75 for commercial for each false/
nuisance alarm shall be paid to the City of Vineland.
(3) For over three false/nuisance alarms in any twelve-month period, a
minimum fine of $200 shall be issued. Penalties shall increase in
increments of $100 for subsequent alarms within the twelve-month
period.
C. On new installations, a grace period of 30 days shall be granted prior to
the imposition of any fine to give the user an opportunity to become
familiar with the alarm system.
D. All alarm users, both residential and commercial, shall provide the
monitoring agency with a current list of names and phone numbers of
responsible contact persons available to respond when an alarm is
activated.
E. Authorized representative.
(1) All property owners shall have an authorized representative on
location within 30 minutes of notification of an alarm. This
representative must have access to all areas of the property,
working knowledge of the alarm system, proper passcodes and the
ability to place the system out of service with the alarm monitoring
company if necessary.
(2) If the alarm company is unable to contact a representative, a
written warning will be issued for the first offense and a fine of
$100 for residential and $200 for commercial will be issued for
each subsequent offense.
§ 372-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-12
1:357
§ 372-13. Knox Box system.114
Any business, building or premises which requires or requests the Vineland
Fire Department to make access to said business, building or premises
during times that said location is unoccupied or unattended shall provide
and install a Knox Box of the type and specification provided by the
Department. It shall be a violation of this article for any person not
authorized by the Department to tamper with any component of the Knox
Box system.
§ 372-14. Public water supply for firefighting.
All public water supply projects, either new or replacement, shall be subject
to approval by the Department of Fire with respect to adequate main size
(3) If a representative is contacted but refuses to respond, an
immediate fine of up to $200 will be issued.
(4) It is acceptable at the discretion of the incident commander to
allow a representative who is unable to respond to correct the
situation via telephone with the alarm company if possible. If the
absence of a representative for whatever reason results in
additional dispatches of the City of Vineland Fire Department for
subsequent false/nuisance alarms, those alarms will be met with a
penalty of $100 for residential and $200 for commercial per
occurrence.
F. False alarms by contractors.
(1) Licensed fire protection and alarm contractors who cause false/
nuisance alarms by failing to ensure the systems they are working
on are placed on test mode prior to beginning work shall be issued
a penalty of $200 per offense they commit regardless of address or
location.
(2) If the Fire Prevention Bureau determines that the cause of alarm is
due to the failure of the alarm monitoring company or central
station to take precautions to prevent the transmission of alarms
during testing, maintenance, service, installation, or fire drills, that
monitoring company shall be held responsible and issued a penalty
of $500.
(3) If the Fire Prevention Bureau determines that the cause of alarm is
due to work being performed by a contractor, regardless of trade,
said contractor shall be held responsible and issued a penalty of up
to $500.
G. Anyone found to have tampered with or attempted to unlawfully disable
a fire protection device in a property other than a single-family, owneroccupied
residential dwelling shall be issued a penalty of up to $1,000.
114. Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Knox Box Systems, of this chapter.
§ 372-12 VINELAND CODE § 372-14
1:358
and placement of fire hydrants. No fire hydrant shall be placed in service
or removed from service other than for routine maintenance without the
approval of the Department of Fire. The Vineland Fire Department shall
reference the standards issued by the National Fire Protection Association
in regard to the above approvals.
§ 372-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-14
1:359

ARTICLE II
Knox Box Systems
[Adopted 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-79]
§ 372-15. Purpose.
A Knox-Box Rapid Entry System, hereinafter referred to as "knox box," shall
be installed in various commercial buildings as set forth in this article to
provide emergency responders with immediate access to locked buildings
in emergency situations, thereby greatly reducing the potential for loss of
life and property damage.
§ 372-16. Required installation.
A knox box shall be installed on any commercial building that:
§ 372-17. Gated communities.
Gated communities and other gated areas shall install a "knox key switch"
on their gates to allow emergency responders to raise and lower the gates
as needed.
§ 372-18. Complexes, malls and multisuite buildings.
Business complexes, malls, multisuite buildings that meet the criteria listed
above shall have the option of installing one large knox box to accommodate
all tenants or an individual knox box for each suite.
§ 372-19. New construction.
The Department of Licenses and Inspections shall ensure that any new
construction, tenant fit up, or elevator installation that meets the criteria
listed above install a knox box in accordance with this article prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
A. Is classified as a life hazard use in accordance with the State of New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
B. Is 12,000 square feet or greater.
C. Contains large quantities of hazardous materials.
D. Has an elevator.
E. Has security gates as defined in Chapter 579, Security Gates
(Ordinance No. 2005-49).
F. Has a history of chronic false or nuisance alarms as defined in this
chapter (Ordinance No. 2002-37).
§ 372-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-20
1:361
§ 372-20. Placement and contents.
Prior to installation, the building owner shall meet with a representative
from the Fire Department to determine placement and contents of the knox
box.
§ 372-21. Exceptions.
Should a building owner whose building fits the criteria listed above wish
to not install a knox box system, said owner may submit a letter stating
their reasons to the Fire Prevention Bureau within 10 days of being cited to
install. At that time the Fire Official shall review the situation with the Fire
Chief to determine if a variance is warranted.
§ 372-22. Maintenance and inspection.
§ 372-23. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Prevention Bureau to enforce this article.
The knox box installation shall be sited on the annual business inspection
for each property. If a property owner refuses to comply, a citation will be
issued through the Vineland Municipal Court.
§ 372-24. Compliance schedule.
§ 372-25. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the building owner to ensure the
maintenance of the knox box. Each box will be checked annually by a
representative of the Fire Prevention Bureau or Fire Department.
B. It shall also be the responsibility of the building owner to inform the
Fire Department every time a key needs to be added to or changed from
the knox box.
A. Upon notice from the Fire Prevention Bureau, a building owner shall
have 30 days to order and receive a knox box.
B. Upon receipt of the knox box the building owner shall notify the Fire
Department and make an appointment to determine the placement and
contents of the box.
C. The knox box shall be installed and ready for use no later than 10 days
after meeting with the Fire Department.
D. This timetable may be extended in the case of new construction.
E. The building owner shall not be held responsible for a delay caused by
either the Fire Department or the knox box vendor.
A. Refusal to comply with this article shall be punishable by forfeiture of
no less than $100 and not more than $500 plus court costs.
§ 372-20 VINELAND CODE § 372-25
1:362
B. For each day the violation is not remedied, it shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 372-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-25
1:363
Chapter 386
FREIGHT CARS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 469. Nuisances — See Ch. 473.
§ 386-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON, FIRM or CORPORATION — Any individual, partnership, firm,
association, company, corporation, syndicate or other group or groups or
organizations or unorganized individuals.
§ 386-2. Spread of dust and other noxious substances.
Wherever in the City of Vineland, County of Cumberland and State of New
Jersey, freight cars or other carriers containing coal, sand, gravel, grain and
other substances which, by their nature, contain dust and other noxious
substances are unloaded or loaded by means of blowers, conveyors or any
other type of mechanical device within a distance of 200 yards from the
nearest dwelling, farm, place of business or public building, said blowers,
conveyors and other mechanical devices and trucks shall be so equipped by
proper covering or other devices as to prevent the spread of dust or other
noxious substances from said operation. The spreading of such dust or other
noxious substances is declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 386-3. Mufflers required; noise.
The motors of said blowers, conveyors and other mechanical devices used
in such loading and unloading operation shall be equipped with mufflers
so as to reduce the noise emanating therefrom. The emanating of loud and
unusual noises from such loading and unloading operations is declared to
be a public nuisance.
§ 386-4. Emission of noxious substances.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit or cause
the emission of any dust, gas or other noxious substances from a
manufacturing business or from any source whatever in such place or
manner as to be detrimental to any person or to the public or to endanger
the health, comfort and safety of any such person or of the public or in such
manner as to cause injury or damage to property or business. The emission
of such dust, gas or other noxious substances is declared to be a public
nuisance.
§ 372-25 VINELAND CODE § 386-5
1:364
§ 386-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No.
90-79115]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 391
GAMES OF CHANCE
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 386-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-5
1:365

ARTICLE I
Issuing Authority for Bingo and Raffle Licenses
[Adopted 8-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-64]
§ 391-1. Statutory issuing authority; findings.
§ 391-2. Designation of Clerk as issuing authority.
The Municipal Clerk is designated as the issuing authority to approve and
grant raffle and bingo licenses subject to compliance with N.J.A.C. 13:47-1
et seq.
A. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1, the City Council is the issuing authority
for licenses to perform certain games of chance entitled raffle and
bingo licenses;
B. In as much as formal action of the City Council regularly meets
biweekly, and therefore requests for raffle and bingo licenses which are
typically time-sensitive may not be considered and granted prior to the
date set for the event;
C. N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1 authorizes City Council to designate another
individual as the issuing authority to approve and grant raffle and bingo
licenses; and
D. City Council finds it in the best interest of the City to allow an individual
to issue said licenses, thereby avoiding the necessity of special sessions
of City Council to consider such matters.
E. Games of chance may be conducted in the City of Vineland on the first
day of the week commonly known and designated as "Sunday," in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and N.J.S.A. 5:8-58, as
may be permitted by N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.,
provided that the applicant for the license to conduct such game
otherwise qualifies under the provisions of the aforementioned statutes
of the State of New Jersey and the rules and regulations of the
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission and, specifically,
provided that the organization conducting the games is a charitable,
religious or other organization specifically qualifying under the
provisions of the aforementioned statutes. [Added 1-11-2011 by Ord.
No. 2010-66]
§ 391-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-2
1:367
Chapter 400
GRAFFITI
§ 400-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
hereinafter set forth:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other
establishment which sells or distributes at retail any spray paint or indelible
marker.
GRAFFITI — Any unsightly or offensive writings, drawings, markings or
other written or pictorial matter inscribed or placed by any method or
device upon real or personal property which contributes to the defacement
of such property or which contributes to the ugliness and unsightliness of
the space, area or community in which such property is located or which
is detrimental to the beauty, neatness and good order of the area and
community. This definition shall exclude easily removable chalk markings
on the public sidewalks and streets used in connection with traditional
children's games.
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tip marker, china marker or similar device
that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface 1/2
inch or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PERSON — Any individual, whether or not a minor, who defaces or
otherwise damages the property of another by inscribing graffiti thereon.
§ 400-2. Prohibited conduct.
A. No person shall write, paint or place with ink, paint, chalk or any other
substance or otherwise mark, scratch, carve or etch graffiti on the real
or personal property of another, whether said real or personal property
is publicly or privately owned, unless the owners of said property shall
have, prior to such writing, painting or placing of graffiti thereon,
specifically consented to the same.
B. No business entity shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray-paint
container or indelible marker to a minor, unless said minor is
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian at the time of purchase or
transfer.
C. No minor shall, at the time of purchase of items specified in § 400-2B
above, knowingly furnish false or fraudulent evidence of majority,
including but not limited to a motor vehicle operator's license, a
registration certificate issued by the Federal Selective Service Act, an
identification card issued to a member of the armed forces or any other
document issued by a federal, state or municipal government or any
private corporation or company.
§ 391-2 VINELAND CODE § 400-3
1:368
§ 400-3. Violations and penalties.116
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, General Penalty. As an alternative to fine or imprisonment, the governing
body of the City of Vineland hereby requests the Municipal Court to use
whatever legal discretion it may have to order the offender to remove
graffiti from public or private property which has been damaged or defaced
so as to restore the damaged property to the condition it was in prior
to being damaged or to make monetary restitution which will allow the
restoration of said property to its original, undamaged condition.
§ 400-4. Parental responsibility.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-15, any parent, guardian or other person having
legal custody of a minor under the age of 18 years who fails or neglects to
exercise reasonable supervision and control of such minor shall be liable in
a civil action for any destruction or damage caused by such minor offender
under § 400-2A above.
§ 400-5. Prosecution of minors.
If, at the time of the offense charged, any person shall be a minor as
defined hereunder, the authority enforcing this chapter shall refer charges
brought against such minor to the Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court or
the Family Court of the County of Cumberland, and the case, including all
papers and process thereto, shall be transferred to said Court as provided
by N.J.S.A. 2C:4-11.
Chapter 407
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 36.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 400-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5
1:369

ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Cleanup
[Adopted 1-8-1991 by Ord. No. 90-117 (Ch. 288, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 407-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Vineland Hazardous Materials
Cleanup Reimbursement Ordinance."
§ 407-2. Authority.
This article is being adopted pursuant to the County Environmental Health
Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.), the County Environmental Health
Standards of Administrative Procedure and Performance (N.J.A.C. 7:1H-1.1
et seq.), the Solid Waste Management Act (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.), the
Abatement of Nuisances Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3-45 et seq.), and under the terms
of the interagency agreement between the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Solid Waste Management, and the
City of Vineland Department of Health.
§ 407-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENTS — "Agents" of the City of Vineland shall include, but not be limited
to, the employees and staff of the City of Vineland Department of Health;
the employees and the staff of the City of Vineland Office of Emergency
Management; Municipal Fire Department responding to any spill; municipal
ambulance and rescue services responding to any spill and any individual,
partnership, corporation or other entity, whether or not a state, county or
municipal agency or private concern, that the City of Vineland Department
of Health uses in any way to aid the City of Vineland in the control or
cleanup of the spillage or discharge of hazardous materials.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping of hazardous substances onto the lands within the Department of
Health's jurisdiction and/or into the waters and sewers/storm sewers which
flow within or into the jurisdiction of the City of Vineland.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish or prevent any fire or
stop or contain any leak, release or spill involving any hazardous material or
in the decontamination of any equipment, vehicles, clothing, structures or
appurtenances, which cannot be reused or cannot be replenished without
cost after that particular incident. These expendable items include, but are
not limited to, fire fighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent
materials, sand, recovery drums and any protective equipment and clothing,
to include but not restricted to chemical protective suits, chemical
protective gloves, goggles and any other item owned or controlled by the
§ 407-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 407-3
1:371
Department of Health or its employees, agents, officers and/or officials. It is
expressly provided that this provision will only apply to the extent necessary
to deal with hazardous materials.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as
such under the National Fire Protection Association Guide of Hazardous
Materials, the Department of Transportation Guidebook, the list of
hazardous substances adopted by the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
Amendment of 1972, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and the list of toxic pollutants designated by Congress or the
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 307 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act.
NONEXPENDABLE ITEMS — This article shall provide for the
reimbursement of expenses incurred for the repair/replacement of
nonexpendable items used during fire extinguishment or the prevention
of any fire or to stop or contain any leak, release or spill involving any
hazardous materials, which prevents the item(s) being reused due to the
incident. These items shall include, but not be limited to, fire apparatus,
other vehicles, equipment and appliances.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to a passenger car, motorcycle, truck, tractor
trailer, construction equipment, farm machinery and watercraft, boats or
barges and airplanes or other aircraft.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box cylinder or tank used to hold or contain
or carry or store any hazardous materials.
§ 407-4. Purpose.
§ 407-5. Prohibitions; procedure upon discharge.
A. This article provides for the reimbursement for, or the replacement of,
any and all equipment utilized by the Department of Health or its
agents, without regard to ownership, for the purpose of mitigating,
controlling or containing any incident in which a hazardous material is
involved in a fire, leak, release or spill or where the potential thereof
exists or for the prevention of the same.
B. This article also provides for the reimbursement for the expenses
incurred by the Department of Health for the overtime wages paid to its
employees, agents, officers, officials or servants as a result of an
incident involving a fire or leak, release or spill of a hazardous material.
This article mandates reimbursement to the City of Vineland for any
expendable items used by the Department of Health or any of its
employees, agents, servants, officers or officials in extinguishing any
fire or stopping or containing or controlling or mitigating any spill,
release or leak of any hazardous material.
§ 407-3 VINELAND CODE § 407-5
1:372
§ 407-6. Reimbursement by responsible parties.
Reimbursement to the City of Vineland or its agents for expendable items
shall be made by the owner or operator of the vehicle responsible for
the fire or leak or spill of hazardous material; by the owner or person
responsible for the vessel containing the hazardous material involved in
such fire, leak or spill on public or private property, whether stationary
or in transit and whether accidental or through negligence; by the owner
or person responsible for any property from which any leak or spill of
hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through negligence;
and by the person responsible for the fire or leak or spill of hazardous
material on public or private property, whether accidental or through
negligence.
§ 407-7. Reimbursable services.
Any person responsible for any fire or leak, spill or release involving a
hazardous material must provide reimbursement for services rendered by
any recovery company, towing company or any other technical assistance
called for by the Department of Health to handle such incident. In the event
of a vehicle having been responsible for an incident, such vehicle may be
impounded until such time as it has been deemed safe to proceed by the
on-scene supervisor of the City of Vineland Hazardous Materials Unit and
until such time as arrangements have been made to reimburse the City of
Vineland and the towing company for their expenditures under the terms of
this article.
A. The discharge of hazardous substances is prohibited. This section shall
not apply to the discharge of hazardous substances pursuant to and in
compliance with the conditions of a federal or state permit.
B. Any person who may be subject to liability for a discharge which
occurred (prior to or) after the effective date of this article shall
immediately notify the Department of Health.
C. Whenever any hazardous substances is discharged, the City of Vineland
Department of Health may, in its discretion, act to remove or arrange
for the removal of such discharge. However, the City will take all
reasonable steps to contact the potential responsible persons in order
to notify the same of said discharge and permit them to remove or to
arrange for the removal of such discharge. This requirement shall not
prevent the City, in its discretion, in emergent circumstances, to take all
appropriate actions for the protection of the public pursuant to this
article, and the City shall notify the potential responsible persons as
soon as practicable.
D. Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance or in any way is
responsible for any hazardous substance which has been or shall be
removed by the Department of Health or its agents shall be strictly
liable, jointly and severally, without regard to fault, for all cleanup and
removal costs.
§ 407-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 407-8
1:373
§ 407-8. Time period for payment.
The person or entity responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
materials shall reimburse the City of Vineland or its agents the full price
of expendable items used to extinguish such fire or to stop or contain such
spill within 30 days after receipt of a bill therefor from the City of Vineland.
§ 407-9. Violations and penalties.
The person or entity responsible for any fire or leak or spill of hazardous
material who fails to reimburse the City of Vineland or its agents within
the time required shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 or more
than $1,000 per day for each day the violation continues, in addition to
reimbursement of the amount claimed due.
§ 407-10. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power of
the municipality or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and
the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and supplemental
to the powers conferred upon the City by any other law or ordinance.
§ 407-8 VINELAND CODE § 407-10
1:374
Chapter 425
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 41.
Agricultural zones — See Ch. 205.
Construction codes — See Ch. 300.
Drainage systems — See Ch. 320.
Excavations — See Ch. 341.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 372.
Noise — See Ch. 469.
Residential occupancy permits — See Ch. 485,
Art. I.
Parking lots — See Ch. 496.
Abandoned or nuisance property — See Ch.
530.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
Special sales — See Ch. 568.
Security gates — See Ch. 579.
Sewers — See Ch. 585.
Solid waste — See Ch. 620.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 630.
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
Water — See Ch. 710.
§ 407-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 407-10
1:375

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 425-1. Title.
This chapter may be called the "City of Vineland Land Use Ordinance."
§ 425-2. Purpose.
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to:
A. Guide the appropriate use or development of land in order to promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. Ensure that the development of the City of Vineland does not conflict
with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole.
E. Promote appropriate population densities that will contribute to the
well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and
preserve the environment.
F. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreation, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all New
Jersey citizens.
H. Encourage circulation routes which will promote the free flow of traffic
while discouraging location of facilities and routes which result in
congestion or blight.
I. Promote a desirable visual environment through good civic design and
arrangements.
J. Promote the conservation of historic sites, open space, energy
resources and natural resources in the state and prevent urban sprawl
and degradation of the environment through improper use of land.
K. Encourage planned developments which incorporate the best features
of design and relate them to the particular site.
L. Encourage the construction of senior-citizen community housing.
§ 425-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-2
1:377
§ 425-3. Word usage and definitions.
§ 425-4. Administrative procedures.
The municipal agencies shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules and
regulations, which are consistent with the statutory provisions and with this
chapter, for the administration of their functions and shall furnish a copy
thereof to any person upon request. Copies of such rules, regulations and
amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary. A
reasonable fee may be charged.
§ 425-5. Fees. [Amended 3-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-13; 3-8-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-6; 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2; 6-13-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-43]
M. Encourage coordination of the various public and private activities
shaping land development, with a view of lessening costs and
increasing the efficient use of land.
N. Promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
A. As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the word "shall" denotes a mandatory requirement, and the
word "may" denotes a permissive action.
B. The meanings of words and terms defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
shall apply. Said meanings and other definitions relating to specific use
will be found in the appropriate sections of this chapter.
A. The following schedule is hereby established:
(1) Resubdivision, not creating a new lot: $100. [Amended 4-10-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(2) Minor subdivision, creating one to four new lots: $100 plus $50 per
new lot.
(3) Major subdivision, preliminary plat: $6,693 plus $122 per new lot.
[Amended 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52]
(4) Major subdivision, final plat: $500 plus $50 per new lot.
(5) Site plan, minor (5,000 square feet or less of proposed developed
area): $500.
(6) Site plan, major preliminary plan,
(a) Greater than 5,000 to 25,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $750.
(b) Greater than 25,000 to 50,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $1,000.
§ 425-2 VINELAND CODE § 425-5
1:378
(c) Greater than 50,000 to 100,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $1,500.
(d) Greater than 100,000 to 250,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $2,000.
(e) Greater than 250,000 to 500,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $3,000.
(f) Greater than 500,000 square feet of proposed developed area:
$4,000.
(g) Planned development: $6,693 plus $122 per dwelling unit.
[Amended 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52]
(7) Site plan, major final plan (except when preliminary and final are
combined, then only preliminary fee applies):
(a) Greater than 5,000 to 25,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $375.
(b) Greater than 25,000 to 50,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $500.
(c) Greater than 50,000 to 100,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $750.
(d) Greater than 100,000 to 250,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $1,000.
(e) Greater than 250,000 to 500,000 square feet of proposed
developed area: $1,500.
(f) Greater than 500,000 square feet of proposed developed area:
$2,000.
(8) Conditional use permit: $100.
(9) Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a: $100.
(10) Interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b: $100.
(11) Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c (fee does not apply if part
of resubdivision, minor subdivision, major subdivision or site plan
application): $100. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(12) Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: $500.
(13) Permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or 40:55D-35: $100.
(14) Special meeting requested by applicant (shall be charged in
addition to other fees herein stated): $750.
(15) Certified list of property owners to be notified: $0.25 per name or
$10, whichever is greater.
§ 425-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-5
1:379
(16) Transcript: [Amended 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
(a) Three dollars per page.
(b) Xerox copy of transcript (all other Xeroxing shall be governed
by the Code of the City of Vineland): in accordance with OPRA.
(17) Certificate as to approval of subdivision of land: $10.
(18) Zoning permit (except zoning permit for residential swimming pool
and/or residential shed with 200 square feet or less of floor area
shall be 50% of stated fee). [Amended 2-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10]
(19) Certificate of zoning compliance: $25.
(20) Certification of nonconforming use or structure: $25.
(21) Research of past ordinances and approvals (shall be charged in
addition to certification of nonconforming use or structure fee):
$25.
(22) Determination of need for site plan approval by Engineering/
Planning: $37. [Added 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10117]
(23) Letter concerning developability of property by Engineering/
Planning: $37. [Added 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
(24) Public hearing (shall be charged in addition to other fees herein
stated): $50.
(25) Resubmission: 1/2 of the original application fee.118
(26) Request for extension: $10.
(27) (Reserved)
(28) Submission to County Planning Board: $10.
(29) Inspections:
(a) Resubdivision, not creating a new lot (if needed): $50.
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(b) Minor subdivision, creating one to four new lots (if needed):
$50.
(c) Major subdivision: $1,000.
(d) Site plan, minor: $50.
117. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections A(22) through (31) as
Subsections A(24) through (33), respectively.
118. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(25), which contained a fee for an appeal to a
governing body, was repealed 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-70.
§ 425-5 VINELAND CODE § 425-5
1:380
(e) Site plan, major (100,000 or less square feet of proposed
developed area): $500.
(f) Site plan, major (greater than 100,000 square feet of proposed
developed area): $1,000.
(30) Placement on Board agenda mailing list: $25 per annum.
(31) Legal review and documentation preparation: [Amended
7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52]
(a) Major subdivision, preliminary plat: $170.
(b) Major subdivision, final plat: $170.
(c) Site plan, major preliminary plan: $170.
(d) Site plan, major final plan: $170.
(e) Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a: $170.
(f) Interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b: $170.
(g) Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c: $170.
(h) Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: $170.
(i) All other resolutions: $125.
(j) Deed or easement review: $76. [Added 2-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-10]
(k) All other legal services: hourly rate set by contract. [Added
2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
(32) Association document review (e.g., homeowners', condominium,
cooperative): $275. [Amended 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52]
(33) Performance and maintenance guarantee review: $60.
B. Notes.
(1) NOTE: In the event that the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment approves an application with conditions specified in the
resolution requiring plan alterations, the revised submission shall
be called a perfected plan. A perfected plan shall not be submitted
to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment; provided,
however, that such plan shall not be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary until all the conditions of the resolution have been met.
When required, a minimum of six paper copies of a perfected plan
and one digital copy of a perfected plan (in a format compatible
with the City Engineer's electronic drafting and GIS systems using
NJ State Plane Coordinate System and NAD 83. Where survey
accuracy is not utilized for the establishment of NJSPC, sub-meter
coordinates shall be used and noted on the plans) shall be
§ 425-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-5
1:381
§ 425-6. (Reserved)120
§ 425-7. Exemptions from fees. [Amended 3-8-1994 by Ord. No.
94-6]
The following are exempt from the payment of any application review fee
charged under § 425-5, Fees:
§ 425-8. Planning Board meetings.
submitted to the Secretary, for which no review fee will be charged,
except for applicable legal fees and consultant escrow fees. Only
one perfected plan submission shall be allowed for each type of
application. Additional plan alterations shall be deemed
resubmissions, and appropriate fees shall be charged. A
development plan which is submitted which proposes modifications
to an already submitted or approved plan shall be considered a
resubmission. Such a plan may only be submitted as a resubmission
prior to surety being released on the project. All subsequent
applications will be deemed new. A resubmission fee is also
applicable to the review of documents. [Amended 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-24]
(2) NOTE: Three percent per year escalator, round to nearest dollar,
and an annual review. Transcript escalator governed by N.J.S.A.
2B:7-4.
(3) (Reserved)119
(4) NOTE: The resolution preparation fee shall be charged and paid at
the time of application submission. The association documents and
performance and maintenance guarantee review fees shall be
charged and paid at the time of document submission.
A. (Reserved)121
B. Agencies of the City of Vineland government or Cumberland County
government.
C. The City of Vineland Board of Education.
D. Single-family dwelling upon a lot, two-family dwelling upon a lot and
farm - exempt from zoning permit fee for handicapped accessibility
improvements. [Added 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52]
119. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), which pertained to escrow fees, amended
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24, was repealed 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.
120. Editor's Note: Former § 425-6, Fees for appeals, amended 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2,
was repealed 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-70.
121. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, which exempted certain charitable, philanthropic,
fraternal and religious nonprofit organizations, was repealed 2-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10.
§ 425-5 VINELAND CODE § 425-8
1:382
§ 425-9. Hearings.
A. The Board shall fix the time and place for holding its regular meetings.
B. Regular meetings shall be held at least once a month unless canceled
due to a lack of applications.
C. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or on the request of
two members of the Board.
D. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present. A "quorum" means the majority of the full authorized
membership of the Board or committee having power to act.
E. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present at
the meeting, unless required otherwise by statute (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9a).
F. All regular and special meetings shall be open to the public. An
executive session for the purpose of discussion and study shall not be
deemed a regular or special meeting.
G. Minutes shall be kept of every regular or special meeting and shall be
made available for public inspection or use as evidence in a legal
proceeding. A reasonable fee for a copy of the minutes may be charged.
A. The Planning Board shall hold a hearing on each application for
development or for adoption, revision or amendment of the Master
Plan.
B. Maps and documents which are the subject of a hearing shall be on file
and available for public inspection at least 10 calendar days before the
date of the hearing.
C. The Board shall make rules governing such hearings. The presiding
officer has power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas.
D. The testimony given shall be under oath, and the right of crossexamination
shall be permitted.
E. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply, but the Board can exclude
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
F. A verbatim recording of the proceedings shall be kept. The fee for a
transcript shall be as permitted in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15 (see § 425-5 of this
article) and shall be certified in writing by the Secretary.
G. Each decision on a development application shall be reduced to writing
as provided under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g and shall include findings of
facts and conclusions thereon.
H. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant within 10 days of
the date of the decision.
§ 425-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-9
1:383
§ 425-10. Informal review of concept plan for development.
If the developer requests it, the Planning Board shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for development for which he intends to submit
a formal application. No fees shall be charged. The developer shall not be
bound by the plan, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by the review.
§ 425-11. Contents of notice of hearing.
Notices shall state:
§ 425-12. Notice of application for development. [Amended
8-24-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-43]
Public notice and hearing shall be given on applications for development if
variances are included, if the application is for a conditional use permit, if
the application is for a revision to the Master Plan of Street Extensions or if
the application is for preliminary approval of a major subdivision.
I. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper. If the Board publishes the decision in lieu of the applicant, a
reasonable fee shall be charged.
A. The date, time and place of the hearing.
B. The nature of the matters to be considered.
C. The identification of the property to be developed, by street address or
by reference to the Assessor's lot and block numbers.
D. The location where maps and documents may be inspected by the
public.
E. The time during which such inspections can be made.
A. The Board shall give public notice of applications, when notice is
required, by publication in the official newspaper at least 10 calendar
days prior to the hearing date.
B. The applicant shall give notice, when notice is required, to all property
owners located within 200 feet of the subject property in all directions,
by either serving a copy thereof to the owner or his agent or by certified
mail to the owner at his address at least 10 calendar days prior to the
hearing date. (NOTE: Notice to a partnership, a corporate owner, a
condominium association, a horizontal property regime, a community
trust or a homeowners' association may be made by serving any
partner, president or any other person authorized by law to accept such
notice.) Notice for revision to the Master Plan of Street Extensions shall
be given to all property owners within 200 feet of the outbound of the
property to be developed by regular mail with certificate of mailing.
§ 425-9 VINELAND CODE § 425-12
1:384
§ 425-13. Notice of hearings concerning Master Plan.
The Planning Board shall give, at least 10 calendar days prior to the date:
§ 425-14. Notice by certified mail.
All notices given by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
C. The applicant shall, in writing, request the Municipal Assessor to
prepare a certified list of names and addresses of the property owners
which are required to be given notice.
D. The applicant shall give notice to the clerk of an adjoining municipality
if the development involves property located within 200 feet of the
municipal boundary.
E. The applicant shall give notice to the County Planning Board if the
development is adjacent to a county road, a proposed county road
shown on the Official County Map or Master Plan or is situated within
200 feet of a municipal boundary or if the development adjoins other
county property.
F. The applicant shall give notice to the Commissioner of Transportation if
the development is adjacent to a state highway.
G. The applicant shall give notice to the Director of the Division of State
and Regional Planning (Department of Community Affairs) if the
development exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units, and the notice
shall include a copy of the documents filed for public inspection.
H. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Secretary
of the Board prior to the hearing.
I. Public notice and hearing shall not be required for conventional site
plans or minor subdivisions if no variances are involved or for final
approval of site plans and major subdivisions unless variances are
involved which were not the subject of a previous hearing.
A. Public notice of a hearing on the adoption, revision or amendment of
the Master Plan.
B. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of an adjoining
municipality when property within 200 feet of such municipality is
involved.
C. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning
Board, including a copy of the proposals to be heard. Notice shall also
be sent to the county within 30 days of the adoption of the proposals,
including a copy as adopted.
§ 425-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-15
1:385
§ 425-15. Appeal to governing body. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-70]
Any interested party desiring to appeal a final decision of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment approving a use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d)
may assert his or her rights by filing an action in lieu of prerogative writ
with the Superior Court of New Jersey.
§ 425-16. Enforcement.
The governing body of the City of Vineland shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter and the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law122 on which it is
based. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of this chapter and the law, the proper local authorities
or any interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy
of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
§ 425-17. Appeal to Board of Public Utility Commissioners.
A. If a public utility is aggrieved by the action of a municipal agency
exercising its powers under this chapter, said utility may appeal to the
New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners within 35 days after
such action and without appeal to the governing body, unless the utility
so chooses. In such case, the appeal to the Commissioners may be taken
within 35 days after action by the governing body. If, after such hearing,
the Commissioners find that the present or proposed use by the public
utility of the land described in the appeal is necessary for the service,
convenience or welfare of the public, the utility may proceed in
accordance with the decision of the Commissioners, this chapter
notwithstanding.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a development
proposed by a public utility for installation in more than one
municipality for the furnishing of service if the Commissioners, after
petition, notice and hearing, decide the proposed installation is
necessary for the service, convenience or welfare of the public.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to restrict the right of any interested
party to obtain a review of the municipal agency or of the Board of
Public Utility Commissioners by any court of competent jurisdiction
according to law.
122. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 425-15 VINELAND CODE § 425-18
1:386
§ 425-18. Exclusive authority of Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment.
Any power expressly authorized herein to be exercised by the Planning
Board or by the Board of Adjustment shall not be exercised by any other
body except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 425-19. Modification of period of approval.
In the event that, during the period of approval granted a development
application, the developer is barred or prevented from proceeding by a
legal action, directive or order and the developer is otherwise ready, willing
and able to proceed with the development, the running of the period of
approval provided under this chapter shall be suspended for the time said
legal action is pending or such directive or court order is in effect.
§ 425-20. Conditional approvals.
A. In the event that a developer submits an application proposing a
development which is barred or prevented by a legal action, the
municipal agency shall process the application and, if it complies with
the provisions of this chapter, shall approve the application conditioned
on the removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that an application for a proposed development requires an
approval by a governmental agency other than the municipal agency,
the municipal agency shall, in appropriate instances, condition its
approval upon the subsequent approval of such other governmental
agency, provided that the municipal agency acts within the time and
under the conditions specified by this chapter.
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 to 40:55D-22.)
§ 425-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-20
1:387

ARTICLE II
Municipal Planning Board
§ 425-21. Establishment; membership; terms; removal.
A. The City of Vineland hereby establishes a Municipal Planning Board
comprised of nine members.
B. The membership shall consist of, for convenience in designating the
manner of appointment, the following four classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor.
(2) Class II: a municipal official other than a member of the governing
body, appointed by the Mayor, provided that a member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a Planning Board member
as required by Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1)
shall be deemed to be the Class II member in the event that the
Class IV or alternate membership includes a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission and a
member of the Board of Education.
(3) Class III: a member of the governing body appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: other citizens of the City of Vineland appointed by the
Mayor. The Class IV member shall hold no other municipal office
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission and a member of
the Board of Education. If such be the case, then the Environmental
Commission member shall be deemed to be the Class II member.
For the purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board
or commission whose function is discretionary and not required by
statute shall not be considered the holding of municipal office.
C. The terms of office for each class shall be as follows:
(1) For Class I members, the term shall correspond to official tenure.
(2) For Class II and Class III members, the term shall be for one year or
terminate with the term of office, whichever occurs first, except for
a Class II member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission. The term of an Environmental Commission member,
whether in Class II or Class IV, shall be for three years or terminate
at the completion of his term of office as a member of the
Commission, whichever occurs first.
(3) For Class IV members, the initial term of office shall not exceed
four years and shall be spaced so that the term of at least one
member expires each year. Thereafter, the Class IV term shall be
four years. If a vacancy occurs before the term expires, it shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 425-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-21
1:389
§ 425-22. Alternate members.
§ 425-23. Organization; compensation.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
Class IV members, shall select a Secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the Board or a municipal employee, and shall create and fill
such other offices as established by ordinance. The Board may employ
or contract for and fix the compensation of legal counsel other than the
Municipal Attorney, experts, staff and services as it may deem necessary,
not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
§ 425-24. Powers and duties.
D. No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Any member other than the Mayor, after a public
hearing if he requests one, may be removed by the governing body for
cause.
A. The governing body hereby provides for the appointment of two
alternate members to the Planning Board, who shall meet the
qualifications of Class IV membership. Alternate members shall be
designated, at the time of appointment by the Mayor, as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2."
B. The terms of alternate members shall be for two years, except that said
terms shall be such that the term of not more than one alternate shall
expire in any one year. In no instance shall the terms of the alternate
members first appointed exceed two years. If a vacancy occurs, the
Mayor shall appoint a member to fill the unexpired term only.
C. The same rules of ethical conduct and the conditions for removal which
apply to Planning Board members shall apply to alternate members.
D. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
A. The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of this chapter and shall
accordingly exercise its powers in regard to:
(1) The Master Plan, pursuant to Article III.
(2) Subdivision control and site plan review, pursuant to Article VI.
(3) The Official Map, pursuant to Article V.
§ 425-21 VINELAND CODE § 425-24
1:390
§ 425-25. Referral powers.
§ 425-26. Citizens Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens Advisory
Committee to assist the Planning Board in its duties, but such person or
persons shall have no power to vote or take other action required by the
Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
(4) The Zoning Ordinance, pursuant to Article XV.
(5) The Capital Improvements Program, pursuant to Article IV.
(6) Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval, pursuant to
Article XIV.
B. The Planning Board may:
(1) Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulation.
(2) Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
process.
(3) Perform such other duties as are assigned to it by ordinance or
resolution of the governing body to aid and assist said body or other
agencies or officers.
A. Prior to the adoption of a development regulation or any revision or
amendment thereto, the Planning Board shall transmit a report to the
governing body within 35 days after referral, including identification of
any provisions in the proposed regulation, revision or amendment
which are inconsistent with the Master Plan, and recommendations
concerning these inconsistencies and any other matters the Board
deems appropriate. The governing body shall review the report, may
disapprove or change any recommendation by a majority vote of its full
membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons for not
following the Board's recommendations. Failure of the Board to send its
report within 35 days shall relieve the governing body from the
requirements of this subsection. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as diminishing the application of the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 (official map) or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 (power to zone).
B. The governing body may, by ordinance, provide for the reference of any
matter to the Planning Board before final approval of said matter. Such
reference shall not extend the time for action by the referring body,
whether or not the Planning Board has submitted its report. Whenever
the Planning Board shall have made recommendations to another
municipal body, such recommendations may not be rejected except by a
majority vote of the full authorized membership of such other body.
§ 425-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-27
1:391
§ 425-27. Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment an index of the
natural resources of the City of Vineland, said Boards shall make available
to the Commission an informational copy of every application submitted
to either Board. Failure of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to make such informational copy available to the Environmental
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 to 40:55D-27.)
§ 425-27 VINELAND CODE § 425-27
1:392
ARTICLE III
Master Plan
[Amended 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-61]
§ 425-28. Preparation; contents; modification.
The Planning Board shall prepare and, after public hearing, adopt or amend
a Master Plan, or component parts thereof, to guide the use of land within
the City in a manner that protects public health and safety and promotes
the general welfare, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 et seq. and any
other applicable state statutes.
§ 425-29. (Reserved)
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28. For requirements
pertaining to periodic reexamination of the Master Plan, see Article XXII.)
§ 425-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-29
1:393

ARTICLE IV
Capital Improvements Program
§ 425-30. Preparation.
§ 425-31. Adoption.
The governing body may adopt the Capital Improvements Program as
recommended by the Planning Board with any modification approved by a
majority vote of the full authorized membership and with reasons for said
modification recorded in the minutes.
§ 425-32. Review.
Upon the adoption of any portion of the Master Plan, the governing body
or other public agencies having jurisdiction over the subject matter shall
refer any capital improvement project to the Planning Board for review
and recommendation in conjunction with the Master Plan prior to the
expenditure of public funds therefor, as provided by statutory direction.
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29 to 40:55D-31.)
A. The governing body may authorize the Planning Board to prepare a
program of municipal improvement projects and amendments to be
carried over a period of at least six years in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-29 et seq.
B. Whenever the Planning Board is authorized and directed to prepare a
capital improvements program, every municipal department, authority
or agency shall, upon Planning Board request, submit to the Board a
statement of all capital projects proposed to be undertaken by such
department, authority or agency for study, advice and recommendation
by the Planning Board.
§ 425-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-32
1:395

ARTICLE V
Official Map
§ 425-33. Adoption of Official Map and Transportation Plan.
The City of Vineland hereby adopts an Official Map as part of this chapter
and establishes procedures for its use. The City has also established
procedures for street extensions, for park development and for the
provision of public facilities, particularly as set by the Master Plan of Street
Extensions and the Comprehensive Plan for Parks. Under this chapter, the
City also adopts the provisions of the Transportation Plan recommended by
the Cumberland County Urban Area Transportation Study (CCUATS).
§ 425-34. Review of amendments by Planning Board.
Prior to the adoption of any amendment or proposed change of the Official
Map, the governing body shall refer such amendment or change to the
Planning Board as provided under § 425-25 of Article II of this chapter.
§ 425-35. Construal.
The Official Map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the location
and widths of streets and public drainageways and the location and extent
of flood control basins as well as public areas, whether or not such streets,
ways, basins or areas are improved, unimproved or are in actual physical
existence.
§ 425-36. Reservation of lands for public use.
Upon receiving an application for development which is affected by this
article, the Planning Board shall advise the governing body, and the
governing body may reserve for future public use the aforesaid streets,
ways, basins and public areas in the manner provided under § 425-48 of
Article VI of this chapter.
§ 425-37. Changes and additions.
Municipal approval by ordinance under the provisions of any law, other
than as provided herein, of the layout, widening, changing the course of or
closing of any street or the widening or changing the course of any public
drainageway or changing the boundaries of a flood control basin or public
area shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter as authorized under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-33.
§ 425-38. Issuance of building permits.
A. To preserve the integrity of the Official Map, no permit shall be issued
for any building or structure in the bed of any street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official
Map or shown on a plat duly filed before the adoption of the Official
Map, except as herein provided.
§ 425-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-38
1:397
§ 425-39. Street frontage required.
§ 425-40. Variances; appeals.
Where the enforcement of § 425-39 of this article would entail practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship or where the circumstances of the case
do not require the building or structure to be related to a street, the Board
of Adjustment may vary the application of § 425-39 and direct the issuance
of a permit subject to conditions that will provide adequate access for firefighting
equipment and emergency vehicles and that will protect any future
street layout shown on the Official Map or on the circulation plan element
of the Master Plan pursuant to § 425-29A(4) of Article III of this chapter.
Sections 425-350 through 425-354 of Article XX of this chapter shall apply
to such appeals.
§ 425-41. Unopened and partially improved streets.
B. Whenever one or more parcels of land which are affected by the
provisions of the Official Map cannot yield a reasonable return to the
owner unless a building permit is granted, the Board of Adjustment
may, in a specific case, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the full
authorized membership of the Board, direct the issuance of a permit for
a building or structure in the bed of such mapped street or drainageway
or flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map, in
such manner as will as little as practicable increase the cost of opening
such street or will tend to cause a minimum change of the Official Map,
and the Board shall impose reasonable requirements as a condition of
granting the permit so as to protect the public interests.
C. Sections 425-350 through 425-354 of Article XX (Zoning Board of
Adjustment) of this chapter shall apply to such applications or appeals.
A. No permit to erect any building or structure shall be issued unless the
lot abuts a street which has been duly placed on the Official Map or
shall be:
(1) An existing state, county or City street;
(2) A street shown on a plat duly approved by the Planning Board; or
(3) A street shown on a plat duly filed in the County Recorder's office
prior to the passage of this chapter.
B. Before the issuance of such permit, the street shall be certified to be
suitably improved to the satisfaction of the governing body or, under
surety, to be improved in accordance with the standards and
specifications for road improvements set in this chapter.
A. Streets which have never been opened, which are shown on maps filed
prior to October 15, 1951 (the date establishing the first Planning
Board in the former Landis Township), shall not be considered part of
the Official Map unless they shall be approved by the Planning Board,
§ 425-38 VINELAND CODE § 425-41
1:398
accepted by the governing body and dedicated by ordinance to the City
of Vineland for general public use. The City shall reserve the right to
vacate such paper streets.
B. Streets which have been used by the general public continuously for 20
years or more prior to the adoption of this chapter which are shown on
maps filed prior to October 15, 1951, that have not been constructed to
standard, shall be constructed to the standards of this chapter prior to
development approval of the adjacent lands. See § 425-47A of Article
VI.
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 to 40:55D-36.)
§ 425-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-41
1:399

ARTICLE VI
Subdivision and Site Plan Review and Approval123
§ 425-42. Approval by Planning Board; exemption. [Amended
11-26-1996 by Ord. No. 96-97]
§ 425-43. Referral of land development ordinances and
amendments to Planning Board.
All ordinances which regulate land development in the City of Vineland, or
any amendments thereto, shall be referred to the Planning Board prior to
hearing and adoption.
§ 425-44. Submission to County Planning Board.
Each application for subdivision approval, where required by Section 5 of
P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), and each application for site plan
approval, where required by Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.6), shall be submitted by the Board, unless the applicant elects to
send it, to the County Planning Board for review or approval. In such case,
the municipal board shall condition its approval upon the timely receipt of
a favorable report from the county board or approval of said board by its
failure to act within the required time period.
§ 425-45. Purposes of procedures and reviews.
The submission and processing of development plans and the standards for
preliminary and final approvals, as set herein, are intended to and shall be
applied to ensure:
A. Approval of subdivision plats shall be by resolution of the Planning
Board as a condition for the filing of such plats with the County
Recording Officer, and approval of site plans shall be by resolution of
the Planning Board as a condition for the issuance of a permit for any
development, provided that the resolution of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall substitute for that of the Planning Board whenever the
Zoning Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction over a subdivision or site
plan pursuant to § 425-356B.
B. Exemption. One single-family dwelling upon a lot or one two-family
dwelling upon a lot is exempt from site plan review. Development of one
single-family dwelling and one two-family dwelling upon the same lot or
of multiple two-family dwellings upon the same lot, if permitted,
requires site plan review. [Amended 7-23-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-49]
A. Consistency with the zoning provisions of this chapter.124
123. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2009-72, adopted 11-24-2009, readopted in its entirety
without change Ord. No. 2008-39, which amends this article.
124. Editor's Note: See Art. XV, Zoning, of this chapter.
§ 425-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-45
1:401
B. The creation of properly designed streets and accessways which can
accommodate prospective traffic, provide access for emergency
vehicles, adhere to the circulation element of the Master Plan, are
oriented to maximize solar gain and which are no more than 50 feet
wide within the right-of-way lines unless said street is an extension of
an existing street of greater width or is shown on the Master Plan at the
greater width.
C. That adequate water supply, drainage facilities, shade trees, sewer lines
and other utilities necessary for essential services are provided.
D. That areas to be reserved for public use shall be of suitable size, shape
and location.
E. That open space to be set aside for residents of a planned development
is protected by the establishment of an open space organization.
F. That lands subject to flooding are effectively regulated to avoid danger
to life and property.
G. That soils are protected from wind and water erosion or from
excavation or grading.
H. That plans conform to standards set by the Commissioner of
Transportation pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of
1983, P.L. 1983, c. 260 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.).
I. That streets are properly graded, improved and constructed, and that
surety is provided for all required installations.
J. That subdivisions and site plans shall conform to the zoning
requirements.
K. That performance shall be in substantial accordance with the final
development plan.
L. That off-tract improvements necessitated by a subdivision or site plan
development are provided.
M. That planned development which promotes flexibility and economy in
layout and design is encouraged.
N. That open space in planned developments is adequate and properly
reserved, utilized and maintained.
O. That the Planning Board may allow a greater concentration of density
or intensity of land use within a section of a planned development than
in another, provided that it is offset by a smaller concentration
elsewhere or by the provision of additional open space.
P. That provisions are made and requirements are set for the timing of
development in stages.
§ 425-45 VINELAND CODE § 425-45
1:402
§ 425-46. (Reserved)125
§ 425-47. Cost of off-tract improvements.
Q. That provisions to protect the public interest and the interest of the
residents in the total completion of a planned development are
adequate in the case of phased construction.
R. That no taxes or assessments are due or delinquent on property
proposed for development.
A. Where off-tract water, sewer, drainage and street improvements are
necessitated by a proposed development, the Planning Board may, as a
condition of approval, require that the cost of the off-tract improvement
be:
(1) Borne solely by the applicant if no other property owner receives a
special benefit; or
(2) Shared if other property owners receive a special benefit.
B. If the Planning Board determines that properties outside a proposed
development will benefit from the required off-tract improvements, the
Board shall send to the governing body a list of the required off-tract
improvements and request advice as to the procedure for installation.
The Board shall act within 120 days if no determination is received from
the governing body.
C. The governing body shall advise the Planning Board within 90 days that
the improvements shall be installed under one of the following:
(1) As a general improvement with the costs borne at public expense,
including a contribution from the developer;
(2) As a local improvement with the costs assessed against the
properties directly benefited, including a contribution from the
developer; or
(3) As a direct cost to the developer under a formula for partial
reimbursement.
D. If the governing body determines that the improvements shall be
installed as a general improvement, the Board shall approve the
estimate by which the total cost exceeds the total amount of benefit to
all the properties, including the development property, and the
developer shall be liable to the City for such excess.
E. If the governing body determines that the improvements shall be
installed as a local improvement, the Board shall estimate the
difference between the total cost and the total amount of benefit to the
125. Editor's Note: Former § 425-46, Site Plan Review Advisory Board, as amended, was
repealed 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52.
§ 425-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-47
1:403
§ 425-48. Reservation of public areas.
§ 425-49. Application by corporation or partnership.
subject properties, including the development property, and the
developer shall be liable for such difference as well as for the amount
assessed to the development property.
F. If the governing body determines that the improvements shall be
installed as a direct cost to the developer, the Board shall estimate the
total cost and the portion attributable to the development property. The
developer shall be reimbursed by the City for the costs not attributable
directly to the development property. Such reimbursements shall be
made if, as and when assessments against other properties benefiting
are received by the City. The assessment against the development
property shall be marked paid and satisfied in consideration of the
improvements installed solely by the developer.
G. The governing body shall adopt an ordinance authorizing any
assessments as provided by law.
A. Where the Master Plan or Official Map provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or public
areas within a proposed development, the Planning Board may require,
before approving a subdivision or site plan, that such street, way, basin
or area be shown on the final plat.
B. The developer may deed the designated area to the City with the
proviso that the land be used only for the designated purpose at the
appropriate future time and, in the event that a subsequent revision of
the Master Plan or Official Map shall deem the area or purpose void,
that the land be returned to the developer.
C. The Planning Board may reserve such land for a period of one year after
final approval and so advise the governing body. If the governing body
has not moved within said year to purchase or condemn according to
law, the developer may apply to use the land in accordance with the
applicable development regulations and procedures.
D. These provisions shall not apply to the streets, ways, basins or areas
necessitated by the development itself and required for final approval.
A. A corporation or partnership applying for approval to develop land into
six or more lots or applying for a variance to construct a multiple
dwelling of 25 or more units or applying for approval of a site for
commercial use shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders or
individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock or having a least a
ten-percent interest in the partnership.
B. The requirement of Subsection A shall be followed by every corporate
stockholder or partner until the names and addresses of the
§ 425-47 VINELAND CODE § 425-49
1:404
§ 425-50. Exception from requirements.
If the literal enforcement of a provision of this chapter is impractical or
will exact undue hardship because of the peculiar conditions of the land,
the Planning Board shall have the power to grant such exception from the
requirement as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the provisions for preliminary or minor subdivision approval or for
preliminary site plan approval.
§ 425-51. Simultaneous review and approval of conditional uses or
site plans.
The Planning Board shall have the power to approve or deny conditional
uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision approval
without the developer being required to make further application to the
Planning Board or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board shall
apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested, notice of the
hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for such
conditional use.
§ 425-52. Guarantees required; surety; release. [Amended
1-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2003-73; 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24;
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-50; 5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-28]
noncorporate stockholders and individual partners, excluding the tenpercent
ownership criterion, have been listed.
C. No board or other municipal body shall approve a corporation or
partnership development application which does not comply with this
section.
D. Any corporation or partnership which conceals this information shall be
subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000, which fine shall be recovered in
any court of record in a summary manner pursuant to law.
A. Before filing of final major subdivision plats, or recording of minor
subdivision plats or deeds, or as a condition of final site plan approval,
or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65(d), the City shall require and shall accept, in accordance
with the standards in this section and the regulations contained in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-33, as amended, the furnishing of performance
guarantees and provision for maintenance guarantees, for the purpose
of assuring the installation and maintenance of certain on-tract
improvements. More specifically, the City shall require the furnishing of
a performance guarantee for improvements required by an approval or
developer's agreement, ordinance or regulation to be dedicated to a
public entity that have not yet been installed; a performance guarantee
for privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping; a temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee; a safety and stabilization
guarantee; and provision for a maintenance guarantee, for the purpose
§ 425-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-52
1:405
§ 425-53. Filing of subdivision plats; notification.
of assuring the installation and maintenance of certain on-tract
improvements; and a maintenance guarantee for the purpose of
assuring the installation and maintenance of certain private site
improvements, in accordance with the standards in this section and
the regulations contained in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, as amended. Until such
time as the Department of Community Affairs adopts by regulation
a standardized form for a performance guarantee, a maintenance
guarantee and letter of credit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53(a), the
standardized forms adopted by resolution of City Council shall be used
verbatim. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-40]
B. In addition to the requirements stipulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65(d)(1),
the request submitted by the obligor upon substantial completion of all
required street improvements (except for the top course) and
appurtenant utility improvements shall also be accompanied by as-built
plans that shall indicate plan review, bench mark, elevations, stations,
sanitary sewer, water main, gas main, storm sewer, manholes and all
other structures associated with the work of the application with
sufficient information to locate all facilities. Underground utilities shall
be shown in plan and profile views. Where survey accuracy is not
utilized for the establishment of NJSPC, submeter coordinates shall be
used and noted on the plans. The as-built information shall be blocked
in as thus
and shown on the originally approved construction drawings. Each
sheet of the originally approved set shall contain an "as-built
certificate" that shall read as follows:
AS-BUILT CERTIFICATION
I hereby certify that the information shown on this record drawing is
an accurate and complete representation of data established from field
inspection obtained under my direction and that the facility or facilities
have been constructed according to the approved plans, except as
noted hereon.
NAME NJPE License No.
TITLE DATE
A. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
signing of the plat unless the plat shall have been properly filed with the
County Recorder. For good cause shown, the Planning Board may
extend this period but not to exceed 190 days from the signing of the
plat.
§ 425-52 VINELAND CODE § 425-53
1:406
§ 425-54. Sale of land before approval; violations and penalties.
§ 425-55. Certificates showing approval; contents.
An interested party may apply in writing to the Secretary of the Board for
the issuance of a certificate stating whether or not a subdivision has been
approved by the Board. Said certificate shall be issued within 15 calendar
days after receipt of the written request and fees therefor. Each certificate
shall be designated "a certificate as to approval of subdivision of land" and
shall certify that:
B. The County Recorder shall accept no subdivision plat for filing unless it
has been signed by the Chairman and the Secretary of the Board. Said
signatures shall not be affixed before surety is posted and approved.
C. The County Recorder shall notify the Board in writing within seven days
of the filing of any plat, identifying it by title, date of filing and official
number.
D. At the same time notification is sent to the Board as specified by
Subsection C, the County Recorder shall send a copy of such
notification to the Municipal Tax Assessor.
A. If any person sells, transfers or agrees to sell or transfer any land prior
to subdivision approval, except by agreement contingent upon final
approval, such person shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed
$1,000, and each lot so disposed shall be deemed a separate violation.
B. In addition, the City may institute civil action for injunctive relief and to
set aside such sale or contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has
not been issued as provided under § 425-55 of this article.
C. In any such action, the purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien
upon the portion of land that remains in the possession of the developer
or his assigns to secure the return of any deposits made or purchase
price paid. The time for such action to be taken shall be two years after
the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer or within six
years if the instrument of transfer is unrecorded.
A. A duly established Planning Board and an ordinance governing
subdivision of land exists in the City of Vineland.
B. The subdivision has been duly approved, giving date, terms and
extensions, if any.
C. Said subdivision, if it has not been approved, is statutorily exempt from
the requirement of approval.
§ 425-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-56
1:407
§ 425-56. Right of property owner covered by certificate showing
approval. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
Any person who acquires for a valuable consideration an interest in land
covered by a certificate of approval shall hold such interest free of any right,
remedy or action which may be instituted under § 425-54. This provision
also applies if a certificate is not duly issued within 15 days as specified
under § 425-55.
§ 425-57. Applicability to condominiums and cooperative structures
and uses.
The development regulations of this chapter shall be applied without regard
to the form of ownership. No approval shall be required as a condition to
the recording of a condominium deed or the sale of any unit therein except
as provided by law.
§ 425-58. Concept plans. [Amended 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2]
§ 425-59. Submission of application; contents of complete
application. [Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-84; 10-8-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-82; 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2; 7-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-49]
A. The developer may submit, prior to the preparation of a detailed plan, a
concept plan for discussion purposes and to obtain input and direction
as may be needed or specifically requested.
B. The concept presentation shall include such data as is reasonably
necessary to inform and properly advise the applicant concerning the
particular site.
C. Though a concept presentation is not required, it is encouraged in the
interests of saving time and costs to all concerned with the land
development process. No fee shall be required for such presentation, no
time limits shall be applied, and no official actions shall be taken.
A. All applications for development approval shall be submitted to the
Planning Division. There shall be no submission deadline. All
applications received by the Planning Division shall be reviewed for
completeness by the Engineering and Planning staff within statutory
time limitations. Those applications deemed complete shall then be
forwarded for technical review. [Amended 7-28-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-52]
B. A complete application shall consist of the following. [Amended
11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-93; 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(1) For a minor subdivision or resubdivision of land:
(a) Six copies of the plat, prepared from a current survey
performed not more than 18 months prior to the date of the
§ 425-56 VINELAND CODE § 425-59
1:408
application (plus four copies if the application must go to the
County Planning Board).
(b) One digital copy of the plat in a format compatible with the City
Engineer's electronic drafting and GIS systems, using NJ State
Plane Coordinate System and NAD 83. Where survey accuracy
is not utilized for the establishment of NJSPC, sub-meter
coordinates shall be used and noted on the plans.
(c) One copy of the application form and disclosure statement,
with all required signatures including that of Tax Collector.
(d) An affordable housing production plan providing a calculation
of the affordable housing obligation for the development based
on the proposed development and COAH's third round rules;
the manner in which the affordable housing obligation is to be
addressed; a plan indicating the location of all proposed
affordable units where units are to be provided on site or off
site and the manner in which they shall comply with the growth
share and development fee ordinances and applicable COAH
regulations.
(e) The review fee as set under § 425-5 of Article I.
(f) An affidavit setting forth the names and addresses of all the
record title owners of the lands subdivided by the map and
written consent to the approval of the map of all those owners.
[Added 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-50]
(g) One copy of any existing or proposed deed restrictions or
covenants, if any. [Added 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-50]
(2) For a major subdivision, preliminary plat:
(a) Ten copies of the plat, prepared from a current survey
performed not more than 18 months prior to the date of the
application (plus four copies if the application must go to the
County Planning Board). This shall include all items listed in
§ 425-72I(3).
(b) One digital copy of the plat in a format compatible with the City
Engineer's electronic drafting and GIS systems, using NJ State
Plane Coordinate System and NAD 83. Where survey accuracy
is not utilized for the establishment of NJSPC, sub-meter
coordinates shall be used and noted on the plans.
(c) Ten copies of the materials listed in the checklist for site
development stormwater plans, as indicated in § 425-72I(3).
(d) One copy of the application form and disclosure statement,
with all required signatures including that of Tax Collector.
§ 425-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-59
1:409
(e) An affordable housing production plan providing a calculation
of the affordable housing obligation for the development based
on the proposed development and COAH's third round rules;
the manner in which the affordable housing obligation is to be
addressed; a plan indicating the location of all proposed
affordable units where units are to be provided on site or off
site and the manner in which they shall comply with the growth
share and development fee ordinances and applicable COAH
regulations.
(f) The review fee as set under § 425-5 of Article I. [Amended
7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52]
(g) An affidavit setting forth the names and addresses of all the
record title owners of the lands subdivided by the map and
written consent to the approval of the map of all those owners.
[Added 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-50]
(3) For a major subdivision, final plat:
(a) Three reproducible copies of the plat, post approval.
(b) Twelve print copies of the plat (plus four if the application must
go to the County Planning Board).
(c) One digital copy of the plat in a format compatible with the City
Engineer's electronic drafting and GIS systems, using NJ State
Plane Coordinate System and NAD 83. Where survey accuracy
is not utilized for the establishment of NJSPC, sub-meter
coordinates shall be used and noted on the plans.
(d) Two paper copies and one digital copy of the description of
lands to be dedicated to public use.
(e) One copy of the application form and disclosure statement,
with all required signatures including that of Tax Collector.
(f) Two copies of the draft homeowners' association documents.
(g) The review fee as set under § 425-5 of Article I.
(h) An affidavit setting forth the names and addresses of all the
record title owners of the lands subdivided by the map and
written consent to the approval of the map of all those owners.
[Added 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-50]
(i) One copy of any existing or proposed deed restrictions or
covenants, if any. [Added 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-50]
(j) One copy of proof of legal right to discharge drainage through
abutting properties or easements, if any. [Added 11-13-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-50]
(4) For site plans:
§ 425-59 VINELAND CODE § 425-59
1:410
§ 425-60. Subdivision plat details and other required data.
[Amended 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 96-82; 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-24; 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39; 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-50]
(a) Minor site plans: six copies (plus four if the application must go
to the County Planning Board).
(b) Major site plans: 10 copies (plus four copies if the application
must go to the County Planning Board).
(c) One digital copy of the plat in a format compatible with the City
Engineer's electronic drafting and GIS systems, using NJ State
Plane Coordinate System and NAD 83. Where survey accuracy
is not utilized for the establishment of NJSPC, sub-meter
coordinates shall be used and noted on the plans.
(d) One copy of the application form and disclosure statement,
with all required signatures including that of Tax Collector.
(e) The review fee as set under § 425-5 of Article I. [Amended
7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52]
(f) Outbound and topographic survey information/plan (signed
and sealed), dated within 18 months prior to the application
date.
(g) Ten copies of materials listed in the checklist requirements of
§ 425-72I(3).
(h) An affordable housing production plan providing a calculation
of the affordable housing obligation for the development based
on the proposed development and COAH's third round rules;
the manner in which the affordable housing obligation is to be
addressed; a plan indicating the location of all proposed
affordable units where units are to be provided on site or off
site and the manner in which they shall comply with the growth
share and development fee ordinances and applicable COAH
regulations.
A. Minor subdivision or resubdivision plats shall:
(1) Be clearly and legibly drawn, to standard engineering scale of not
less than one inch equals 100 feet, in black ink on translucent
tracing cloth, translucent mylars at least four mils thick or its
equivalent, of good quality, with signatures in ink, or as an
equivalent reproduction on photographic fixed line mylar four mils
thick with signatures in black ink or its equivalent and
accompanied by a cloth print or photographic fixed line mylar four
mils thick duplicate; and one of six standard sizes: 8 1/2 inches by
13 inches, 30 inches by 42 inches, 24 inches by 36 inches, 11 inches
by 17 inches, 18 inches by 24 inches or 15 inches by 21 inches, as
§ 425-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-60
1:411
measured from cutting edges. If one sheet is not of sufficient size
to contain the entire territory, the map may be divided into sections
to be shown on separate sheets of equal sizes, with references on
each sheet to the adjoining sheets, and an additional subdivision
plan sheet shall be provided that shows the entire site development
at a reasonable scale.
(2) Show the scale, which shall be inches to feet and be large enough
to contain legibly written data on the dimensions, bearings and all
other details of the boundaries. Also show the graphic scale.
(3) Show the acreage of the entire tract and the dimensions and area
of each lot to the nearest square foot or nearest 1/100 of an acre.
Show dimensions and bearings of all boundaries, including the
portion to be divided. Bearings and curve data shall include the
radius, delta angle, length of arc, chord distance and chord bearing
sufficient to enable the definite location of all lines and boundaries
shown, including public easements and areas dedicated for public
use. Nontangent curves and nonradial lines shall be labeled. Rightof-
way parcel maps shall show bearings, distances and curve data
for the right-of-way or the center line or base line and ties to rightof-
way lines if from a base line. Also show lot lines to be eliminated.
(4) Number lots in each block consecutively. Block and lot designations
shall conform with the Municipal Tax Map. The map shall show the
block boundaries and designations for the territory shown on the
map, in addition to the Municipal Tax Map sheet numbers, as per
the Assessor's records.
(5) Show the reference meridian used for bearings on the map
graphically. The coordinate base, either assumed or based on the
New Jersey Plane Coordinate System, shall be shown on the plat.
Indicate the north designation, by arrow. The north arrow shall be
oriented on the sheet(s) towards the top or to the right, consistently
on all sheets.
(6) Show and designate all municipal boundary lines crossing or
adjacent to the territory.
(7) Show all natural and artificial watercourses, streams, shorelines
and water boundaries and encroachment lines. On right-of-way
parcel maps, all easements that affect the right-of-way, including
slope easements and drainage easements, shall be shown and
dimensioned.
(8) Show and dimension all permanent easements, including sight
triangle easements and utility easements, and the beneficiary and
purpose of all easements shall be provided.
(9) Clearly show all monumentation required by this chapter, including
monuments found, monuments set, and monuments to be set. An
indication shall be made where monumentation found has been
§ 425-60 VINELAND CODE § 425-60
1:412
reset. For purposes of this subsection, found corners shall be
considered monuments. A minimum of three corners distributed
around the tract shall indicate the coordinate values. The outbound
corner markers shall be set pursuant to regulations promulgated
by the State Board of Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
(10) Cite the zone in which the property is located. The map shall show
as a chart on the plat any other technical design controls required
by local ordinances, including minimum street widths, minimum lot
areas, minimum yard dimensions and other bulk requirements, and
shall identify any variance requested from the zone district
requirements.
(11) Show the name of the subdivision/development, the name and
address of the applicant/developer, the names of property owners
of all lots involved in the application and the names of the
municipality and county.
(12) Show the date of the survey, date the plat was completed and the
dates of any revisions, and shall be in accordance with the
minimum survey detail requirements of the State Board of
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
(13) Provide the name and address of the licensed surveyor who
prepared the plat.
(14) Show a key map relating the tract to surroundings and streams
with an orientation consistent with the properties shown on the
plat.
(15) Show existing on-site structures, their use, and dimensions to
property lines. Also show all structures within 150 feet of the land
to be subdivided. Structures are considered to include, but not be
limited to, buildings, driveways, mailboxes, signs, utility poles,
drainage and sewerage structures, valves, septic systems and
wells.
(16) Note current use of application property and that of properties
within 200 feet of the subject parcel. Include names of businesses,
where appropriate.
(17) Show any wellhead protection areas and identify any best
management practices for wellhead protection, if applicable.
(18) Show any area of special flood hazard and any floodway.
(19) Show any wetlands and wetlands transition areas.
(20) Show and identify the developable land area of each lot.
(21) Provide a certificate of a land surveyor or surveyors, which shall be
endorsed on the map as follows:
§ 425-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-60
1:413
I certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief, this map
and land survey, dated ________, meet the minimum survey detail
requirements of the State Board of Professional Engineers and
Land Surveyors, and the map has been made under my
supervision, and complies with the Map Filing Law, in addition to
the Title Recordation Act, and that the outbound corner markers
as shown have been found, or set.
(Include the following, if applicable)
I further certify that the monuments as designated and shown
have been set.
(Signature)
(Printed name)
Licensed professional land surveyor and Number
(Affix seal)
(22) Provide the following two certificates in lieu of the certificate above
if the land surveyor who prepares the map is different from the land
surveyor who prepared the outbound survey:
(a) I certify to the best of my knowledge, information and belief
that this land survey, dated _____, has been made under my
supervision and meets the minimum survey detail
requirements of the State Board of Professional Engineers and
Land Surveyors, and that the outbound corner markers as
shown have been found, or set.
(Signature)
(Printed name)
Licensed professional land surveyor and Number
(Affix seal)
(b) I certify that this map has been made under my supervision
and complies with the Map Filing Law, in addition to the Title
Recordation Act.
§ 425-60 VINELAND CODE § 425-60
1:414
(Include the following if applicable)
I further certify that the monuments as designated and
shown have been set.
•
(Printed name)
Licensed professional land surveyor and Number
(Affix seal)
(23) Show the following requirements and endorsement on the map if
monuments are to be set at a later date:
The monuments shown on this map shall be set within the time
limit provided in the "Municipal Land Use Law," P.L. 1975, c.291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) or local ordinance. I certify that a bond
has been given to the municipality, guaranteeing the future setting
of the monuments as designated and shown on this map.
(Signature)
(Printed name)
Municipal Clerk
(24) Provide a certificate for the project surveyor that the monuments
have been set or will be set if the map is a right-of-way parcel map.
(25) Provide a certificate of the Municipal Engineer, which shall be
endorsed on the map as follows:
I have carefully examined this map and to the best of my
knowledge and belief find it conforms with the provisions of the
Map Filing Law, in addition to the Title Recordation Act, resolution
of approval and applicable municipal ordinances and
requirements.
(Signature)
(Printed name)
Municipal Engineer (Affix seal)
§ 425-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-60
1:415
(26) Give the name of the street where the parcel is located. Show all
street names approved by the City. If the map shows proposed
highways, streets, lanes or alleys, a certificate of the Municipal
Clerk shall be endorsed on the map as follows:
City Council has approved the highways, streets, lanes or alleys
shown on this map.
(Signature)
•
Municipal Clerk
B. Major subdivision preliminary plats shall:
(1) Provide all data listed in Subsection A(1) through (21) of this
section.
(2) Show existing and proposed streets with right-of-way widths,
distances between intersections and sight triangles.
(3) Show streams with widths and direction of flow, swales and ditches,
as well as flood hazard areas, if any, which are located within 200
feet of the tract.
(4) Show land set aside for recreation, with dimensions, area and
proposed improvements, when said land is required to be reserved
in accordance with § 425-82.
(5) Show existing and proposed lots, with dimensions.
(6) Show building lines by dimensions or notation on the plat.
(7) Show side and rear yards by dimensions or notation on the plat.
(8) Designate names of property owners within 200 feet of the tract.
(9) Show wooded areas and unusual land features.
(10) Clearly depict bench marks and elevation datum.
(11) Provide one soil log and permeability test for each five acres to be
developed, as well as tests within the limits of infiltration
structures to determine adequacy.
(12) Provide additional tests, made and witnessed by the Health Officer
or City Engineer, on lands comprised of Hydrologic Soil Group C or
below. This shall not preclude the necessity for additional tests on
lands comprised of Hydrologic Soil Groups A or B.
(13) Provide proposed road plans and profiles on the same sheet with
contours provided in the plan view.
§ 425-60 VINELAND CODE § 425-60
1:416
(14) Show utility plans and connection to mains.
(15) Show proposed method of on-site sewage disposal and water
supply.
(16) Provide separate grading details for intersections and culs-de-sac
(temporary or permanent).
(17) Provide all utility facilities via underground installations.
(18) Provide hydrologic soil group (HSG) and soil boring log
information, including, but not limited to, soil profile, permeability
rate, existing ground elevation, elevation of seasonal high water
groundwater, depicted on drainage/grading sheets.
(19) Show storm sewer, existing and proposed, in plan and profile.
(20) Show basin cross sections, when applicable, indicating all relevant
elevations and topographic features. The limit of the cross section
shall be 50 feet from where the one-foot freeboard elevation
intersects the inner bank of the basin.
(21) Provide a note stating, "Existing City of Vineland monuments shall
be preserved to the greatest extent practicable. Should the
monumentation be damaged or destroyed, the responsible party
shall reimburse the City of Vineland for the replacement of said
monumentation."
(22) Show details only on designated "detail sheets."
(23) Include a note, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-18, stating,
"Only manufactured products of the United States, wherever
available, shall be used where the City of Vineland, or any other
governmental agency, will ultimately own and maintain the facility."
(24) Include a note, as applicable, stating, "As-built permeability test
results shall be provided for all components of the stormwater
management system."
(25) Include a note, as applicable, stating, "The design engineer shall
certify in writing to the City of Vineland that the basin(s) has been
constructed according to the approved design, that any approved
deviations are noted and that the basin has been properly cleaned
after 90% of the project completion. The engineer's certification
shall also certify that the basin currently operates as intended by
its design, taking into account all soil and water conditions
encountered during construction."
(26) Include a note, as applicable, stating, "Prior to final release of
performance guarantee, the applicant shall provide an as-built plan
of any and all stormwater systems and stormwater management
basins. The as-built plan shall include, but not be limited to, basin
§ 425-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-60
1:417
bottom elevation and basin berm elevation at twenty-five-foot
intervals, inverts and outlet structures."
(27) Include a note, as applicable, stating, "The basin owner shall
provide the City of Vineland with a maintenance bond for said basin
for two years after final acceptance of the basin."
(28) Show NJDEP application/permit numbers on the plan sheet, as
applicable.
(29) Clearly delineate the proposed limit of clearing. Identify the forest
acreage to be removed and provide a forest retention and tree
replacement plan, if applicable.
(30) Provide a list of any design waivers or exceptions requested from
City development regulations.
(31) Provide a landscaping plan showing any proposed landscape areas,
including buffer areas; show the number, size, species and location
of proposed plantings; planting details; and proposed means of
irrigation.
(32) Provide a lot yield map showing the number of lots permitted under
conventional zoning and the number of lots proposed, and identify
any variances or design exceptions necessary to achieve the yield
under conventional zoning standards, for residential cluster
development or residential development based on lot size
averaging.
(33) Provide a certification of the design engineer, architect, planner, or
surveyor, as applicable, of conformance of the plan and details to
RSIS; identify any requested design waivers from RSIS; identify
any requested de minimis exceptions from RSIS, and identify any
improvements proposed to exceed RSIS, for residential
development subject to the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(34) Indicate the distance and bearing to the nearest street
intersection.
C. Major subdivision final plats shall:
(1) Provide the data listed in Subsection A of this section.
(2) Provide signatures on the plat of the property owners, Tax
Collector and City Engineer.
(3) Provide two copies of descriptions for dedication of streets and of
lands reserved for public use.
(4) Include a note indicating all conditions placed upon the
development as a result of the Planning Board's approving
resolution.
§ 425-60 VINELAND CODE § 425-60
1:418
(5) Provide endorsements, in addition to those required by the Map
Filing Law and Title Recordation Act, as follows:
(a) This map has been approved by the City Council of the City of
Vineland by the provision of Resolution No._____, which was
adopted on_________.
(Signature)
(Printed name)
President, City Council
Date
(Signature)
(Printed name)
Municipal Clerk
Date
(b) I/we, the undersigned, hereby certify, I/we are the owners of
record of the lands involved in this subdivision and do hereby
consent to the filing of the map shown.
(Signature)
(Printed name)
Owner
Date
(Signature)
(Printed name)
Owner
Date
(c) I hereby certify all taxes have been paid up to date on all
properties in this subdivision.
§ 425-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-60
1:419
§ 425-61. Site plan details and other required data.
•
(Printed name)
Tax Collector
Date
(d) The Planning Board of the City of Vineland has duly reviewed
and approved this subdivision under Resolution No._____, in
accordance with Ordinance No. 86-38 (as amended). Said map
shall be properly filed on or before _______.
(Signature)
•
Chairman
Date
(Signature)
•
Secretary
Date
A. Minor site plans shall show the proposed improvements, alterations or
change of use on a site. The minor site plan shall: [Amended
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(1) Be drawn to standard engineering scale, not less than one inch
equals 50 feet and not more than one inch equals 10 feet. Sheet
size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches or 11 inches by 17 inches. In
the event that the overall site does not fit onto a standard sheet
size, an additional site plan sheet shall be provided which shows
the entire site development at a reasonable standard scale.
(2) Provide the name and address of the licensed engineer, architect
and/or surveyor who prepared the data.
(3) Be signed and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect and/or land
surveyor.
(4) Reserve space on the plan for approval stamps and signatures.
(5) Show an appropriate title by including the words "Site Plan for
_______________," indicating the intended use of the site.
§ 425-60 VINELAND CODE § 425-61
1:420
(6) Show a key map, locating streets and streams within 2,000 feet of
the site.
(7) Give the date the plan was completed and revision dates, if any.
(8) Indicate the zone or zones, including any zone lines which are
within or along the property boundaries.
(9) Include a zoning schedule chart, which shall indicate all bulk
standards and conformance with the standards for the existing and
proposed conditions.
(10) Provide the name and address of the applicant and all property
owners of all lots involved in the application.
(11) Indicate the proposed addition or modification, showing the
dimensions and gross floor areas of proposed buildings and
structures, the location of parking areas and the number of existing
and proposed parking spaces, all dimensioned and referenced to lot
lines and center lines of streets.
(12) Show existing on-site structures, their use, and dimensions to
property lines. Also show all structures within 150 feet of the land
to be developed. Structures are considered to include, but not be
limited to, buildings, driveways, mailboxes, signs, utility poles,
drainage and sewerage structures, and valves. [Amended
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39]
(13) Note current use of application property and that of properties
within 200 feet of the subject parcel. Include names of businesses
where appropriate.
(14) Indicate the existing and proposed type of paving.
(15) Indicate the block, lot and Tax Map sheet numbers as per the
Assessor's records.
(16) Indicate the north designation, by arrow. The North arrow shall be
oriented on the sheet(s) towards the top or to the right, consistently
on all sheets.
(17) Note the names and widths of all abutting streets.
(18) Indicate the on-site accessways and sight triangles, existing and
proposed, with referenced dimensions.
(19) Indicate the driveway openings, existing and proposed, with
referenced location and width at the curbline and at the property
line.
(20) Indicate the location of the nearest stormwater inlets.
(21) Clearly depict site bench marks and elevation datum as applicable.
§ 425-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-61
1:421
(22) Show types of vehicles that will be used for deliveries and trash
removal, and other large vehicles likely to enter the site on a
regular basis. Provide circulation patterns of these vehicles using
AASHTO Minimum Turning Path for said vehicle.
(23) Include a note indicating, "Existing City of Vineland monuments
shall be preserved to the greatest extent practicable. Should the
monumentation be damaged or destroyed, the responsible party
shall reimburse the City of Vineland for the replacement of said
monumentation."
(24) Include a note indicating, "Per N.J.S.A. 40A:11-18, only
manufactured products of the United States, wherever available,
shall be used for work which the City of Vineland or any other
governmental agency shall ultimately own and maintain."
(25) Show the existing and proposed buffer areas (dimensioned from
improved surfaces to the property line), the existing and proposed
screening materials, landscaping, fencing and trees.
(26) Show existing and proposed utility lines and the location of poles.
(27) Show existing and proposed on-site lighting type and location.
Provide a site lighting plan showing the location, height above
grade, type of illumination, type of fixture, the source lumens, and
the luminous area for each source of light proposed. [Amended
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39]
(28) Show contiguous lands owned by the applicant.
(29) Show all easements and purpose of easements, located and
dimensioned.
(30) Show lands to be dedicated to public use, dimensioned on the plan,
and provide two paper copies of the written descriptions.
(31) Include, as applicable, any and all NJDEP application/permit
numbers on the plan sheet.
(32) Include such other details as may apply to the proposed
improvements or change of use. Details shall only be shown on
designated detail sheets.
(33) Show drainage improvements as needed, at the discretion of the
City Engineer, where the development will change drainage
patterns, negatively impact neighboring properties or streets,
where there are existing drainage problems on the subject
property, or where circumstances generally would require drainage
improvements.
(34) Show any stream corridors. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
§ 425-61 VINELAND CODE § 425-61
1:422
(35) Show any wellhead protection area and provide an environmental
impact statement to identify the best management practices
proposed for wellhead protection, if applicable. [Added
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-39]
(36) Show any area of special flood hazard and any floodway. [Added
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-39]
(37) Show any wetlands or wetland transition areas. [Added
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-39]
(38) Show the developable land area of each lot. [Added 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(39) Provide copies of any existing or proposed deed restrictions or
covenants. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(40) Show such other details as may apply to the proposed
improvements or change of use. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
B. Major site plans shall: [Amended 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2;
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(1) Provide the data listed in Subsection A of this section.
(2) Show finished floor, top of block, garage floor, basement floor/crawl
space and exterior corner elevations for all buildings and
structures. Basement floor/crawl space elevation shall be not less
than two feet higher than the seasonal high groundwater level.
(3) Show contour lines based on United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey data or bench marks approved by the City Engineer.
(4) Show proposed grading at maximum one-foot intervals, for
sufficient distance to define runoff paths.
(5) Provide a stormwater system designed to sufficiently convey the
design storm as described in § 425-72 of this chapter. The
stormwater conveyance system shall be accompanied by design
computations and details.
(6) Provide an on-site disposal system or details of connection to the
sewer main.
(7) Provide approximate location of water well(s) and/or lateral(s).
(8) Provide street improvements, including, but not limited to,
concrete vertical curb, concrete driveway, and street restoration,
§ 425-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-61
1:423
showing the location, type and size, and typical construction
details.
(9) Provide existing and proposed outdoor trash areas, screened as
required, with location dimensioned.
(10) Show retaining walls and walkways, indicating dimensions of the
structures, with locations dimensioned. Details of any retaining
walls shall be provided.
(11) Show the center-line elevations of the existing streets.
(12) Show future street extensions, as indicated on the Master Plan of
Street Extensions.
(13) Provide hydrologic soil group (HSG) and soil boring log
information, including, but not limited to, soil profile, permeability
rate, existing ground elevation, elevation of seasonal high water
groundwater depicted on drainage/grading sheets.
(14) Lighting and landscaping plans prepared by licensed professionals.
(15) Show basin cross sections, when applicable, indicating all relevant
elevations and topographic features. The limit of the cross section
shall be 50 feet from where the one-foot freeboard elevation
intersects the inner bank of the basin.
(16) Show storm sewer, existing and proposed, in plan and profile.
(17) Provide other data which may pertain to the particular site and use,
including traffic and environmental studies or impact analyses.
(18) Provide a landscaping plan showing any proposed landscape areas,
including buffer areas; the number, location, size, species and
location of proposed plantings; planting details; and proposed
means of irrigation. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(19) Provide preliminary architectural plans and elevations in
designated redevelopment areas. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(20) Provide a list of any design waivers or exceptions requested from
City development regulations. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(21) Identify the forest acreage to be removed and provide a forest
retention and tree replacement plan, where applicable. [Added
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-39]
(22) For residential development subject to the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS), provide a certification of the
design engineer, architect, planner, surveyor, as applicable, of
§ 425-61 VINELAND CODE § 425-61
1:424
§ 425-62. Required improvements. [Amended 10-8-1996 by Ord. No.
96-82; 7-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-51; 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
conformance of plan and details to RSIS: identify any requested
design waivers from RSIS: identify any requested de minimis
exceptions from RSIS, and identify any improvements proposed to
exceed RSIS. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
A. For minor subdivisions, the applicant shall install:
(1) Monuments, as specified under the Title Recordation Act (N.J.S.A.
46:26A-1 et seq.), placed according to state standards. In addition,
monuments shall be set at: [Amended 11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-50]
(a) All corners and angle points of the outbounds.
(b) The point where the municipal boundary line intersects the
right-of-way line of any existing and/or proposed street.
(2) Other improvements which, due to the nature of the use or to the
condition of the particular site, are deemed necessary by the
Planning Board to protect the public health and safety.
B. For major subdivision developments, the applicant shall install:
(1) New streets and, where required, street improvements in abutting
streets.
(2) Shade trees.
(3) Street signs.
(4) Stormwater drainage facilities.
(5) Water supply facilities.
(6) Sanitary sewer facilities.
(7) Topsoil, at least four inches throughout the site, stabilized by
seeding and planting on slopes of less than 12% or by sodding on
slopes of 12% or over. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or
used as fill.
(8) Monuments, as specified under the Title Recordation Act (N.J.S.A.
46:26A-1 et seq.), placed according to state standards. In addition,
monuments shall be set at: [Amended 11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-50]
(a) All corners and angle points of the outbounds.
(b) The point where the municipal boundary line intersects the
right-of-way line of any existing and/or proposed street.
§ 425-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-62
1:425
§ 425-63. Procedure for minor subdivision or resubdivision
approval.
(9) Curbs, except where 90% of the proposed lot frontages are 160 feet
or more.
(10) Recreational areas, where required, in accordance with § 425-82.
(11) Other improvements which, due to the nature of the use or to the
condition of the particular site, are deemed necessary by the
Planning Board to protect the public health and safety.
C. For all site plan developments, the applicant shall install:
(1) Street improvements, including but not limited to concrete
driveway aprons, curbs and gutters.
(2) On-site parking.
(3) On-site lighting.
(4) Screening materials.
(5) Buffer areas.
(6) Stormwater drainage facilities.
(7) Water supply facilities.
(8) Sanitary sewer system.
(9) Other improvements which, due to the nature of the use or to the
condition of the particular site, are deemed necessary by the
Planning Board to protect the public health and safety.
(10) In all developments, the following improvements shall be installed
by the appropriate authority and assessed to the developer:
streetlights.
D. Sidewalks shall not be required unless one or both of the following
apply:
(1) Sidewalks exist along the frontage of the abutting property.
(2) The Board finds that, by reason of the particular conditions of the
site, its location or surroundings, sidewalks are required to protect
the public safety.
E. Off-tract improvements, if required, shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 425-47 of this article.
F. Any rules contained in the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq., shall take precedence over any
conflicting regulations within this chapter.
§ 425-62 VINELAND CODE § 425-63
1:426
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
ALL-INCLUSIVE DEED — A legal document which combines, by written
description, several parcels of land or parts thereof into one tract,
which deed is required for the purpose of establishing a lot that meets
the minimum standards set under the schedules of this chapter as a
provision for subdivision or resubdivision approval.
DETAIL SHEET — A separate sheet or sheets in a set of engineering or
architectural drawings specifically containing technical detail drawings
and notes. The subject parcel shall neither be shown in plan nor profile
on a detail sheet.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land to create a total of
five or fewer lots, provided that such subdivision does not involve a
planned development, a new street or the extension of any off-tract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated. The subdivision of any
portion of a minor or major subdivision which is proposed within three
years of the previous subdivision and results in the cumulative creation
of greater than five lots shall be considered a major subdivision. Any
previous minor subdivision which affects this result shall be subject to
§ 425-82 of this chapter.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of
any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law, or the alteration of any streets or the
establishment of any new streets within any subdivision previously
made and approved or recorded according to law, but does not include
conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
B. If the Planning Board finds that a development application conforms to
the definition of a minor subdivision or resubdivision as defined herein,
notice and public hearing may be waived. Minor subdivision or
resubdivision approval shall be deemed final approval by the Board,
provided that the Board may condition approval to ensure the provision
of such specified improvements as apply to the development under the
provisions of this chapter. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-24; 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52]
C. Minor subdivision or resubdivision approval shall be granted or denied
within 45 days of the submission of a complete application; otherwise,
approval shall be deemed to be granted. [Amended 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-24]
D. Approval is conditioned on a favorable report from the County Planning
Board where county review is required under Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c.
285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3).
E. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire within 190 days unless a
plat in conformity with approval and with the Title Recordation Act
(N.J.S.A. 46:26A-1 et seq.) or a deed clearly describing the approved
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recorder, the City
§ 425-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-63
1:427
§ 425-64. Procedure for major subdivision approval.
Engineer and the City Tax Assessor. Such plat shall be signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the Board before filing. [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-50]
F. The zoning requirements and all conditions of the approval shall not be
changed for two years after the date of approval.
G. The following shall not be considered subdivisions or resubdivisions if
no new streets are created: [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-24]
(1) Divisions found by the Planning Board to be for agricultural use
where all resulting tracts are five acres or more in size.
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
(3) Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
(4) Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.
(5) Conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land
owned by the same person or persons, all of which are found and
certified by the Zoning Officer to conform to the requirements of
this chapter and are shown as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the
Municipal Tax Map. [Amended 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-49]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights, specified
herein, prior to final approval after specific elements of a development
plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
B. A plat and such other data specified under § 425-60B of this article as is
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for preliminary approval have been met shall
be submitted to the Secretary. All data presented shall be in tentative
form for discussion purposes for preliminary approval only.
C. If the application is found incomplete, the developer shall be notified in
writing of the deficiencies therein by the Board for determination of
completeness within 45 days of submission of the application, or it shall
be deemed properly submitted.
D. A complete application to create 10 or fewer lots shall be granted or
denied preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such
§ 425-63 VINELAND CODE § 425-64
1:428
§ 425-65. Procedure for final major subdivision approval.
§ 425-66. Procedure for preliminary site plan approval.
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer.
E. A complete application to create 10 or more lots shall be granted or
denied preliminary approval within 95 days or within such further time
as may be consented to by the developer.
F. Notice of the application for development shall be given pursuant
§ 425-12 of Article I of this chapter. Any substantial revision of
improvements which were the subject of a hearing shall require that an
amended application be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of
the original application.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken
on a preliminary approved major subdivision after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or
fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or
guaranties properly posted for their completion, or approval
conditioned on the posting of such guaranties.
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application or within such further time as may
be agreed to in writing by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board
to act within said period shall constitute final approval, and a certificate
as to such failure shall be issued upon request.
C. Where County Planning Board review is required, final approval shall
be conditioned upon timely receipt of a favorable report from the
County Board.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MAJOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots, with
a proposed developed area of more than 5,000 square feet, or with a
proposed developed area of 5,000 square feet or less which involves
planned development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract
improvement which is to be prorated.[Amended 2-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-2]
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots with
a proposed developed area of 5,000 square feet or less, which does
not involve planned development, any new street or the extension of
any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated, and which contains
the information reasonably required for the Planning Board to make an
informed decision.[Amended 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2]
§ 425-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-66
1:429
PROPOSED DEVELOPED AREA — The portion of a development plan
in which any construction activity or man-made land disturbance is
proposed. Such construction activity or man-made land disturbance
would include, but not be limited to, buildings and structures, parking
and access improvements, utilities, drainage systems, landscaping,
fencing, clearing, grading, excavating, filling, mining and quarrying,
and any modification to an existing developed area, such as revised line
striping within a parking lot. For purposes of this chapter, the proposed
developed area shall be computed by dimensioning the area enclosed
by one rectangle, the sides of which touch the extreme points or edges
of the construction activity or man-made land disturbance.[Added
2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes,
waterways, buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of
ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping,
structures, signs, lighting devices and any other information that may
be reasonably required by the Board to make an informed
determination.126
B. Submission procedure. A site plan shall be required whenever a zoning,
building or conditional use permit is required or whenever parking
areas, driveways or access to a site is created, expanded or altered, or
for any use or change of use other than for one single-family dwelling
upon a lot or one two-family dwelling upon a lot or a farm. A site plan
shall be submitted for development of one single-family dwelling and
one two-family dwelling upon the same lot or of multiple two-family
dwellings upon the same lot, if permitted. However: [Amended
1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4; 11-26-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67;
2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2; 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-49]
(1) No site plan shall be required by the City of Vineland if the
proposed additional or altered developed area comprises less than:
(a) Three hundred square feet of developed area in the B-1
Business, R-P Residential-Professional, R-B Residential-
Business, R-1 Residential and R-2 Residential Zones.
(b) Four hundred square feet of developed area in the R-3
Residential and R-4 Residential Zones.
(c) Six hundred square feet of developed area in the B-2 Business
Zone.
(d) One thousand square feet of developed area in the B-3
Business and B-4 Business Zones.
126. Editor's Note: The definition of "standard site plan," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2.
§ 425-66 VINELAND CODE § 425-66
1:430
(e) One thousand two hundred square feet of developed area in
the I-1 Industrial and I-B Industrial-Business Zones.
(f) One thousand square feet of developed area in the I-2
Industrial Zone.
(g) One thousand two hundred square feet of developed area in
the I-3 Industrial Zone.
(h) One thousand five hundred square feet of developed area in
the I-4 Industrial Zone.
(i) One thousand square feet of developed area in the IN-1
Institutional Zone.
(j) One thousand square feet of developed area in the A-5
Agricultural, A-6 Agricultural, W-5 Woodlands and W-6
Woodlands Zones.
(2) Site plans shall be required for all of the above if any one or more of
the following apply:
(a) Any variance is required as a result of the proposed
development.
(b) The premises in question has never received a site plan
approval or the premises in question is not in substantial
conformity with its site plan approval.
(c) Parking areas, driveways or access to a site is created,
expanded or altered.
(d) Subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, the total of
additions and/or alterations to the developed area equals or
exceeds the square footages listed above.
C. The developer shall submit a site plan and such other data to the Board
as is required to make an informed decision.
D. The developer shall be notified in writing within 45 days of the
deficiencies if any application is found to be incomplete; otherwise, it
shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
E. If the Board requires any substantial change which has been the subject
of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted and proceeded
upon as in the original application.
F. Upon submission of a complete application which involves 10 acres or
fewer and 10 dwelling units or fewer, the Planning Board shall grant or
deny preliminary approval within 45 days or within such further time as
is agreed to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application which involves more than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling
units, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 95 days or within such further time agreed to by the developer.
§ 425-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-67
1:431
§ 425-67. Procedure for minor site plan approval.
§ 425-68. Effect of preliminary approval of major subdivision or site
plan.
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or a site plan shall, except as
provided under Subsection D of this section, confer the following rights to
the applicant for a three-year period from the date of preliminary approval:
A. Classification. A minor site plan, as defined by statute, shall be limited
to: [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4; 2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-2]
(1) Development of one or more lots, with a proposed developed area
of 5,000 square feet or less, which does not involve planned
development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract
improvement which is to be prorated.
(2) Applications for permits to conduct a business use or a home
occupation in the applicant's residence or in an accessory structure
located on the same lot as the residence.
(3) Applications for permits to construct or expand one- or two-family
residences, including accessory structures, which are located
within a designated flood zone, provided that the information
relating to flood zone elevations and requirements are clearly
indicated and are acceptable to the City Engineer.
B. If the Planning Board finds that a development application conforms to
the definition of a minor site plan, as defined herein, notice and public
hearing may be waived. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed final
approval by the Board, provided that the Board may condition approval
to ensure the provision of such specified improvements as apply to the
development under the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-52]
C. Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the submission of a complete application; otherwise, approval shall be
deemed granted.
D. Approval is conditioned on a favorable report from the County Planning
Board where county review is required under Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c.
285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6).
E. The zoning standards and all other conditions under which minor site
plan approval is granted shall not be changed for two years after the
date of approval.
A. That the general terms and conditions of the preliminary approval shall
not be changed, including but not limited to use requirements, layout
and design standards for improvements, lot size, yard dimensions, offtract
improvements and the specifics of site plan approval.
§ 425-67 VINELAND CODE § 425-68
1:432
§ 425-69. Procedure for final approval of site plans.
§ 425-70. Effect of final approval of major subdivision or site plan.
Final approval provides that:
B. That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, all or part of the development
plan.
C. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year not to exceed a total extension of two years.
D. That the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsections
A, B and C above, in the case of a subdivision or site plan comprising 50
acres or more, for such period longer than three years as shall be
determined by the Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
extent of the proposed construction, the economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development.
E. The duration of preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan
shall be the same as the period of zoning protection permitted in this
section. [Added 8-24-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-43]
A. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates conform to the standards established
herein for final approval and conform to the conditions of the
preliminary approval, provided that the Planning Board may permit
minimal deviations, in the case of a planned residential development
(PRD) or planned cluster development (PCD), necessitated by
conditions beyond the developer's control. The conditions of the
preliminary approval shall be included on the plan in the form of a note.
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after the
submission of a complete application. Failure to act within said period
shall constitute final approval, and a certificate as to such failure shall
be issued by the Secretary on request.
C. Where County Planning Board approval is required, final approval shall
be conditioned upon timely receipt of a favorable report from the
County Board.
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval and all
other rights conferred, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed for two years after the date of final approval, except that said
rights shall expire for a major subdivision which has not been duly
recorded. Where approval has been granted and the major subdivision
duly recorded, the Planning Board may extend such protection period
for one year but may not exceed three one-year extensions. The
§ 425-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-70
1:433
granting of final approval terminates the period of preliminary
approval.
B. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of 50
acres or more, the Board may grant such rights for longer than two
years based on the considerations cited under § 425-68D of this article.
[Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-84]
C. No physical feature of layout or space shown on an approved site plan
shall be changed, modified or altered during construction from that
shown on the approved plan without Planning Board approval.
D. The duration of final approval of a major subdivision or site plan shall be
the same as the period of zoning protection permitted in this section.
[Added 8-24-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-43]
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 to 40:55D-59.)
§ 425-70 VINELAND CODE § 425-70
1:434
ARTICLE VII
Design Standards127
§ 425-71. Flood damage prevention. [Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-84; 3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 87-11; 7-27-1993 by Ord. No.
93-67; 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-17]
A. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives.
(1) Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey
has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore,
the City Council of the City of Vineland, Cumberland County, New
Jersey, does ordain as follows:
(2) Findings of fact.
(a) The flood hazard areas of the City of Vineland are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard, which increase
flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored,
cause damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately
floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(3) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this section (§ 425-71) to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
(a) Protect human life and health;
(b) Minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;
(c) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;
(d) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
127. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2009-72, adopted 11-24-2009, readopted in its entirety
without change Ord. No. 2008-39, which amends this article.
§ 425-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-71
1:435
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(f) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to
minimize future flood blight areas;
(g) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
(h) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
(4) Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its
purposes, this section includes methods and provisions for:
(a) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
(b) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at
the time of initial construction;
(c) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which help
accommodate or channel floodwaters;
(d) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development,
which may increase flood damage; and
(e) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers,
which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards in other areas.
B. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section (§ 425-71) shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meanings they have in common usage and to give this section its most
reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding), where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain), where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the City Engineer's interpretation
of any provision of this section (§ 425-71) or a request for a variance.
§ 425-71 VINELAND CODE § 425-71
1:436
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on
a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a onepercent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. It is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM)
as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS), including the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation
represents the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has
a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor elevated above the base flood elevation, plus freeboard,
by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
§ 425-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-71
1:437
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A manufactured home
park, as defined in § 425-100, for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the spaces on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevations of
the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
or erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without accumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than 0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 425-71 VINELAND CODE § 425-71
1:438
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing
walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure,
useable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage,
in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest
floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of other applicable nonelevation design
requirements of 44 CFR Section 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home spaces for rent.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs, which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 425-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-71
1:439
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A manufactured home park,
as defined in § 425-100, for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the spaces on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle that is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab
or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. "Substantial damage"
also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or
more separate occasions during a ten-year period, for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 425-71 VINELAND CODE § 425-71
1:440
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period,
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
"Substantial improvement" also means cumulative substantial
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed, or
repetitive loss. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this section
(§ 425-71) that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise
be prohibited by this section.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this section (§ 425-71). A new or substantially
improved structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications, which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
C. General provisions.
(1) Lands to which this section (§ 425-71) applies. This section shall
apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of
the City of Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey.
(2) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
(a) The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Vineland,
Community No. 340176, are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
[1] A scientific and engineering report entitled, "Flood
Insurance Study, Cumberland County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)," dated June 16, 2016.
[2] "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cumberland County, New
Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," as shown on Map Index and
Panels 34011C0054E, 34011C0058E, 34011C0062E,
34011C0064E, 34011C0066E, 34011C0067E,
34011C0068E, 34011C0069E, 34011C0088E,
§ 425-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-71
1:441
34011C0089E, 34011C0177E, 34011C0179E,
34011C0183E, 34011C0185E, 34011C0191E,
34011C0192E, 34011C0194E, 34011C0201E,
34011C0202E, 34011C0203E, 34011C0204E,
34011C0206E, 34011C0208E, 34011C0209E,
34011C0211E, 34011C0212E, 34011C0213E,
34011C0214E, 34011C0216E and 34011C0218E, whose
effective date is June 16, 2016.
(b) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a
part of this section (§ 425-71). The Flood Insurance Study,
maps and advisory documents are on file at 640 East Wood
Street, Vineland, New Jersey.
(3) Penalties for noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter
be constructed, relocated to, extended, converted, or altered
without full compliance with the terms of this section (§ 425-71)
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
section by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this section or fails to comply with any of its requirements
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500 or be
imprisoned for not more than six months, or both, for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Any day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the City of Vineland from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(4) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section (§ 425-71) is not
intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section and
other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(5) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section
(§ 425-71), all provisions shall be:
(a) Considered as minimum requirements;
(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under State statutes.
(6) Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(a) The degree of flood protection required by this section
(§ 425-71) is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
§ 425-71 VINELAND CODE § 425-71
1:442
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
section does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages.
(b) This section shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Vineland, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this section or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
D. Administration.
(1) Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall
be obtained before construction or development begins, including
placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood
hazard established in Subsection C(2) above. An approved
development permit shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of any
construction permits by the Construction Official within any area of
special flood hazard. Application for a development permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the City Engineer and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the
following information is required:
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure
has been floodproofed;
(c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Subsection E(2)(b)
below; and
(d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
(2) Designation of the local administrator. The City Engineer is hereby
appointed to administer and implement this section (§ 425-71) by
granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
(3) Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the City
Engineer shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Permit review.
§ 425-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-71
1:443
[1] Review all development permits to determine that the
permit requirements of this section (§ 425-71) have been
satisfied.
[2] Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
[3] Review all development permits to determine if the
proposed development is located in the floodway. If located
in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions
of Subsection E(3)(a) below are met.
[4] Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below
the base flood level. For this, the City Engineer shall
consult with and accept the professional opinion of the
Construction Official on matters that are normally
regulated by the Construction Official.
(b) Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood
elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with Subsection C(2) above, Basis for establishing
the areas of special flood hazard, the City Engineer shall
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer Subsection E(2)(a) below,
Specific standards, Residential construction, and Subsection
E(2)(b) below, Specific standards, Nonresidential construction.
(c) Information to be obtained and maintained.
[1] Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures, and whether or
not the structure contains a basement.
[2] For all new or substantially improved floodproofed
structures:
[a] Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level); and
[b] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
Subsection D(1)(c) above.
[3] Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this section (§ 425-71).
(d) Alteration of watercourses.
[1] Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and
§ 425-71 VINELAND CODE § 425-71
1:444
Flood Control Section and the Land Use Regulation
Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to
the Federal Insurance Administration.
[2] Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(e) Substantial damage review.
[1] After an event resulting in building damages, assess the
damage to structures due to flood and nonflood causes,
with the assistance of the Construction Official.
[2] Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of
substantial damage structures and provide a letter of
substantial damage determination to the owner and the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Dam
Safety and Flood Control Section.
[3] Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements
of Subsection E(2)(a) below, Specific standards,
Residential construction, and Subsection E(2)(b) below,
Specific standards, Nonresidential construction.
(f) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations
where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the
areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of
the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal
the interpretation as provided in Subsection D(4) below.
(4) Variance procedure.
(a) Appeal board.
[1] The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
established by City Council, shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this
section (§ 425-71). Jurisdiction shall be determined as with
other land use appeals and variances.
[2] The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an
error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the City Engineer in the enforcement or administration
of this section (§ 425-71).
[3] Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
§ 425-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-71
1:445
Superior Court of New Jersey, as provided in Rule 4:69-1
et seq.
[4] In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, and standards specified in
other subsections of this section, and:
[a] The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others;
[b] The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;
[c] The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
[d] The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;
[e] The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;
[f] The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or
erosion damage;
[g] The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
and anticipated development;
[h] The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program of that area;
[i] The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
[j] The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site; and
[k] The costs of providing governmental services during
and after flood conditions, including maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
[5] Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D(4)(a)[4]
above and the purposes of this section (§ 425-71), the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach
§ 425-71 VINELAND CODE § 425-71
1:446
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this section.
[6] The City Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon
request.
(b) Conditions for variances.
[1] Generally, variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements, to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the base flood
level, providing all the items in Subsection D(4)(a)[4]
above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
[2] Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an historic structure and that the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
[3] Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
[4] Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
[5] Variances shall only be issued upon:
[a] A showing of good and sufficient cause;
[b] A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
and,
[c] A determination that the granting of a variance will
not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, as identified in Subsection
D(4)(a)[4] above; or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
[6] Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be
built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood
§ 425-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-71
1:447
elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
E. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
(1) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Construction Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the following standards, whichever is more
restrictive, is required:
(a) Anchoring.
[1] All new construction to be placed or substantially
improved and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
[2] All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but
are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
(b) Construction materials and methods.
[1] All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
[2] All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage.
(c) Utilities.
[1] All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system;
[2] New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the
systems into floodwaters;
[3] On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and
[4] For all new construction and substantial improvements,
the electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-
§ 425-71 VINELAND CODE § 425-71
1:448
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall
be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(d) Subdivision and new development proposals.
[1] All subdivision and other new development proposals shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
[2] All subdivision and other new development proposals shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
[3] All subdivision and other new development proposals shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage; and
[4] Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all major
subdivisions, as defined in § 425-64, and other new
development proposals, which contain one acre or more.
(e) Enclosure openings.
[1] All new construction and substantial improvements having
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor, which are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage, in an area other than a basement, and which are
subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[a] A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding, shall be provided.
[b] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.
[2] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base
flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in Subsection
C(2) above, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard,
or in Subsection D(3)(b) above, Use of other base flood data, the
following standards are required:
§ 425-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-71
1:449
(a) Residential construction.
[1] New construction and substantial improvements of any
residential structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated at or
above the base flood elevation plus two feet, or as required
by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive;
[2] New construction and substantial improvements of any
residential structure located in an AO or AH Zone shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated
above the depth number specified in feet plus two feet,
above the highest adjacent grade, or at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is
specified, and adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes shall be required to guide floodwaters around
and away from proposed structures.
(b) Nonresidential construction.
[1] In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus two feet,
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive; or be floodproofed so that below the base
flood elevation plus two feet, or as required by ASCE/SEI
24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is more restrictive, the
structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; has structural
components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such
certification shall be provided to the City Engineer as set
forth in Subsection D(3)(c)[2] above.
[2] In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure located in an AO or AH
Zone shall either have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated above the depth number
specified in feet plus two feet, above the highest adjacent
§ 425-71 VINELAND CODE § 425-71
1:450
grade or at least three feet above the highest adjacent
grade if no depth number is specified, and adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes shall also be
required to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures; or be floodproofed so that below the
highest adjacent grade plus two feet, the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water; has structural components capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects
of buoyancy; and be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the City
Engineer as set forth in Subsection D(3)(c)[2] above.
(c) Manufactured homes.
[1] Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance
with Subsection E(1)(a)[2] above.
[2] All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved within an area of special flood hazard shall:
[a] Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
[b] Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
[c] Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood damage; and
[d] Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
top of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood
elevation plus two feet, or as required by ASCE/SEI
24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more restrictive.
(3) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard
established in Subsection C(2) above, are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due
to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(a) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge.
(b) If Subsection E(3)(a) above is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements must comply with Subsection E,
Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
§ 425-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-71
1:451
§ 425-72. Stormwater control. [Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord. No.
86-84; 2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7; 12-26-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-110]
(c) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood
elevation data has been provided and no floodway has been
designated, the accumulative effect of any proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any point.
F. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this section shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
the section (§ 425-71), which shall remain in full force and effect, and
for this purpose the provisions of this section are hereby declared to be
severable.
G. Enactment.
(1) Adoption. This section shall be effective on June 16, 2016, and shall
remain in force until modified, amended or rescinded by the City
Council of the City of Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey.
A. Scope and purpose.
(1) Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low-impact
techniques shall be required before relying on structural BMPs.
Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive
site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being
placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source
control plans should be developed based upon physical site
conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated quantity or
amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management
BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance
standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater recharge.
(2) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in Subsection B, and to require
retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets. [Amended 1-29-2013
by Ord. No. 2012-68]
(3) Applicability.
(a) This section shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
§ 425-71 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:452
[1] Nonresidential major developments; and
[2] Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(b) This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the City of Vineland.
(c) Retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets shall be applicable as
provided in § 425-72K. [Added 1-29-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-68]
(4) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance. In their interpretation
and application, the provisions of this section shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety and general welfare. This section is not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation,
statute or other provision of law, except that, where any provision
of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by
any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law,
the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
B. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain which
is subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. Refer to § 425-71.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
(1) A county planning agency; or
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:453
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment
Plan Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as
urban, regional, town, village or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
lands, development means any activity that requires a state permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of
any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et
seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
GROUNDWATER MOUNDING ANALYSIS — A test performed to
demonstrate that the groundwater below a stormwater infiltration
basin will not mound up, encroach on the unsaturated zone, break the
surface of the ground at the infiltration area or downslope and create
an overland flow situation.
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:454
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that meets the definition
of "major subdivision" in § 425-64A or the definition of "major site plan"
in § 425-66A.[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township or village.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
City or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater. [Added 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2012-68]
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a
compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, City of Vineland, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural and construction waste or runoff, or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters
or surface waters of the state or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:455
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the
State Plan Policy Map adopted by the State Planning Commission that
is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment
and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.[Added 1-29-2013
by Ord. No. 2012-68]
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may
be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood given priority access to state
resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:456
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or
Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
C. General standards.
(1) Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(a) Stormwater management measures for major development
shall be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality standards in Subsection D. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the
design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet
these standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into
the design.
(b) The standards in this section apply only to new major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in
receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge.
The standards do not apply to new major development to the
extent that alternative design and performance standards are
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or
water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
D. Stormwater management requirements for major development.
(1) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development in accordance with Subsection J.
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:457
(2) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered
species as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or
Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A.
13:1B-15.147 through 13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata
(swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlenbergii (bog turtle).
(3) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7):
(a) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
(4) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7) may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis
that, through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of Subsection D(6)
and (7) to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7), existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(4)(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7) that were not
achievable on site.
(5) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:458
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
Subsection D(6) and (7) shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at
Subsection D(5)(b) into the design. The applicant shall identify
the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the
project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for
engineering, environmental or safety reasons to incorporate
any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection D(5)(b) below into the design of a
particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed;
[5] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction;
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes
the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to
prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are
not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems, including
features that satisfy Subsection D(5)(c) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:459
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under Subsection D(5)(b)[9][b]
above shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain
inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash and other floating,
suspended or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard
see Subsection D(5)(c)[3] below.
[1] Grates.
[a] Design engineers shall use either of the following
grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or
another ground surface to collect stormwater from
that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
[i] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[ii] A different grate, if each individual clear space in
that grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the
smallest dimension.
[b] Examples of grates subject to this standard include
grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on
storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than 7.0 square inches or be
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:460
no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
The City of Vineland utilizes J-type curb heads. These
heads have tines measuring approximately 1 13/16 inches
wide spaced two inches apart that are 3 1/2 inches high
along the face of the curb head.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards.
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection D(7)(a) are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could
not pass through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in Subsection D(7)(a).
[d] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in
Subsection D(6) and (7) shall be subjected to a conservation
restriction filed with the Cumberland County Clerk's office, or
subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that
measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:461
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G.
(6) Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity
standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration
and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff
quantity impacts of major development.
[1] The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
and implementing rules.
[2] The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge calculations at Subsection E, either:
[i] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater
management measures maintain 100% of the
average annual preconstruction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
[ii] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff
volume from preconstruction to post construction
for the two-year storm is infiltrated.
[b] This groundwater recharge requirement does not
apply to projects within the urban redevelopment area
or to projects subject to Subsection D(6)(a)[2][c]
below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:
[i] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
High pollutant loading areas are areas in
industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored or applied; areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas
where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities" as
defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:462
where recharge would be inconsistent with
Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations
and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[ii] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents and
detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that
are exposed to stormwater.
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact
on the groundwater table and design the site so as to
avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse
hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to,
exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high-water
table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements, or interference with the proper operation
of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient
of the groundwater recharge area.
[3] In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff calculations at Subsection E,
complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that, for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events do not exceed at any
point in time the preconstruction runoff hydrographs
for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased
volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:463
site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts
of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming
full development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area; or
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-,
and one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and
80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff
rates. The percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to
the portion of the site on which the proposed
development or project is to be constructed. The
percentages shall not be applied to post-construction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets
the definition of major development at Subsection B shall be
submitted to the appropriate soil conservation district for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of
this section and any applicable soil conservation district
guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control.
For the purposes of this section, "agricultural development"
means land uses normally associated with the production of
food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
(7) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the post-construction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from
the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required for
water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious
surface is being proposed on a development site. The
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater
runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25
inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality
design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the
volume of runoff may take into account the implementation of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management
measures.
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:464
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G. The BMP
Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed in
Subsection G. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the
removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall
be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant
shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:465
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40 to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See Subsection F(3)
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60 to 80%
Wet pond 50 to 90%
(d) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eightypercent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area,
unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design
storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum
extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performance
standards in Subsection D(6) and (7).
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection G.
(g) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to
prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified
as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas (SWRPA) shall be
established along all waters designated Category One at
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:466
N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial or intermittent streams that drain
into or upstream of the Category One waters as shown on the
USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the county soil surveys within
the associated HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be
established for the protection of water quality, aesthetic value,
exceptional ecological significance, exceptional recreational
significance, exceptional water supply significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply
Category One waters. These areas shall be designated and
protected as follows:
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[a] A three-hundred-foot special water resource
protection area shall be provided on each side of the
waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway
from the top of the bank outwards or from the center
line of the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed
to follow natural succession.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection
D(7)(h)[1][a] above shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred
(for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where the applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to
the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval
by the Department.
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the
"Standards For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through
the special water resource protection area cannot comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:467
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,"
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150
feet of the Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by
this section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
post-construction removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact
on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and Soil
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall
be subject to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as
an element of a regional stormwater management plan or
by a municipality through an adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) has been approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan
shall be the applicable special water resource protection
area requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in Subsection D(7)(h)[1][a]
above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan
allow the reduction of the special water resource
protection area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
[5] Subsection D(7)(h) does not apply to the construction of
one individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:468
larger development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009.
E. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge.
(1) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following.
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
[1] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4 -
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds; or
[2] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at
Subsection E(1)(a)[1] and the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods at Subsection E(1)(a)[2]. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer
verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or
portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover
have existed on the site during the five years immediately prior
to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there
is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition
(if the land use type is pasture, lawn or park), with good cover
(if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
(c) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows
or culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater
runoff rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:469
rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from
unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area
modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55 -
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may
be employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
(2) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is
available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427.
F. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas,
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal highwater
table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone
carbonate rocks (limestone).
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
repairs and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater
than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one
inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In
addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Subsection H(2).
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:470
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed and installed to be strong, durable, and
corrosion-resistant. Measures that are consistent with the
relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4 and 5:21-7.5 shall be
deemed to meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at Subsection H.
(f) Stormwater management basins shall be provided with an
access drive, a minimum of 12 feet wide, constructed of
pervious pavers. For access drives longer than 150 feet, the
access drive shall be constructed with a turnaround area.
(g) As-built permeability test results of any new stormwater
management basin shall be provided to the City of Vineland
prior to the release of surety.
(h) Upon completion of any stormwater management basin and
prior to release of surety, the design engineer shall certify in
writing to the City of Vineland that the basin has been
constructed according to the approved design, that any
approved deviations are noted and that the basin has been
properly cleaned after 90% of the project's completion. The
engineer's certification shall also certify that the basin
currently operates as intended by its design, taking into
account all soil and water conditions encountered during
construction.
(i) The location of the one-foot freeboard elevation of all
stormwater management basins shall meet the minimum yard
requirements of the zone and shall also be at least 50 feet away
from any septic system, well or dwelling. Any septic system,
well or dwelling within 50 feet of the property line on which
any basin is built shall be located and shown on the plan. In the
absence of such facilities, a note shall be added to the plan
stating the absence.
(j) Street and yard inlet grates shall have elevations not less than
the required one-foot freeboard elevation of stormwater
management basins.
(k) The horizontal reaches of all underground stormwater
management recharge structures shall meet the minimum yard
requirements of the zone and shall also be at least 50 feet away
from any septic system, well or dwelling. Any septic system,
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:471
well or dwelling within 50 feet of the property line on which
any basin is built shall be located and shown on the plan. In
the absence of such facilities, a note shall be added to the plan
stating the absence.
(2) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by Subsection D of this section.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of Subsection D of this section, provided the pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the Department of
Environmental Protection and that the applicant provides sizing
computations signed and sealed by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of New Jersey.
G. Sources for technical guidance.
(1) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed below, which are available from
Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New
Jersey, 08625.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures, such as bioretention
systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
(2) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
(a) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards
may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation
Committee or any of the soil conservation districts listed in
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone
number of each soil conservation district may be obtained from
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:472
the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625;
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service; and
(c) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625.
H. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This section applies to any new stormwater
management basin.
(2) Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape
provisions.
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater
than six-inch spacing between the bars.
[2] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is
not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of
stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion-resistant and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance.
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:473
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion-resistant and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(c) For purposes of this paragraph, "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management
basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
[1] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency
identified in Subsection H(3) a freestanding outlet
structure may be exempted from this requirement.
[2] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool
of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2
feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent
water surface. See Subsection H(5) for an illustration of
safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
[3] In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm
shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
(3) All new stormwater management basins shall be protected from
public intrusion by both six-feet-high fencing and screening. If a
chain link fence is utilized, it shall be clad with black vinyl.
(4) Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(a) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for
stormwater management basins may be granted only upon a
written finding by the City Engineer that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
(5) Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management
basin.
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:474
I. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a
development subject to this section, the applicant shall submit
all of the required components of the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan at Subsection I(3) below as part
of the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision
or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with Subsection I(3) of this section.
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision
or site plan review process by the municipal board or official from
which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:475
official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or
Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project
meets the standards set forth in this section.
(3) Checklist requirements. The following information shall be
required:
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals.
The map, as appropriate, may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis.
[1] A written and graphic description of the natural and manmade
features of the site and its environs. This description
should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or
environmentally sensitive features, environmentally
critical areas and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
[2] The site analysis shall also include a groundwater
mounding analysis for each stormwater infiltration BMP.
The groundwater mounding analysis shall calculate the
maximum height of the groundwater mound based upon
the volume of the maximum design storm. The professional
engineer conducting the analysis shall provide the
Municipal Engineer with the methodology and supporting
documentation for the mounding analysis used and shall
certify to City of Vineland, based upon the analysis, that
the groundwater mound will not cause stormwater or
groundwater to break out to the land surface or cause
adverse impact to adjacent surface water bodies, wetlands
or subsurface structures, including but not limited to
basements and septic systems. If there is more than one
infiltration BMP proposed, the model shall indicate if and
how the mounds will interact. The mounding analysis shall
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:476
be calculated using the most restrictive soil horizon that
will remain in place within the explored aquifer thickness
unless alternative analyses are authorized by the
Municipal Engineer. The mounding analysis shall be
accompanied by a cross section of the infiltration BMP
and surrounding topography, and the mound analysis shall
extend out to the point(s) at which the mound intersects
with the preexisting maximum water table elevation.
(c) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map, indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where curbing and roadway superelevation
is existing and proposed. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan
and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions
shall also be required.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
Subsections C through F are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours (indicating high and low points), land area to be
occupied by the stormwater management facilities and the
type of vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed
plan to control and dispose of stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and post-development
conditions for the design storms specified in Subsection D
of this section.
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:477
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
[3] A summary narrative of the calculations shall be provided.
Said narrative shall include, but not be limited to:
[a] Design requirements;
[b] Design methodologies;
[c] Predevelopment and post-development peak
discharge and volume results in tabular form for all
design storms;
[d] New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet
(NJGRS) printout;
[e] Post-development TSS removal rates by drainage
area;
[f] Stage-area-storage table for proposed stormwater
management facilities, which will indicate basin
elevation in relation to basin surface area, storage
volume, peak inflows and outflows;
[g] Time to drain stormwater management basin
(calculations may be provided in other parts of
report); and
[h] Bulleted summary of conformance to the various
stormwater management requirements.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Subsection J.
(h) Nonstructural point system (NSPS) worksheet.
[1] The applicant shall complete the New Jersey
Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies Point
System (NSPS) and submit all pages for review.
[2] If the NSPS demonstrates that sufficient nonstructural
stormwater management measures have been utilized, no
further proof of compliance with the maximum extent
practicable requirement shall be required. However, if the
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:478
NSPS fails to demonstrate such compliance, such results
shall not be used to disapprove any permit application
sought by a proposed major development. Instead, the
applicant will be required to demonstrate compliance
through other and/or alternate means. This includes the
Low Impact Development (LID) Checklist contained in
Appendix A of the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual.
(i) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official
or board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of
any of the requirements in Subsection I(3)(a) through (f) of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship
on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially
affect the review process.
J. Maintenance and repair.
(1) Applicability.
(a) Projects subject to review as in Subsection A(3) of this section
shall comply with the requirements of Subsection J(2) and (3).
(2) General maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the
name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer
(for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as
having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in
a residential development or project, unless such owner or
tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-72
1:479
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Subsection J(2)(g) below shall be recorded upon the deed of
record for each property on which the maintenance described
in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow
and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of
vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of the development, including a record of all inspections
and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan
and the deed as needed.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsection J(2)(f) and (g) above.
(i) The requirements of Subsection J(2)(c) and (d) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes
a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
Municipal Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and
repair, the municipality or county may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
§ 425-72 VINELAND CODE § 425-72
1:480
§ 425-73. Buffers, screening, shade trees and landscaping.
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
K. Private storm drain retrofitting. [Added 1-29-2013 by Ord. No.
2012-68128]
(1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this Subsection K to require the
retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets that are in direct contact
with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or
alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the
discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans,
food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm
sewer system(s) operated by the City so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare.
(2) Prohibited conduct. No person in control of private property
(except a residential lot with one single-family house) shall
authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of
individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen),
reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact with
an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet either:
(a) Already meets the design standards contained in
§ 425-72D(5)(c) to control passage of solid and floatable
materials; or
(b) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standards contained in
§ 425-72D(5)(c) prior to the completion of the project.
L. Penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts,
maintains or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this
section shall be subject to the penalties outlined in § 425-312.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUFFER or BUFFER STRIP — A land area used to visually separate
one use from another or to block noise, lights or other nuisances,
which shall be maintained on a base of self-draining soils and which
may be required under screening standards to include fences, berms,
vegetation or a combination thereof.
LANDSCAPING — The provision of lawns, trees, plants and other
natural and decorative features in order to improve the visual and
climatic conditions of the land.
128. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection K
as Subsection L.
§ 425-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-73
1:481
SCREENING — A method of visually shielding or obscuring one
structure or use from another structure or use by using walls, berms or
densely planted vegetation which acts as a visual barrier and a muffler
of noise.
SHADE TREES — Those trees which provide shade in the summer and
shed their leaves in the fall.
B. Purpose. Buffer strips, screening, shade trees and landscaping shall be
used to achieve the following:
(1) The maximum harmony possible between land uses and land users.
(2) The reduction of glare, noise and pollution levels.
(3) The reduction of the volume of stormwater runoff required to be
carried away from the site.
(4) A safer means of controlling access to and from public streets.
(5) A safer functional pattern for on-site traffic circulation and
circulation between connected but separate uses.
(6) Improved protection of privacy and property rights.
(7) Improved protection of the quality of the environment.
(8) Provision of areas of shade which reduce temperature and energy
costs during hot weather.
(9) Provision for natural windscreens which protect from exposure and
reduce energy costs during cold weather.
(10) The creation of a more visually pleasing site which contributes to
the maintenance of an attractive community in which to live and
work.
(11) The preservation of some land in a natural state to offset the
monotony of continuous pavement and to improve the quality of the
urban scene.
(12) The protection of environmentally sensitive areas.
(13) A means to conceal service and trash collection areas from public
view.
(14) To generally preserve the amenities within public areas which
provide some relief from the adverse effects of stress engendered
by ever-increasing urbanization.
C. General provisions.
(1) The dimension standards set forth in this section are part of the
area, yard and bulk requirements of the zoning schedules,
specifically Sheet 1, Area, Yard, Bulk and Parking Standards
§ 425-73 VINELAND CODE § 425-73
1:482
(§ 425-308 of Article XV). An exception or change may be permitted
after public hearing upon clearly demonstrated need based on the
specific conditions or constraints of the particular site. [Amended
1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
(2) These standards shall not be applied to an existing site
development approved prior to the adoption of this section unless
such site development is enlarged or expanded, in which case the
standards of this section shall apply to the areas of enlargement or
expansion. However, these standards shall apply in all cases where
the existing conditions are found to be hazardous to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic or where a specific parking or drainage problem
can be relieved by their application. In such cases, the Board shall
require that revisions be made, but only to the extent necessary to
alleviate the problem, as a condition for approval of the
enlargement or expansion of the use.
(3) A buffer strip or buffer area shall be an integral part of a
development plan or an expansion, shall be permanently
maintained and shall not be encroached upon or reduced in any
way.
(4) Natural features, such as drainage swales, scenic views, trees and
such indigenous vegetation, shall be made part of the development
to the fullest possible extent. Such features shall be properly
maintained as well as such newly planted vegetation as may be
required for screening purposes.
(5) The cost of providing, planting and maintaining the required shade
trees and screening materials shall be placed under surety,
including any fences, walls or berms which may be part of the
screening requirement.
(6) It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or lessee to carry out
a care and maintenance program which assures that the required
shade trees and screening materials are kept in good condition and
that such planting as do not survive are replaced as soon as
possible. (Refer to Subsection H for enforcement.)
D. Buffers.
(1) Side and rear line buffer strips required in commercial and
industrial zones shall be a minimum of five feet in width, except as
modified below, and shall be provided for all developments which
require site plan approval. No parking shall be permitted therein
nor shall such buffers be paved except at locations which provide
for access across.
(2) Side and rear buffers which abut a residential use or residential
zone shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width for all developments
which require site plan approval except as modified below in the
R-1, R-P, B-1, and R-B-1 and R-B-2 Zones to screen commercial or
§ 425-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-73
1:483
industrial activities which abut a residential use or residential
zone. [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4; 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(3) In lieu of side- and rear-line buffer strips, solid fences or walls at
least six feet high may be erected behind the minimum front yard
building line in the R-1, R-P, B-1 and R-B Zones to screen
commercial or industrial activities which abut a residential use or
residential zone. [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
(4) Front buffer strips shall be provided for all developments which
require site plan approval and in residential development on street
frontage designed as reverse frontage. No parking or paving shall
be permitted within the front buffer strip. Sidewalks shall only be
permitted within the front buffer strip in the B-1 Zone only. Front
buffer strips shall be provided in accordance with the following
provisions; [Amended 9-27-1994 by Ord. No. 94-67; 4-10-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(a) A twenty-five-foot landscape buffer shall be required along all
public streets classified as a major or minor arterial or a major
or minor collector street. A fifteen-foot landscape buffer shall
be required along all other public streets. The landscape buffer
shall include canopy trees and ground cover and understory
and shrubs and must follow the standards provided herein.
(b) Not less than one canopy tree with a diameter breast height
(DBH) at planting of 2 1/2 inches shall be provided for every 50
feet of street frontage.
(c) All planted shrub and ground cover areas shall achieve a onehundred-
percent coverage of their planting area within one
year.
(d) The twenty-five-foot buffer along public streets may include a
berm ranging in height from one to two feet, maintaining a
two-foot height for at least 40% of the overall length. The
course and base of the berm shall meander where possible and
have side slopes no greater than 4:1.
(e) Loading, service or dumpster areas or similar items shall not
be placed in any buffer.
(f) Hedge, shrub and ground cover landscaped areas should be
planted to achieve one-hundred-percent coverage of the
planting area within one year of installation. All continuous
shrub hedges shall be installed at a minimum of 24 inches in
overall height and maintained at a height of 36 inches to 42
inches and one-hundred-percent opacity within one year of
planting. Determination of spacing should be considered as
follows:
§ 425-73 VINELAND CODE § 425-73
1:484
[1] Hedge/shrubs: three-gallon container grown, planted 36
inches on center maximum spacing. Plant count at thirtysix-
inch triangular spacing equals: planting area square
feet multiplied by 0.129 equals total number of plants.
[2] Ground covers: one-gallon container grown, planted 24
inches on center maximum spacing. Plant count at twentyfour-
inch triangular spacing equals: planting area square
feet multiplied by 0.290 equals total number of plants.
(5) Ground cover, such as grass, ivy or decorative stone landscaping,
shall be provided on all the areas of a site which are not used for
buildings, walkways, service areas, access drives and parking, and
such ground cover shall be maintained continuously.
(6) Parking areas which provide 50 or more parking spaces shall use at
least 5% of the land within said areas for divider strips or islands in
order to alleviate an otherwise barren expanse of paved area and to
provide locations for the required on-site shade trees. Parking lots
shall be planted with trees at a rate of at least one tree per 12
spaces. Parking shall not extend more than 12 spaces without a
tree island break. At time of parking lot construction and planter
installation, all planter islands shall be excavated to the full width
of the parking planter island and through the full depth of
compacted subgrade to remove all compacted material, limerock or
other material harmful to plant health, and backfilled with clean
planting fill. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(7) Divider strips located between rows of parking spaces shall be at
least 10 feet wide in order to accommodate car overhang and allow
for adequate planting space between bumpers. [Amended
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39]
(8) Island spaces placed at the end of parking rows shall be a minimum
of 10 feet wide. The height of landscaping materials placed within
such islands shall not interfere with visibility necessary for safe
traffic circulation.
E. Screening.
(1) Screening shall be required on all site developments which abut
residential uses or residential zones. In cases where development
is limited to a portion of a lot, the Board may limit screening to that
portion plus such reasonable extension as will protect the adjacent
residents from lights, noise, nuisance or other intrusions of privacy.
(2) Screening may consist of evergreen trees planted in two staggered
rows, massed evergreens or a wall or solid fence with some
shrubbery to break up the monotony of the wall or fence. The
§ 425-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-73
1:485
method, materials and arrangements shall create an effective
visual barrier at least six feet high within two years of planting.
(3) The height of screening located within a front buffer strip, if
screening is required therein, or any front landscaping shall not
rise above four feet nor obstruct visibility at points of access. If a
wall or fence is used, it may be solid only up to 30 inches above
grade, shall be at least 70% open in the remaining 18 inches and
shall be placed 10 feet back from the front property lines.
(4) Service areas and refuse stations shall be completely screened
from streets and adjacent properties by means of a wood fence, a
wall enclosure or by evergreen plantings.
(5) Evergreen trees for screening purposes shall be at least four feet
tall at the time of planting.
F. Shade trees.
(1) All development which requires site plan approval shall provide
one shade tree for each 50 feet of street frontage planted within the
front buffer area. Trees shall not be planted where roots or
branches can interfere with drainage facilities or utility lines.
(2) Within the parking area of a commercial or industrial site, one
shade tree for each 12 parking spaces shall be provided.
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-39]
(3) Existing shade trees may be counted to meet the above if their
location, size and condition substantially comply.
(4) Trees having wide-spreading roots, such as sycamores or willows,
shall not be planted where they can disrupt paving or underground
facilities.
(5) Trees which are resistant to motor exhausts, such as the London
plane, are recommended.
(6) Trees which resist salt and deicing compounds, such as locusts and
oaks, are recommended, particularly along public thoroughfares.
(7) Trees which are particularly susceptible to insects and disease,
such as the American elm, shall be avoided.
(8) Trees shall be of such type, selection and size as will have the best
chance to thrive. Those indigenous to the southern New Jersey
area, such as maples and oaks, are recommended.
(9) Tree planting specifications are fairly standard: being balled,
burlapped and properly staked. To assure survival, new trees
should be thoroughly watered biweekly for at least two years
during the spring, summer and fall months.
§ 425-73 VINELAND CODE § 425-73
1:486
(10) Though forest or wild trees do not do well when their habitat is
drastically altered, as many existing trees as possible should be
retained. Survival depends on finished grade variations which do
not vary more than six to 12 inches (unless wells are used), on
careful pruning of roots and limbs (over a two- to three-year period)
and on the erection of protective fences, particularly during site
construction. Such trees survive better in groupings. Very old or
disease-prone trees should not be retained. Under most
circumstances, nursery-grown stock has the best chance for
survival and growth.
(11) Deciduous trees shall have a caliper at breast height of at least 2 1/
2 inches at the time of planting. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
G. Landscaping.
(1) Places appropriate for landscaping may include raised walkways,
sidewalks and building walls, the ends of parking bays or in islands
created within a parking area, as well as around sign pylons, sign
walls, entranceways and along fences.
(2) Landscaping in narrow places shall utilize low-lying shrubs.
(3) Where landscaping materials are used to screen, hemlocks, white
pines, cedars and yews are recommended.
(4) Shrubs shall have a minimum height of two feet and a minimum
width of 18 inches at the time of planting.
(5) Decorative natural materials, such as wood chips or stones, shall
not be used between curbs and sidewalks.
(6) Pedestrian walkways shall be landscaped with additional shade or
ornamental trees equal to an average of one shade tree per 50
linear feet of walkway, unless the walkway is adjacent or included
within an existing compliant buffer. One shade tree shall be planted
for each 200 square feet of separate additional landscaped area.
[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(7) All landscaped areas shall be designed, installed and maintained at
a high level of quality, following best management practices for
landscaping. Landscaped areas shall include all areas of the site
that are to be planted with ground cover, shrubs, trees or flowers,
or any combination of plant material. All landscaped areas to be
planted pursuant to an approved landscape plan of a site plan for
nonresidential development and for multifamily residential
development shall have one-hundred-percent irrigated coverage.
All landscaped areas shall be irrigated with a timed, automatic
underground system utilizing pop-up heads and/or tree bubblers
and providing coverage of not more than 1 1/2 inches of water per
§ 425-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-73
1:487
§ 425-74. Parking and access.
week. The automatic irrigation system shall include a rain gauge
or other water-saving features to minimize wasted water. Broken
lines or damaged spray heads shall be repaired to minimize wasted
water. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
H. Enforcement. The continued maintenance of all site improvements shall
be enforced by the Zoning Officer, who shall notify the property owner
that a violation exists and that 60 days is given to correct it.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCELERATION LANE — An added roadway lane which permits
integration and merging of slower-moving vehicles into the main
vehicular stream.[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
AISLES — The travelled way by which cars enter and depart parking
spaces.
BAYS — The parking module usually consisting of two rows of parking
spaces and the aisle.
BUMPER — Permanent devices set in each stall to block the front
wheels and prevent encroachment beyond the stall space.
CURB RETURN — The curb connecting the ramp curb to the street
curb.
DECELERATION LANE — An added roadway lane that permits cars to
slow down and leave the main vehicular stream.
DRIVEWAY OPENING — The opening along the curbline or edge of
pavement at which point vehicles may enter or leave the
roadway.[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
HAIRPIN MARKING — Parking stall striping configured such that
double solid four-inch white stripes are placed 12 inches apart on
center connected by a solid four-inch white stripe at the entrance to the
parking stall.[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
ISLANDS — Built-up structures, usually curbed, placed at the end of
parking rows as a guide to traffic and also used for landscaping, signing
or lighting.
OVERHANG — The portion of a vehicle which extends beyond the wheel
stops or curb approximately 2.5 feet.
PARKING SPACE — A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a
public or private parking area; also known as "parking stall."
PARTY DRIVEWAY — A single way providing vehicular access to two
adjoining properties.
§ 425-73 VINELAND CODE § 425-74
1:488
RAMP — A sloping roadway, passage or route used to join two different
levels of streets, structures, buildings or sidewalks or a
driveway.[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
SPEED BUMP — A raised section of a paved surface or roadway
designed to interfere with and deter speeding traffic.
THROAT LENGTH — The distance between the street and the end
of the driveway inside the land development where the parking lot
is located. The throat is ended where the driveway terminates at the
first instance of internal intersection.[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-24]
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set the minimum standards
for the regulation of parking areas and parking lots in order to assure
safety, appearance and convenience.
C. General provisions.
(1) The standards set forth under § 425-73C(1) and (2) of this article
shall also apply to parking and access standards.
(2) Parking and service areas shall be integral parts of a site
development plan or an expansion of an existing development and
shall be properly paved and illuminated.
(3) Parking and service areas shall be so located that they do not
interfere with proper drainage and so graded that water does not
collect and remain on the surface.
(4) The cost of parking and service area construction shall be placed
under surety.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee to carry out a
care and maintenance program which assures that the parking and
service areas are kept in good condition and that parking space
lines are clearly visible.
(6) The standards shall not be applied to off-street parking for one- or
two-family residences of traditional developments.
(7) No commercial vehicle over one ton shall be parked overnight on
any residential lot or anywhere in a residential zone, except that
this provision shall not apply to a farm use nor shall it pertain to
privately owned recreation or camping vehicles.
D. Standards.129
(1) When the computation to determine the number of required
parking spaces results in a fractional space, any fraction up to 1/2
129. Editor's Note: See the Dimensions Table for Parking Spaces and Aisles located at the end
of this chapter.
§ 425-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-74
1:489
shall be disregarded and any fraction of 1/2 or over shall require
one space.
(2) Parking areas or lots which provide space for more than 50 vehicles
shall provide on-site groundwater recharge where deemed
necessary by the City Engineer and approved by the Planning
Board.
(3) Parking areas or lots which provide 200 or more spaces shall
provide divider strips between rows and/or landscaped islands in
accordance with § 425-73D(6) through (8) of this article.
(4) Parking areas or lots which include 25 or more spaces shall provide
one shade tree for each 25 spaces, to be planted within the parking
area or lot in addition to the required street shade trees.
(5) Where curbing or wheel bumpers are used, the length of the paving
in the parking space may be reduced by 2 1/2 feet, provided that
the car overhang shall not intrude into the required buffer space or
reduce abutting walkways to fewer than three feet.
(6) Where wheel bumpers are used, they shall be precast concrete
securely anchored by long pins into the pavement and shall be
designed to butt against the front wheels. Wheel bumpers are not
recommended because they can be, and often are, pushed out of
place, making snow removal and cleanup difficult.
(7) Old telephone poles or railroad ties laid on the ground to serve as
bumpers shall not be approved.
(8) All parking spaces shall be delineated by painted lines. Hairpin
marking is recommended for ninety-degree parking.
(9) Parking areas or lots shall be illuminated between sunset and
sunrise when the use is in operation. All illumination shall be
nonglare and focused downward and away from adjacent
residential uses and public streets.
(10) Grass or similar ground cover is difficult to maintain under car
overhang areas because of grease or radiator overrun. Either the
sidewalk usually placed in front of the building shall be extended to
include the overhang area or a two-and-one-half-foot-wide strip of
stones or other natural material shall be tamped down within this
space.
(11) In planning the parking arrangements, the developer shall focus on
ease of public use. End slots are difficult to use unless the spaces
are angled. If parking is perpendicular 90°, the end slot space shall
be widened or a five-foot indentation shall be placed at the end of
the bay.
(12) Provisions shall be made for ramps and extra-wide spaces for the
handicapped in accordance with the New Jersey Barrier-Free Code.
§ 425-74 VINELAND CODE § 425-74
1:490
(13) Driveways shall have a maximum slope of 2% through sidewalk
area and a minimum slope of 2% from the sidewalk area to the back
of curb/edge of pavement. Ramps, including driveways, shall be set
to a maximum grade of 10%; breakover angles shall not exceed
10%. Residential driveways shall have a minimum slope of 2% from
the building toward the sidewalk. Driveway slopes shall be labeled
on the grading/drainage sheet. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-24]
(14) Slopes around parking areas in excess of 2:1 shall be avoided. A
ratio of 3:1 is recommended with ground cover, such as ivy, crown
vetch or similar material, planted to stabilize the slope. When
excessive grading is required, parking should be terraced.
(15) Parking lots shall provide on-site turnaround space to permit cars
to exit in a forward position.
(16) The minimum paving standards for nonresidential sites shall be as
follows: [Amended 1-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1]
(a) Minimum standard: two inches of FABC Mix I-5 on a six-inch
base of I-5 granular material or dense graded aggregate.
(b) For moderate and heavy truck traffic: two inches of FABC Mix
I-5 over three inches of I-2 bituminous stabilized base course
over a six-inch base of I-5 granular material or dense graded
aggregate.
(c) For material storage areas, nonvehicular, or areas that will
routinely receive asphalt-damaging traffic: four inches of
three-fourths-inch median size broken, crushed subangular
stone, free of silts or fines in accordance with Section 901.04 of
the New Jersey Department of Transportation's Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest
edition) over a six-inch base of I-5 granular material or dense
graded aggregate.
(d) For stormwater basin access drives, in lieu of providing the
minimum standard listed in Subsection D(16)(a) porous/grass
pavers over a one-inch-thick bedding sand and a minimum of
eight inches of compacted aggregate base. The minimum
required width for a stormwater basin access drive is 10 feet.
[Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-84]
(17) Parking standards for multifamily housing developments.
(a) Location. Parking facilities shall be located as close as possible
to the building or dwelling unit they will serve.
(b) Groupings. Parking spaces shall be located in small bays rather
than strung along access drives.
§ 425-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-74
1:491
§ 425-75. Streets and easements.
(c) Walkways. Paved walks shall be provided from parking areas to
the buildings they serve.
(d) Layout. Safe and convenient parking can be provided by
arranging the buildings into a square and parking on the
outside of the square, thus leaving the interior as open space.
(18) Driveway aprons, sidewalks and driveways from the back of the
sidewalk to the property line shall be constructed of portland
cement concrete complying with NJDOT Class B concrete.
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(19) High points and lines of grade breaks in driveway/parking areas
shall be noted on the grading/drainage plan. [Added 4-10-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(20) Driveways shall be designed with sufficient throat length to provide
adequate internal circulation of the site. [Added 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-24]
(21) Compliance with the construction standards shall be required for
all site improvements. (See § 425-79 of this article.) [Added
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CARTWAY — That area of a street within which vehicles are permitted,
including travel lanes and parking places, usually measured between
curbs or curblines.
CHANNELIZATION — A traffic control device which forces vehicles
into certain traffic flows or turning movements.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — An easement which precludes future
or additional development of the land in order to preserve open space,
a scenic view, a waterfront or the facade of a building.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — An easement required for the installation
of sewers or drainage ditches and/or required for the preservation or
maintenance of a natural stream, watercourse or other drainage facility.
EASEMENT — The grant of one or more property rights by the property
owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another
person or entity.
LOCAL STREET — A street designed to provide access to the abutting
property and to discourage through traffic, generally connecting to a
collector.
MAJOR ARTERIAL — A roadway of limited access, such as New Jersey
Route 55 which carries traffic on multilanes from one region to another
within the state, generally connecting with interstate routes.
§ 425-74 VINELAND CODE § 425-75
1:492
MAJOR COLLECTOR STREET — A street which serves to collect traffic
from the minor collector streets and is part of the network which
comprises the main movers of traffic within the City, generally
connecting to a minor arterial.
MINOR ARTERIAL — A roadway, such as New Jersey Route 47, which
serves to collect traffic from the major collectors and carry it through
the City and into the adjacent counties.
MINOR COLLECTOR STREET — A street which serves to collect traffic
from local streets, generally connecting to a major collector.
MINOR STREET — A street which carries very little traffic, such as
a cul-de-sac, and serves only as access to the abutting lots, generally
connecting to a local street.
PERPETUAL EASEMENT — An easement that is self-perpetuating and
runs with the land.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be
occupied or is occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric
transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, waterline, sanitary storm sewer
and other similar uses, and which grants the right of one to pass over
the property of another.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established
at street intersections or driveway intersections in which nothing is
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such manner as to
limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving
the intersection. Sight triangles shall be in accordance with the latest
edition of AASHTO's "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets" with the exception that all maneuvers (left turns, right turns,
crossing) from a "stop" shall be calculated using "left turn from stop"
criteria. For applications involving multiple lanes, wide shoulders,
greater than 3% grades, or higher percentages of heavy vehicles,
adjustments must be made to lengthen the time gap portion of the
equation from which the sight triangle distances are based.[Amended
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
STREET — Any vehicular way which is an existing state, county or
municipal roadway, is shown on a plat approved pursuant to law, is
approved by other official action or is shown on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the County Recorder prior to the appointment
of a Planning Board and the grant to said Board of the power to review
plats, and includes the land between the street lines, whether or not
improved.
STREET SHADE TREE EASEMENT — An easement set adjacent to
the public right-of-way boundaries for the purpose of planting and
maintaining street shade trees, usually required where utilities and
infrastructure have preempted space within the dedicated public rightof-
way.
§ 425-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-75
1:493
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to classify streets based on their
function, to provide standards of design and construction, to provide
regulations which protect the integrity of the circulation plan and,
thereby, to increase public safety.
C. General provisions.
(1) The movement of people and vehicles is an important element of
the development review. The circulation plan is based on a logical
process. For example, in driving to work, one usually proceeds from
a minor or local street to a collector which leads to an arterial
roadway. Most drivers are willing to use roundabout routes to avoid
heavy traffic. The development plan for circulation should provide
for obvious preferences.
(2) Separate pedestrian and bicycle path systems are encouraged to
ensure safe segregation from vehicular traffic.
(3) The utilization of culs-de-sac and loop streets is encouraged where
appropriate. Such streets offer maximum privacy and safety and do
not permit short cuts by through traffic.
(4) The internal system should be determined by the demands of the
site, the traffic needs of the area and the volume to be generated by
the development. One system may be incorporated within another;
for example, a loop within a grid system which functions to
separate slow and fast traffic.
(5) Intersections should be as close as possible to right angles.
(6) The construction of retaining walls shall not be permitted in the
public right-of-way. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
D. Street classifications shall be as follows.
(1) Major arterial: New Jersey Route 55 (limited access route).
(2) Minor arterials:
Chestnut Avenue (from Delsea Drive to Lincoln Avenue)
East Railroad Boulevard
Elmer Road/Dante Avenue (from Delsea Drive to Union Road)
Garden Road (from Maurice River to Main Road)
Landis Avenue (from Maurice River to Delsea Drive and Main
Road to Union Road)
Lincoln Avenue
Main Road
Mayslanding Road
New Jersey Route 47 (Delsea Drive)
§ 425-75 VINELAND CODE § 425-75
1:494
Park Avenue (from Delsea Drive to Main Road)
Sherman Avenue
Union Road
West Railroad Boulevard
Wheat Road (from Delsea Drive eastwardly)
(3) Major collectors:
Almond Road
College Drive
East Avenue (from Park Avenue to Chestnut Avenue)
Maple Avenue (from Main Road to Brewster Road)
Mill Road
West Avenue (from Park Avenue to Chestnut Avenue)
Weymouth Road
(4) Minor collectors:
Brookfield Streets (connected)
Butler Avenue
Chestnut Avenue (east of Lincoln)
Cornucopia Avenue
East Avenue (from Strawberry Avenue to Park Avenue)
Elm Road
Foster Avenue/Magnolia Road (connected)
Franklin Drive/Italia Avenue (connected)
Hance Bridge Road
Maple Avenue (east of Brewster Road)
Oak Road
Orchard Road
Palermo Avenue
Panther Road
Pennsylvania Avenue
Spring Road
Venezia Avenue
West Avenue (from Weymouth Road to Park Avenue)
E. Building line modification for minor arterials. The building line setback
along minor arterials shall be 100 feet from the center line of the street,
except that structures legally located along said arterials which are
made nonconforming by the passage of this chapter shall be permitted
§ 425-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-75
1:495
to increase the size of the structure or portion thereof which is located
within the nonconforming area by up to 25%. No other increase of
such nonconforming structure shall be permitted as of right within
the one-hundred-foot setback established herein. (See also Article XV,
§ 425-306J.) [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
F. Street width and length standards.
(1) The following shall be standard: [Amended 5-23-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-25]
Street
Classification
Cartway
Right-of-
Way
Width
(feet)
Width
(feet)
Length
Maximum
(feet)
Maximum
Number of
Dwellings
Cul-de-sac 50 30 750 25
(R = 55) (R = 45)
Loop 50 30 2,600 50
Minor or local 50 30
Minor collector 60 to 70 40
Major collector 66 to 100 40 to 60
Minor arterial 66 to 100 40 to 60
(2) All new streets, public or private, shall conform to the construction
standards as approved and amended. See § 425-79 of this article.
(3) Circulation plans and intersections shall be compatible with the
Cumberland County Urban Area Transportation Plan.
(4) The location of new streets shall conform to the Master Plan of
Street Extensions, as duly adopted and revised by the Planning
Board.
(5) No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60°.
(6) Intersecting street lines shall connect with a curve having a
minimum radius of 20 feet.
(7) If a proposed street cannot be aligned with a street existing on the
opposite side of the road, the center line of the proposed street
shall be placed at least 150 feet away from the center line of the
existing street.
(8) At least two means of ingress and egress shall be provided for
residential developments which comprise more than 50 dwelling
units. While the primary purpose of an interconnected system is to
safely and efficiently distribute traffic throughout the site and to
§ 425-75 VINELAND CODE § 425-75
1:496
the adjacent streets, an important secondary purpose is to ensure
access by emergency vehicles.
(9) The radius of the curbs on an access road shall be at least 35 feet
when connecting to arterials or collector streets.
(10) Dead-end streets which are to be extended at some future time
shall provide a turnaround radius of 50 feet measured from the
center line of the right-of-way, and the full width of the street shall
be dedicated along the property line beyond which the street will
extend. The building line along the lots fronting on the cul-de-sac
shall conform as nearly as possible to the required setback, but in
no case shall be closer than 15 feet to the property line of the
temporary cul-de-sac.
(11) Stub-end streets, required to be dedicated to protect the integrity
of the Master Plan of Street Extensions, need not provide a
turnaround if they are less than 150 feet long.
(12) A tangent of not less than 100 feet shall connect reverse curves on
local or minor streets; a tangent of not less than 300 feet shall
apply to all other streets.
(13) When connecting street lines deflect from each other by more than
10° but by less than 45°, they shall be joined by a curve having a
radius of not less than 400 feet for minor or local streets. For all
other streets, the connecting curve shall have a radius of at least
750 feet.
(14) Grades on minor or local streets shall not exceed 10%. No street
shall be graded at less than 1/2 of 1%. Within 50 feet of intersection
with an arterial or collector, the maximum grade shall be 2%.
(15) All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient length to provide smooth transition and proper sight
distances.
(16)No street shall duplicate the name or so nearly duplicate as to be
confused with an existing street name. Street names proposed by
the developer shall be designated on the initial submission and
shall be subject to approval of the Planning Board. If names are not
designated, the Planning Board shall name the streets.
(17) Driveways on lots which front on arterial or collector streets shall
be designed to provide on-site turning space to avoid the necessity
of cars backing into the street. Joint driveways are recommended
because they reduce the possible collision points on the street,
reduce interference with traffic flow and reduce the total paving
necessary.
(18) The proposed street plan shall be designed to minimize the
necessity for driveway openings on existing streets with ADT at or
§ 425-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-75
1:497
above 3,000 and/or posted speed limits of 35 mph or above. New
residential development which abuts such streets shall provide
reverse frontage access from a minor street for the proposed
housing. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(19) The recommended minimum distances between center lines of
arterial and collector streets is 1,000 feet, between arterials (or
collectors) and minor streets is 600 feet, and between minor streets
is 200 feet.
(20) If final surface course paving is not completed by November 15 of
any year, all castings shall be set flush with the asphalt base course.
When final paving occurs, the manholes shall be manually reset
with masonry and inlets may be raised with four sided riser
extension units. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
(21) Road profiles shall be designed to have the tangent extensions
intersect at center lines. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-24]
(22) Permanent signs shall be installed in areas of future street
extensions, alerting the public to the potential of the extension. The
sign must be approved by the City Engineer. [Added 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-24]
G. Traffic impact statements (TIS)130 shall provide:
(1) A description of the traffic expected to be generated by the
proposed development.
(2) A description of the current traffic loads on the surrounding
streets.
(3) The probable impact of the development on capacities and service
levels.
(4) The improvements required to ease congestion and maintain
capacity and service.
H. Review guide for assessment of traffic impact statements. The Board
shall consider the following:
(1) The recommendations of the City of Vineland Police Department.
(2) The recommendations of the City Engineer.
(3) The existing and projected capacity of streets and intersections at
level of service "C."
(4) The number and location of driveways and intersections.
(5) The parking, if any, within the street right-of-way.
130. Editor's Note: For complete details, see § 425-80 of this article.
§ 425-75 VINELAND CODE § 425-75
1:498
(6) Existing and proposed traffic signals, pedestrian crossings and
channelization.
(7) The following guidelines for traffic volumes on residential streets,
which volume is generally less than its physical or optimum
capacity:
Type of Street
Average Daily
Traffic
(number of
vehicular trips) Type of Residential Use
Minor or local 0 to 2,000 Single-family detached
Collector 2,000 to 5,000 Single units and multiunits
on limited or reversefrontage
lots
Arterial 5,000 and over Multiunit developments with
limited access
(8) The following guidelines for assessing traffic volumes generated by
different uses:
Type of Use
One-Way Vehicular Trips
(per day)
Single-family detached unit Between 10 and 15
Multifamily units Between 4 and 8
Senior citizen housing Less than 4
NOTE: All figures include delivery and service vehicles. The higher
figures apply to high-income low-density areas where two to three
cars per unit are common. The number designated for multifamily
units generally depends on the size of the unit and the proximity
to public transportation
I. Easements. As a rule, utility distribution lines, such as water mains,
sewer lines, drainage facilities, electric, gas and telephone service
lines, are located within public rights-of-way. Sometimes, however,
other locations become necessary and easements must be considered.
(1) Location. Easements shall be located in accordance with the
approval of the appropriate authority and the Planning Board and
shall not be placed in any buffer which is required to be planted in
order to provide or preserve the required screening.
(2) Width. Easements shall be at least 20 feet wide.
(3) Width along watercourses. Easements measuring 25 feet in width
on each side of watercourses, streams or channels shall be
required.
§ 425-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-75
1:499
§ 425-76. Layout of blocks and lots.
(4) Natural features shall be disturbed as little as possible within
easement areas.
(5) Two paper copies of legal descriptions setting off the areas of the
easement by metes and bounds shall be submitted prior to final
approval of a development or any phase of a development.
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
J. Compliance with the construction standards shall be required for all
site improvements. See § 425-79 of this article.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BLOCK — An area of land usually bounded by streets, railways, streams
or other barriers to development continuity, which includes within its
boundaries land parcels designated by lot numbers on the Municipal
Tax Maps.
LOT — A parcel, tract or area of land established by plat or subdivision
as permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
B. Block regulations.
(1) Blocks shall be of such shape and size as will properly
accommodate the lot sizes specified for the zone under the
schedules of Sheet 1, Area, Yard, Bulk and Parking Standards
(Article XV, § 425-308). [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
(2) Block boundaries shall be designed to facilitate safe control of the
anticipated street traffic.
(3) Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet except where they abut
arterial streets.
(4) Blocks shall conform to the Master Plan of Street Extensions unless
revisions are duly approved by the Planning Board after public
hearing.
(5) Block numbers shall be assigned to conform to the system
governing Tax Maps and shall be approved by the Tax Assessor.
C. Lot regulations.
(1) Lot sizes shall meet the minimum requirements set under the
zoning schedules, Sheet 1, Area, Yard, Bulk and Parking Standards
(§ 425-308 of Article XV). [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No.
96-4]
(2) A condition of subdivision approval for a traditional development
plan shall be that lots shall front on streets which are or shall be
§ 425-75 VINELAND CODE § 425-76
1:500
§ 425-77. Fences.
dedicated to public use in accordance with the standards set
herein.
(3) Where extra width is required to be dedicated to widen an existing
right-of-way, the lot lines shall begin at the extra width line; lot area
shall be calculated from this line, and the building line setback
shall be measured from it.
(4) The minimum depth of a lot shall be measured along a horizontal
distance between the front and rear lines which is perpendicular to
the street at the midpoint of the lot or, in the case of curved streets
and cul-de-sac lots, shall be measured along a radial line which
intersects the midpoint of the lot frontage. [Amended 11-7-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-83]
(5) The frontage of a lot shall be measured along the street right-ofway
line which, on standard-width streets, is 25 feet from the
center line.
(6) Corner lots and other double-frontage lots shall be subject to two
front yard and two side yard requirements.
(7) Lot lines shall be represented by bearings and distances based on
actual field surveys.
(8) In the case of reverse-frontage lots, the street line which parallels
the arterial or major street shall be considered the frontage. No
other access to reverse-frontage lots shall be permitted.
(9) In the case of lots having nonparallel side lines, the frontage shall
be measured along the building line set for the zone.
(10) In the case of lots which abut curved streets or front on culs-de-sac,
the frontage shall be measured along the tangent of the center of
the arc at the building line set for the zone.
(11) Insofar as is practical and whenever possible, lot side lines shall be
at right angles to straight streets and shall be radial to curved
streets and to culs-de-sac.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for
regulating the use of fences.
C. General provisions.
(1) All fences shall be erected within the owner's property lines.
§ 425-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-77
1:501
§ 425-78. Signage. [Amended 2-28-1995 by Ord. No. 95-8;
7-25-1995 by Ord. No. 95-46; 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
(2) No fence shall encroach on a public right-of-way or easement.
(3) No fence shall obstruct visibility or create a potential hazard.
(4) All fences shall be owner-maintained in safe, sound and upright
condition on secure foundations.
(5) Reconstruction, relocation or alteration of existing fences shall
conform to the standards of this section.
D. Standards for fences in residential zones shall be as follows.
(1) Height: six feet maximum from a building line back; four feet
maximum from property line to building line.
(2) Openness, for fences located in front yards which exceed 30 inches
in height: at least 70% open on the vertical faces.
(3) Tennis courts: 10 feet minimum height, open-wire type.
(4) Swimming pools: four feet minimum height for in-ground pools.
E. For fences in business and industrial zones, except for LC, LMS and EG
Zones, the height standard shall be eight feet maximum, including
barbed wire, placed no closer than 10 feet to the front property line,
said ten-foot setback being the boundary of the required front yard
buffer. For LC, LMS and EG Zones, fences shall be prohibited, except
for enclosures for trash receptacles and building mechanical
equipment, such as air conditioning units, or as permitted by the Main
Street District Outdoor Dining and Seating Design Standards.
[Amended 7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-28]
F. Fences for public areas. A fence having a maximum height of 10 feet
may enclose public playgrounds, public parks or school properties.
G. Exceptions. These regulations shall not be applied to restrict the
erection of a wall for the purpose of retaining earth nor shall they be
applied to public utility installations.
H. Enforcement.
(1) If the Zoning Officer, upon report and inspection, finds that any
fence or portion thereof is not maintained as specified herein, the
Officer shall notify the owner in writing, state his findings and the
reasons for said findings, and he shall order such fence or portion
repaired or removed within 30 days of the notice.
(2) If after notice the fence is not repaired or removed within the time
given, the owner shall be subject to the provisions of Article XV
regarding violations and penalties.
§ 425-77 VINELAND CODE § 425-78
1:502
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate exterior signage to
promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare. More
specifically, it is the purpose of this section to:
(1) Enhance the aesthetic environment.
(2) Encourage the effective utilization of signage as a means of
identifying establishments.
(3) Create an attractive and viable business climate.
(4) Maintain the character of residential neighborhoods and rural
areas.
(5) Protect the natural environment.
(6) Minimize possible adverse effects on adjoining properties.
(7) Ensure compatibility of signage with surrounding land uses by
regulating said signage based on the character of an area (zoning
district) rather than on the nature of an establishment.
(8) Improve both pedestrian and vehicular safety by reducing
distractions, obstructions and hazards caused by the indiscriminate
use or placement of signage.
(9) Ensure uncluttered streetscapes.
(10) Reverse prior practices which allowed for excessive signage.
(11) Limit the competitive nature of signage, which has led to excessive
signage, by implementing reasonable and consistent regulations.
B. Applicability. The regulations of this section shall govern and control
the placement, establishment, erection, enlargement, expansion,
alteration, operation, maintenance, relocation and removal of all signs
within the City, with the exception of public signs, visible from any
public street, road or sidewalk or adjoining property. Any signage not
expressly permitted by these regulations shall be prohibited.
C. Definitions. Words and phrases used in this section shall have the
meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this
section, but defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall be given the
meanings set forth in said chapter. All other words and phrases shall be
given their common, ordinary meanings, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise. The following definitions shall be applicable to this
section:
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical
condition by any movement or rotation or which utilizes changes in
lighting or materials to give the visual impression of such movement or
rotation.
§ 425-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-78
1:503
ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE — Any device, with or without
commercial message, designed or intended to attract attention because
of size, or because of sudden, intermittent or rhythmic movement or
physical change, or because of lighting. Such devices shall include,
but not be limited to, pennants, banners, nongovernmental flags,
streamers, tethered balloons, propellers, whirlygigs, carnival lights,
beacons, searchlights, flashing signs and inflatable or oversized
decorations.
AWNING or CANOPY — Any fabric, plastic or structural protective
cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. A
marquee is not an awning or canopy for purposes of this section.
AWNING, CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign that is mounted
or painted on or is attached to or is a part of an awning, canopy or
marquee, such that no part of the sign shall extend above, below or
beyond the physical dimensions of such awning, canopy or marquee,
except as allowed for a wall sign. For purposes of this chapter, an
awning, canopy or marquee sign shall be considered a wall sign.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted on a pole or a building at one or more edges. For purposes of
this chapter, a banner shall be considered an attention-getting device.
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed into the
atmosphere or directed at one or more off-site points or any light with
one or more beams that rotate or move. For purposes of this chapter, a
beacon shall be considered an attention-getting device.
BILLBOARD — Any sign which directs attention to a business, product,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other
than the property on which the sign is located. A billboard may also be
a sign with no commercial message. Except in the Pinelands Area of the
City, billboard, for purposes of this chapter, shall not include signage
placed upon New Jersey Transit weather shelters within public right-ofway,
if approved by City Council.
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building and
date of its construction which is cut into a masonry surface or is made
of bronze or other permanent material.
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN — Any sign which identifies an institution or
organization on the premises on which it is located and which contains
the name of the institution or organization and the name or names of
the person or persons connected with it, greetings, announcements of
events or activities, or similar messages. For purposes of this chapter,
a bulletin board sign shall be considered either a freestanding sign or a
wall sign, whichever is appropriate.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — Any sign or portion thereof with
characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the
copy changes more than eight times per day, unless said copy provides
only an electronic or mechanical indication of time and/or temperature,
§ 425-78 VINELAND CODE § 425-78
1:504
shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign
for purposes of this section.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls
attention to a business, product, service, entertainment or other
commercial activity.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — Any sign erected on premises upon which
construction is taking place, during the period of such construction,
indicating the names of the architects, contractors or similar artisans or
the owners, financial supporters, sponsors or similar persons or firms
having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign, with no commercial message, which
guides and controls access and on-site traffic flow. For purposes of this
chapter, a directional sign shall be considered an incidental sign.
DIRECTORY SIGN — Any sign giving the name or name and location of
the occupants of the building to which the sign is associated.
DISTANCE OF SIGN PROJECTION — The horizontal distance from the
exterior wall surface of a building to the sign element the farthest
distance from said surface.
FLASHING SIGN — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which
exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any
means whatsoever. For purposes of this chapter, a flashing sign shall be
considered an attention-getting device.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures that are
placed on or are anchored in the ground and that are independent from
any building. In addition to ground, pole and pylon signs, for purposes
of this chapter, a sign placed on a decorative, wall-like structure shall
be considered a freestanding sign.
GOVERNMENTAL FLAG — Any fabric banner or bunting containing
distinctive colors, patterns or markings used as a symbol of a
government, political subdivision or institution.
GROUND SIGN — Any sign, other than a pole or pylon sign, supported
by structures that are placed on or are anchored in the ground and
that are independent from any building, such that the bottom edge
of the sign face of any ground sign shall be less than six feet above
grade. For purposes of this chapter, a ground sign shall be considered
a freestanding sign.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS — Decorations, with no commercial message,
clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly associated with
any national, local or religious holiday, displayed during appropriate
seasons.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any sign giving the name, logo, trademark
or other identifying symbol, address or any combination of the name,
§ 425-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-78
1:505
symbol and address of a building, business, development or
establishment on the premises where it is located.
ILLUMINATION — The lighting of a sign supplied in any manner by an
artificial light source.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — Any informational sign, with no commercial
message, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the property on
which it is located. For purposes of this chapter, directional signs, in
addition to signs providing information on hours of operation, accepted
credit cards, menus and the location of rest rooms and telephones, shall
be considered incidental signs.
INTEGRAL ROOF SIGN — Any roof sign erected or constructed as
an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of
any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the
highest portion of the associated roof structure and such that no part
of the sign is separated from the roof by a space of more than two feet.
For purposes of this chapter, an integral roof sign shall be considered a
wall sign.
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the
building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection
from the weather.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which lawfully existed prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which now
fails to comply with all the standards and regulations contained herein
by reason of said adoption, revision or amendment.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, with or
without commercial message, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. For purposes of this
chapter, a pennant shall be considered an attention-getting device.
POLE OR PYLON SIGN — Any sign that is mounted on a pole or pylon
or other supports such that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet
or more above grade. For purposes of this chapter, a pole or pylon sign
shall be considered a freestanding sign.
POLITICAL SIGN — Any sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local
election. A political sign is not a temporary sign for purposes of this
section.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign that is not permanently affixed to a
building, a structure or the ground. Such signs shall include, but not
be limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A-frames, T-frames, or sandwich boards; and signs
attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from any public
right-of-way, unless said vehicles are used in the normal day-to-day
operation of the business. For purposes of this chapter, a portable sign
shall be considered a temporary sign.
§ 425-78 VINELAND CODE § 425-78
1:506
PRIVATE SALE OR EVENT SIGN — Any sign advertising the private
sale of personal property at a person's residence, such as garage sales,
rummage sales and the like, or private not-for-profit events, such as
picnics, carnivals, bazaars, game nights, art fairs, craft shows and the
like, erected only for a limited period of time.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon
a building for support and which has a distance of sign projection of
more than two feet.
PUBLIC SIGN — Any sign erected by or on behalf of a governmental
body or public utility pursuant to any law, ordinance or governmental
regulation or in discharge of any governmental function, such as
posting legal notices, identifying public or utility property, conveying
public information or directing or regulating pedestrian or vehicular
traffic within public rights-of-way.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Any sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the
premises or a portion of the premises on which the sign is located.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign located in a residential zone that
contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located,
if offering such services at such location conforms with all the
requirements of this chapter.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign that is integral to or is erected or constructed
upon the roof of a building or which is dependent on a building for
support and which extends above the highest point of a building with a
flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or
the deckline of a building with a mansard roof.
SIGN — Any object, device, display, structure, fixture, placard or part
thereof situated outdoors or visible from outdoors, which is used to
announce, advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to
or communicate information of any kind about an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, event, subject or
location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs,
symbols, fixtures, colors, forms, graphics, illumination or projected
images. For purposes of this chapter, a governmental flag; an emblem
or insignia of any governmental, institutional, religious, fraternal or
civic organization; a window display; a work of art which relates no
commercial message or an athletic field scoreboard shall not be
considered a sign.
SIGN FACE — The entire surface area of a sign on which copy could
be placed. The computation of sign face area is explained more fully in
Subsection I(1).
SIGN HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the base of a sign to the
top of the highest attached component of the sign. The computation of
sign height is explained more fully in Subsection I(2).
§ 425-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-78
1:507
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign or advertising display generally but not
always constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, plastic, plywood or
other lightweight material, designed or intended to be displayed for a
limited period of time.
WALL SIGN — Any sign fastened parallel to or painted on or confined
within the wall of a building in such a manner that the wall becomes the
supporting structure for or forms the background surface of the sign
and which has a distance of sign projection of not more than two feet.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, with the exception of a directory,
identification or incidental sign, which is applied or attached to the
interior or exterior of a window. For purposes of this chapter, a window
sign shall be considered a wall sign.
D. Permitted signs. The following signs shall be permitted if in accordance
with all the regulations of this section and with § 425-308:
(1) Billboards.
(2) Building markers.
(3) Changeable copy signs.
(4) Construction signs (maximum sign face area: four square feet for
properties within residential zones and 32 square feet for
properties within business or industrial zones; maximum number of
signs: one per company or firm per street frontage).
(5) Directory signs (maximum sign face area: four square feet;
maximum number of signs: one per building entrance).
(6) Freestanding signs.
(7) Holiday decorations.
(8) Identification signs (maximum sign face area: two square feet;
maximum number of signs: one per street frontage).
(9) Incidental signs (maximum sign face area: two square feet; no
maximum number of signs).
(10) On-site real estate signs. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-87]
(a) "For sale" signs. The maximum sign face area is four square
feet for properties within residential zones and 32 square feet
for properties within business or industrial zones. The
maximum number of signs: one per street frontage.
(b) "Open house" signs are permitted in addition to "for sale" signs
within residential zones. The maximum sign face area is four
square feet. The maximum number of signs: one per street
§ 425-78 VINELAND CODE § 425-78
1:508
frontage. The maximum display time: three days per open
house.
(c) For purposes of this section, "open house" shall be defined as a
maximum of two consecutive days for which a property within
a residential zone is advertised to be opened to the general
public without appointments. The sellers or their
representatives shall be on-site and available to permit entry to
the premises for the purpose of showing the property to
prospective purchasers.
(11) Political signs (maximum sign face area: four square feet for
properties within residential zones and 32 square feet for
properties within business or industrial zones; maximum number of
signs: one per candidate or issue per street frontage).
(12) Private sale or event signs (maximum sign face area: four square
feet for properties within residential zones and 32 square feet for
properties within business or industrial zones; maximum number of
signs: one per street frontage).
(13) Public signs (exempt from regulations of this section).
(14) Residential signs.
(15) Temporary signs.
(16) Trespassing notices (maximum sign face area: two square feet; no
maximum number of signs).
(17)Wall signs.
E. Prohibited signs. The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning
districts:
(1) Animated signs.
(2) Attention-getting devices (banners and nongovernmental flags
erected by the Vineland Downtown Improvement District within
the Vineland Downtown Improvement District area shall be exempt
from this chapter provision).
(3) Off-site real estate signs.
(4) Portable signs, except those approved as temporary signs.
(5) Projecting signs.
(6) Roof signs, except those that are integral roof signs.
(7) Signs painted on or affixed to trees, utility poles, rocks, curbs,
sidewalks, fences, lamps, hydrants, benches, refuse containers or
enclosures, weather shelters or bridges (signage placed upon New
Jersey Transit weather shelters within public right-of-way, if
§ 425-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-78
1:509
approved by City Council, shall be exempt from this chapter
provision).
(8) Signs which contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene
nature.
(9) Signs which project into or over public right-of-way (signage placed
upon New Jersey Transit weather shelters within public right-ofway,
if approved by City Council, and banners and
nongovernmental flags erected by the Vineland Downtown
Improvement District within the Vineland Downtown Improvement
District area shall be exempt from this chapter provision).
(10) Signs which simulate in color, form, character, shade or lighting or
which could otherwise be mistaken for functional, directional or
warning signals maintained by governmental agencies, railroads or
public utilities.
F. Nonconforming signs. A sign which lawfully existed prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which now fails to
comply with all the standards and regulations contained herein by
reason of said adoption, revision or amendment shall be deemed a
nonconforming sign. Said sign shall not be reconstructed, relocated,
replaced, enlarged or changed in nature, purpose or type. Said sign
may only be cleaned, repainted or repaired, provided that no structural
change is made.
G. Sign zoning permit. No sign, except those enumerated in Subsection H,
shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated, enlarged or changed in
nature, purpose or type prior to issuance of a sign zoning permit by the
Zoning Officer and construction permits, if necessary, by the
Department of Licenses and Inspections. For issuance of a sign zoning
permit, a sign must be in conformance with the provisions of this
section and with § 425-308 or have been approved by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. (For a sign not in conformance
with the provisions of this section and with § 425-308, copies of the
application for a sign zoning permit, which shall be considered an
application for minor site plan and variance approval, shall be
submitted to the Board having jurisdiction. More explicitly, for a sign
not in conformance with the provisions of this section and with
§ 425-308 for a property with a single-family dwelling, duplex, farm or
nonconforming use or for a property which is subject to a use variance,
application shall be made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. For a sign
not in conformance with the provisions of this section and with
§ 425-308 for a property without a single-family dwelling, duplex, farm
or nonconforming use or for a property which is not subject to a use
variance, application shall be made to the Planning Board.) An
application to the Zoning Officer for a sign zoning permit shall include
the following:
(1) The applicant's name, address and telephone number.
§ 425-78 VINELAND CODE § 425-78
1:510
(2) The property owner's name, address and telephone number.
(3) The authorization by property owner to erect the sign if the
applicant is not the property owner.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the sign company
which will erect the sign.
(5) The block and lot numbers of the property upon which the sign will
be erected.
(6) A plot plan of any property on which a freestanding sign is to be
placed, giving the dimensions of the property and the location of all
buildings, sidewalks, driveways, drive aisles and parking stalls,
showing the exact location of the proposed sign and all existing
signs, referencing distances to property lines, in sufficient detail to
illustrate conformity to this chapter.
(7) An elevation view of any building on which a wall sign is to be
attached or painted, showing the dimensions of the building facade
and the dimensions of the proposed sign and all existing signs in
sufficient detail to illustrate conformity to this chapter.
(8) A copy of the plans and specifications of the sign, showing the size
(sign face area, sign height and sign clearance) and the method of
construction, illumination and support, in sufficient detail to
illustrate conformity to this chapter.
(9) Calculation of the total amount of sign area, by type, presently
existing on the property.
H. Signs or activities not requiring a sign zoning permit. The following
signs or activities, while regulated by this chapter, shall not require a
sign zoning permit:
(1) Banners and nongovernmental flags erected by the Vineland
Downtown Improvement District within the Vineland Downtown
Improvement District area.
(2) Building markers.
(3) Construction signs (maximum sign face area: four square feet for
properties within residential zones and 32 square feet for
properties within business or industrial zones; maximum number of
signs: one per company or firm per street frontage).
(4) Directory signs (maximum sign face area: four square feet;
maximum number of signs: one per building entrance).
(5) Holiday decorations.
(6) Identification signs (maximum sign face area: two square feet;
maximum number of signs: one per street frontage).
§ 425-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-78
1:511
(7) Incidental signs (maximum sign face area: two square feet; no
maximum number of signs).
(8) On-site real estate signs. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-87]
(a) "For sale" signs. The maximum sign face area is four square
feet for properties within residential zones and 32 square feet
for properties within business or industrial zones. The
maximum number of signs: one per street frontage.
(b) "Open house" signs are permitted in addition to "for sale" signs
within residential zones. The maximum sign face area is four
square feet. The maximum number of signs: one per street
frontage. The maximum display time: three days per open
house.
(c) For purposes of this section, "open house" shall be defined as a
maximum of two consecutive days for which a property within
a residential zone is advertised to be opened to the general
public without appointments. The sellers or their
representatives shall be on-site and available to permit entry to
the premises for the purpose of showing the property to
prospective purchasers.
(9) Political signs (maximum sign face area: four square feet for
properties within residential zones and 32 square feet for
properties within business or industrial zones; maximum number of
signs: one per candidate or issue per street frontage).
(10) Private sale or event signs (maximum sign face area: four square
feet for properties within residential zones and 32 square feet for
properties within business or industrial zones; maximum number of
signs: one per street frontage).
(11) Public signs (exempt from regulations of this section).
(12) Trespassing notices (maximum sign face area: two square feet; no
maximum number of signs).
(13) Changing the copy of an approved changeable copy sign.
(14) Cleaning or repainting an existing sign.
(15) Repairing an existing sign, provided that no structural change is
made.
I. Sign standards. The following standards, in addition to those in
§ 425-308, shall be applicable to all signs regulated by this chapter,
including signs not requiring a sign zoning permit.
(1) Sign face area shall be subject to the following provisions:
§ 425-78 VINELAND CODE § 425-78
1:512
(a) Sign face area shall be computed by dimensioning the area
enclosed by one rectangle, the sides of which touch the
extreme points or edges of the sign, not including the
supporting structure, unless such structure is made a part of
the sign's message.
(b) Sign face area of a sign composed of characters or words
which are attached directly to the surface of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall of the building or
structure forms the background surface of the sign shall be
computed by dimensioning the area enclosed by one rectangle
which encloses the characters or words. In the event that the
wall of the building or structure, or portion thereof, is painted
or altered in some manner to create a defined background for
the characters or words, the painted or altered area shall be
considered part of the sign.
(c) For double-faced signs, where two identical sign faces are
placed back to back so that both faces cannot be viewed from
any point at the same time and so that the two identical sign
faces are part of the same sign structure, sign face area shall
be computed by dimensioning one of the sign faces.
(d) Properties fronting on two or more streets are allowed the
permitted sign face area for each street frontage if the
permitted sign face area for each street frontage is oriented
toward the traffic on each street, unless otherwise limited by
the permitted number of signs. For purposes of this chapter, a
limited access highway such as Route 55 shall not be
considered a street frontage.
(e) Sign face area for wall signs that are oriented toward a
particular street may not exceed the total sign face area
derived from the wall area fronting on said street. Signage
cannot be accumulated and used on one street in excess of that
allowed for lots with only one street frontage.
(f) In instances where a multitenant building is not oriented
toward a street frontage, meaning the intended front facade is
oriented toward a side or rear yard, wall signs may be placed
upon said intended front facade. The standards applicable to
wall signs placed upon the side of the building oriented toward
a street frontage shall be utilized.
(2) Sign height, which relates only to a sign not fastened parallel to or
painted on or confined within the wall of a building, shall be subject
to the following provision:
(a) Sign height shall be computed as the distance from the base of
a sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached
component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be
the lowest of either the existing grade prior to construction or
§ 425-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-78
1:513
the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of
any filling, berming, mounding or excavation solely for the
purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal
grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be
computed assuming that the elevation of the normal grade at
the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest
point in the crown of the adjoining public street or the grade of
the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on
the property, whichever is lower.
(3) Sign clearance, which relates only to a sign not fastened parallel to
or painted on or confined within the wall of a building, shall be
subject to the following provisions:
(a) Signs over sidewalks, driveways, drive aisles and parking stalls
shall have a minimum clearance of nine feet.
(b) There shall be no obstruction within 10 feet of any public rightof-
way between the height of two feet and 10 feet to ensure
adequate sight lines for driveways and intersections.
(c) There shall be no obstruction within 10 feet of any intersection
of driveways or drive aisles, as measured from the edges of
said driveways or drive aisles, between the height of two feet
and 10 feet to ensure adequate sight lines.
(4) Number of signs shall be subject to the following provisions:
(a) A singular property may have wall, freestanding and
temporary signs, or any combination thereof, if permitted by
§ 425-308.
(b) Properties fronting on two or more streets are allowed the
permitted number of signs for each street frontage if the
permitted number of signs for each street frontage is oriented
toward the traffic on each street. Signage cannot be
accumulated and used on one street in excess of that allowed
for lots with only one street frontage. For purposes of this
chapter, a limited access highway such as Route 55 shall not be
considered a street frontage.
(c) Sites developed as a singular entity, even when comprised of
multiple lots, shall be regulated as a singular property for
purposes of this chapter.
(5) Illumination shall be subject to the following provisions:
(a) No direct light or significant glare from any sign shall be cast
on any public street, road or sidewalk or adjoining property.
(b) A sign may be lighted either internally or externally.
§ 425-78 VINELAND CODE § 425-78
1:514
§ 425-79. Construction standards.
All required improvements shall comply with the construction standards as
provided herein pertaining to:
J. Construction and installation. Construction and installation of signs
shall conform to the provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code. No sign shall be erected prior to issuance of required permits.
K. Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition,
in compliance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code and in
conformance with the ordinance under which they were approved.
L. Signs of special concern. Temporary signs and political signs are of
special concern, thereby requiring additional regulatory controls.
(1) Temporary signs shall be subject to the following provisions:
(a) The message carried on a temporary sign shall pertain to and
be limited to the business conducted on the premises.
(b) A property shall only display a single temporary sign at any one
time.
(c) A property shall be limited to 60 days per calendar year for a
temporary sign, irrespective of the number of businesses or
tenants located on the property.
(d) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property with
multiple tenants to determine which tenant or tenants may
utilize temporary signs and for what duration.
(2) Political signs shall be subject to the following provisions:
(a) No political sign shall have a sign face area greater than four
square feet for a property within a residential zone or 32
square feet for a property within a business or industrial zone.
(b) The maximum number of political signs per property shall be
one per candidate or issue per street frontage.
(c) The sum of $100 shall be deposited by an authorized agent for
each 100 political signs to be posted, or fraction thereof, with
the Zoning Officer as surety to guarantee removal within 20
days following the respective election.
(d) No political sign shall be erected and maintained for a period
longer than 60 days.
M. Enforcement. Any sign, with the exception of a nonconforming sign,
erected or installed without a sign zoning permit or in violation of an
approved sign permit or in violation of this chapter shall be subject to
enforcement by the Zoning Officer and fines of $10 per day for each day
of violation.
§ 425-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-79
1:515
§ 425-80. Traffic impact statements (TIS).
A. Drainage (inlets).131
B. Drainage (manholes).132
C. Street improvements.133
D. Street construction.134
E. Water, sewer.135 [Amended 11-22-1994 by Ord. No. 94-88]
F. Driveways.136 [Added 11-22-1994 by Ord. No. 94-88]
G. Soil erosion and sediment control.137
H. Tree planting, soil erosion and stream channels.138
A. The contents of a traffic impact statement shall pertain to the particular
site under study and shall:
(1) Provide findings which represent the prevailing traffic conditions
and roadway capacities by the use of studies which reveal the
annual average daily traffic counts, the peak hour counts, the
turning movements and the directional flow of traffic at
intersections, the traffic accident records and the classification
counts of vehicles segregated by type, size and weight.
(2) Provide a description of the proposed development and the
surrounding land uses.
(3) Provide an assessment of the probable impact the completed
development will have upon prevailing traffic conditions and
anticipated future conditions.
(4) Provide an analysis of the probable impact on traffic flows which
may occur during the construction period.
131. Editor's Note: Diagrams of drainage standard construction details for inlets are located at
the end of this chapter.
132. Editor's Note: Diagrams of drainage standard construction details for manholes are
located at the end of this chapter.
133. Editor's Notes: Diagrams of street improvement standard construction details are located
at the end of this chapter.
134. Editor's Note: Diagrams of street construction standard construction details are located at
the end of this chapter.
135. Editor's Note: Diagrams of water, sewer standard construction details are located at the
end of this chapter.
136. Editor's Note: Diagrams of driveway standard construction details are located at the end
of this chapter.
137. Editor's Note: Diagrams of soil erosion and sediment control standards are located at the
end of this chapter.
138. Editor's Note: Diagrams of tree planting, soil erosion and stream channel standards are
located at the end of this chapter.
§ 425-79 VINELAND CODE § 425-80
1:516
§ 425-81. Environmental impact statements (EIS).
§ 425-82. Recreation facilities. [Added 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 96-82;
amended 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-67; 11-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-89; 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-65]
(5) Describe steps proposed by the developer to minimize any adverse
impacts during construction and after completion of the project.
(6) Provide any other data which may be needed to evaluate the effect
the development will have on existing traffic conditions.
B. The Planning Board shall emphasize safety features under
consideration.
A. The contents of an environmental impact statement shall pertain to the
particular site under study and shall:
(1) Provide an inventory of the existing environmental conditions at
the site and the surrounding areas, which includes air and water
quality, water supply, hydrology, geology, soil, topography,
vegetation, wildlife, aquatic organisms, pollution sources, ecology,
demography, land uses, aesthetics, history and archaeology.
(2) Provide a description of the proposed development.
(3) Provide a list of all licenses, permits and approvals required by law
from other agencies.
(4) Provide an assessment of the probable impact of the proposed
development upon all the inventory items.
(5) Provide a list of all the adverse environmental impacts which
cannot be avoided.
(6) Describe the steps proposed by the developer to minimize the
adverse impacts during and after construction.
(7) What alternatives exist to the proposed development.
(8) Such other information necessary to evaluate the impact of the
development upon the environment.
B. The environmental resource inventory prepared by the Environmental
Commission shall serve as a critical area evaluation and shall aid the
Planning Board in establishing the suitability of the specific areas for
specific uses. The protection of shade trees shall be given particular
attention.
A. Facilities for recreational activities shall be provided as part of all
planned developments.
B. Exemptions.
§ 425-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-82
1:517
(1) Planned developments resulting in four or fewer new dwelling units
shall be exempt from this provision.
(2) Any lot upon which only recreational facilities are located shall not
be required to meet the minimum lot size set by each zoning
district, nor shall such a lot be counted in determining application
or other fees under § 425-5.
C. Facilities required.
(1) The type and size of facility required shall vary with the number of
new dwelling units within the proposed planned development,
according to the following table:
Total New Lots Range: Number of Facilities
Start End
Gathering
Places Small Field
Hard
Courts
5 14 1 0 0
15 25 1 1 0
26 50 1 0 1
51 100 2 1 1
101 150 2 2 2
151 200 3 3 3
201 250 4 4 3
(2) For planned developments in excess of 250 dwelling units, one
additional gathering place and one additional small field shall be
added for each increment of 50 additional dwelling units, and one
additional hard court shall be added for each increment of 75
additional dwelling units in excess of 250 dwelling units.
(3) The land area to be included within the recreation area/lot shall be
sufficient in size and character (upland, adequate frontage) to
contain the improvements required and provide sufficient
additional lands for access, pedestrian circulation between and
among facilities and for maintenance needs. The minimum land
area of any recreation area/lot shall be 5,000 square feet in area
and shall include at least 40 feet of frontage upon an improved
street.
D. Definitions and design requirements.
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
GATHERING PLACES — Such facilities as tot lots, picnic groves
with tables, gazebos with sitting areas, and similar facilities. Each
such facility shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the function
§ 425-82 VINELAND CODE § 425-82
1:518
intended for the space and include at least 2,500 square feet of
improved area.
HARD COURT — Such facilities as basketball, tennis, handball,
shuffleboard and similar facilities. Each such facility shall be of
sufficient size to accommodate the function intended for the space
and include at least 6,000 square feet of improved area.
IMPROVED AREA — The actual area of any courts or fields,
whether paved or grassed. For gathering areas, the "improved
area" shall include those lands upon which the required apparatus
is situated (picnic tables, playground equipment) and a generally
rectangular grassed area to a maximum distance of 10 feet from
any single piece of equipment.
SMALL FIELD SPORTS — Such facilities as badminton, tetherball,
horseshoes, volleyball, and similar facilities. Each such facility shall
be of sufficient size to accommodate the function intended for the
space and include at least 1,500 square feet of improved area.
(2) All facilities shall be designed in accordance with Architectural
Graphic Standards, Ninth Edition (John Wiley & Sons, 1994), or
standards published by the governing bodies for particular sports
and activities or such equivalent standard as may be accepted by
the Planning Board.
(3) The applicant is encouraged to propose an appropriate mix of types
of recreational opportunities based upon the required number of
facilities within each category. The applicant should base their
recommendations upon the reasonably anticipated demographic
composition of the new community. The Planning Board shall
review and approve the suitability of the proposed facilities, the
adequacy of the land area proposed to accommodate those
facilities and the location of the recreational area/lot within the
new community.
E. Maintenance.
(1) The applicant shall provide for the long-term maintenance of the
facilities required by this chapter in a manner consistent with the
Municipal Land Use Law.139 A homeowners' or condominium
association shall be accepted by the Planning Board as meeting this
requirement.
(2) The improvements required under this chapter shall be treated as
site improvements under § 425-52.
F. Payments in lieu.
(1) The applicant may propose to substitute a payment dedicated to
the provision of recreational opportunities to the City or an
139. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 425-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-82
1:519
§ 425-83. Stream corridors. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
established nonprofit organization established to meet the
recreational needs of the City's residents in the place of on-site
facilities.
(2) The City Engineer shall prepare an estimate of the costs of typical
facilities required under this chapter to include construction costs
and the value of the land. The City Engineer shall forward a copy of
his or her estimates to the Planning Board and shall provide such
estimates to the public upon request. The City Engineer shall
update the estimate periodically, as construction techniques and
costs may change over time.
(3) In determining whether to accept such a payment, the Planning
Board shall review the availability of alternative recreational
facilities for the residents of the proposed subdivision and the use
to which such a payment may be put for the benefits of those
residents and the City at large.
(4) The requirement of a payment-in-lieu shall be established as a
condition of approval for a development. Payment shall be made
prior to recording of said development, or prior to release for
issuance of permits. If a project is phased, payments would likewise
be phased. The amount shall be based upon the established fee at
the time of payment, not the date of approval.
G. Referral to the Recreation Commission.
(1) The Planning Board shall forward one copy of any design of
recreational facilities or requests for payments in lieu to the
Recreation Commission. The Recreation Commission may provide
comment to the Planning Board through the Superintendent of
Recreation or such designee as may be provided for by the
Recreation Commission.
(2) Failure to provide such a copy to the Recreation Commission or
failure to provide a timely commentary shall not affect the timely
processing of any application before the Planning Board within the
time constraints of the Municipal Land Use Law.140
A. Statement of purpose. The stream corridors of the City consist of rivers,
streams, ponds, lakes, together with adjacent upland areas, including
the floodplain and areas that support protective bands of vegetation
that line the waters' edge. The maintenance of a stream buffer as part
of the corridor of a surface water body is needed to maintain water
quality and to protect the stream environment from adverse
140. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 425-82 VINELAND CODE § 425-83
1:520
development impacts. The purpose of these stream corridor regulations
is to provide design standards that will:
(1) Improve the management, care and conservation of the water
resources of the City of Vineland.
(2) Protect significant ecological components of stream corridors such
as floodplains, woodlands, steep slopes and wildlife and plant life
habitats within the stream corridors of the watershed and prevent
flood-related damage to the communities of the watershed.
(3) Complement existing state, regional, county and municipal stream
corridor and flood hazard protection and management regulations
and initiatives.
(4) Coordinate the regulation of development within stream corridors
in a manner complementary and consistent with the City's other
regulatory approaches regarding environmentally sensitive areas,
including the City's Flood Hazard Overlay Zone.
(5) Reduce the amount of nutrients, sediment, organic matter,
pesticides and other harmful substances that reach watercourses
and subsurface and surface water bodies by using scientifically
proven processes, including filtration, deposition, absorption,
adsorption, plant uptake, biodegradation, denitrification, and by
improving infiltration, encouraging sheet flow, and stabilizing
concentrated flows.
(6) Regulate the land use, siting and engineering of all development to
be consistent with the intent and objectives of this chapter and
accepted conservation practices.
(7) Conserve natural, scenic and recreation areas within and adjacent
to streams and water bodies. Support the water resource policies of
the New Jersey State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
(8) Advance the purposes of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law
with particular regard to those purposes set forth pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2a, b, d, i, and j.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
STREAM — Any pond or lake or perennial or intermittent waterway
depicted on the most recent United States Geological Survey
7.5-minute topographic map quadrangles and/or the Cumberland
County Soils Report prepared by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
STREAM CORRIDOR — The stream channel (the bed and banks of a
stream that confine and conduct continuously or intermittently flowing
water or the bed and banks of a pond or lake), the area within the onehundred-
year flood line, and the stream corridor buffer. Where no one-
§ 425-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-83
1:521
hundred-year flood line has been delineated, the stream corridor shall
consist of the stream channel and stream corridor buffer area.
STREAM CORRIDOR BUFFER — An area extending a minimum of
75 feet and an average distance of 100 feet from the one-hundredyear
flood line or from the boundary of the Flood Hazard Overlay
Zone unless a greater distance is required for the specific stream by
City regulation. If there is no one-hundred-year flood line delineated,
the distance shall be measured outward from the bank of the stream
channel, lake or pond. If slopes greater than 10% or wetlands or
wetland transition areas abut the outer boundary of the stream
corridor, the area of such slopes, wetlands and wetland transition areas
shall also be included within the boundaries of the stream corridor
buffer area.
C. Applicability.
(1) All tracts that are the subject of an application for subdivision, site
plan, conditional use, or variance approval that fall, in whole or in
part, within a stream corridor buffer or the Flood Hazard Overlay
District shall be subject to the standards set forth in this section.
(2) Review of any land disturbance in a stream corridor or stream
corridor buffer or the Flood Hazard Overlay Zone shall be
undertaken as part of the application review by the Planning Board.
(3) The stream corridor buffer shall be increased to a minimum
distance of 200 feet and an average distance of 250 feet for the
following:
(a) Blackwater Branch, from East Avenue eastward to the City
limit.
(b) Maurice River, main stem, from its confluence with the
Blackwater Branch north to the City limit.
(c) Menantico Creek, main stem.
D. Stream corridor standards.
(1) Permitted activities. Stream corridors and stream corridor buffers
shall remain in their natural state, with no clearing or cutting of
trees and brush (except for removal of dead vegetation and pruning
for reasons of public safety), altering of watercourses, regrading or
construction, except for the following activities:
(a) Wildlife sanctuaries, woodland preserves, and arboretums, but
excluding enclosed structures.
(b) Game farms, fish hatcheries, and fishing reserves, operated for
the protection and propagation of wildlife, but excluding
enclosed structures.
§ 425-83 VINELAND CODE § 425-83
1:522
(c) Hiking, bicycle, and bridle trails, including bridges or other
structures appurtenant thereto constructed.
(d) Trails or pathways, including bridges or other structures
appurtenant thereto constructed and/or maintained by or
under the authority of the City for the purpose of providing
access to public recreation areas.
(e) Fishing areas.
(f) Cultivation of the soil for agricultural or horticultural
production, pasture, and similar agricultural uses, undertaken
in accordance with agricultural best management practices to
reduce or prevent nonpoint-source pollution.
(2) Location of activities on tracts partially within stream corridors.
(a) All new lots in major and minor subdivisions and site plans
shall be designed to provide sufficient areas outside of stream
corridors and stream corridor buffers for the placement of
principal buildings and uses as well as any permitted accessory
uses.
(b) The Planning Board may allow an average stream corridor
buffer width of 100 feet from the one-hundred-year flood line,
thus allowing reasonable flexibility to accommodate site
planning when necessitated by the size and shape of the tract
and physical conditions thereon. The stream corridor width
may be reduced to a minimum of 75 feet from the one-hundredyear
flood line, provided there is an equivalent increase in the
width elsewhere on site and that all relevant permits (e.g.,
stream encroachment, freshwater wetlands) are obtained.
(3) Activities in stream corridors and stream corridor buffers when
there is no reasonable or prudent alternative. The Planning Board
may permit the following in a stream corridor, if the Planning Board
determines that there is no other reasonable or prudent alternative
to placement in the stream corridor or stream corridor buffer.
(a) Recreational use, whether open to the public or restricted to
private membership, such as parks, camps, picnic areas, golf
courses, sports or boating clubs, not to include enclosed
structures, but permitting piers, docks, floats or shelters
usually found in developed outdoor recreational areas.
(b) Outlet installation for sewage treatment plants and sewage
pumping stations and the expansion of existing sewage
treatment facilities.
(c) Private or public water supply wells that have a sanitary seal,
floodproofed water treatment facilities, or pumping facilities.
§ 425-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-83
1:523
(d) Dredging or grading when incidental to permitted structures
or uses, including stream cleaning and stream rehabilitation
work undertaken to improve hydraulics or to protect public
health.
(e) Dams, culverts, bridges and roads, provided that they cross the
corridor directly as practical.
(f) Sanitary or storm sewers.
(g) Utility transmission lines installed during periods of low
stream flow in accordance with soil erosion and sediment
control practices and approved by the State Soil Conservation
District in a manner that will not impede flows or cause
ponding of water.
(h) Stormwater management facilities such as detention basins
and outfall facilities.
(4) Provisions governing activities in stream corridors and stream
corridor buffers.
(a) The applicant for development of any activity in a stream
corridor or stream corridor buffer shall rehabilitate any
degraded areas within the stream corridor, in a manner
acceptable to the Planning Board, unless the applicant
demonstrates that it is economically infeasible to do so.
(b) The applicant shall also:
[1] Rehabilitate or cure the effects of the disturbance caused
during construction;
[2] Maintain the integrity of the surrounding habitat; and
[3] Maintain the existing ability of the stream corridor to
buffer the stream.
(c) The applicant shall provide whatever additional measures are
necessary to ensure that areas designated as stream corridors
and stream corridor buffers will be preserved and to prevent
additional encroachments in the stream corridor likely to occur
as a result of the approval granted.
(d) The Planning Board may require conservation easements or
deed restrictions ensuring that there will be no further
intrusion on the stream corridor than that permitted by the
activity approved.
(5) Submission requirements. An applicant for an activity in a stream
corridor or stream corridor buffer shall submit a map at a scale of
not less than one inch equals 100 feet of the project site delineating
the following, using the best available information:
§ 425-83 VINELAND CODE § 425-83
1:524
§ 425-84. Wellhead protection. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2006-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(a) One-hundred-year flood line, which shall be the line formed by
the area inundated by a one-hundred-year flood which is the
flood estimated to have a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any one year;
(b) State wetland boundary lines;
(c) The stream corridor and stream corridor buffer boundary;
(d) Any steep slopes located within the site; and
(e) The location of all improvements and land disturbance
proposed to be located within any of the above boundaries.
A. Statement of purpose.
(1) The City public water supply is derived exclusively from
groundwater resources and public community wells. The Kirkwood-
Cohansey formation is the main source of the City public water
supply.
(2) The purpose of these design standards is to secure the public
health, safety and welfare by protecting groundwater resources to
ensure a supply of safe and healthful drinking water for the general
public in Vineland.
(3) The lands surrounding the wellhead of each public community well
in Vineland are areas through which contaminants may move in the
ground to be withdrawn in water taken from the well. To reduce the
risk of contamination to the City's water supply, the development of
the lands around the wellhead must safeguard against accidental
spills and discharges of toxic and hazardous materials that may
threaten the quality of the City's groundwater supplies and related
water sources. As a preventive measure, the proximity of such
materials to sources of water supplies should be restricted and the
potential for groundwater contamination should be reduced to
prevent the migration of potential pollutants into the groundwater
that is withdrawn from a public community well.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Performance or design
standards established to minimize the risk of contaminating
groundwater or surface waters while managing the use, manufacture,
handling or storage of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes.
CONTAMINATION — The presence of any harmful or deleterious
substances in the water supply.
§ 425-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-84
1:525
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission,
unless pursuant to and in compliance with the conditions of a valid
and effective federal or state permit, resulting in the releasing, spilling,
pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous
substance into the waters or lands of the state or into waters outside
the jurisdiction of the state when damage may result to the lands,
waters or natural resources within the jurisdiction of the state.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — A substance designated under 40 CFR
116 pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Act; the Spill Compensation
and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.; or Section 4 of the State
Act. Substances listed include petroleum, petroleum products,
pesticides, solvents and other substances.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste that is defined or identified
as a hazardous waste pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act,
N.J.S.A. 13:1E et seq., N.J.A.C. 7:26-8, or 40 CFR Part 261.
POLLUTED WATER — In the content of drinking water, water is
polluted when a pollutant is present in excess of a maximum
contaminant level or bacteriological limit established by law or
regulation.
PUBLIC COMMUNITY WELL — A public water supply well which
serves at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents or
regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents.
WELLHEAD — The well bore hole and its attendant equipment.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The area within the corporate
boundaries of the City of Vineland and described in plan view around a
well from which groundwater is reasonably likely to flow to the well and
through which groundwater pollution, if it occurs, is reasonably likely
to pose a significant threat to the water quality of a public community
well. Wellhead protection areas consist of three tiers, corresponding
to areas on average from which groundwater flows to a well in two
years (Tier 1); five years (Tier 2); and 12 years (Tier 3). These areas
are delineated by the New Jersey Geological Survey of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). The location of the
existing wellhead protection areas in the City of Vineland are mapped
on Map CO-1. Conservation Plan, in the conservation plan element
of the City Master Plan adopted by the City Planning Board. For any
planned location of a new public community well for which the NJDEP
has not delineated the wellhead protection area, the wellhead
protection area shall be the area within a radius of 2,000 feet from the
location of the proposed wellhead.
C. Applicability. Any tract of land that is the subject of an application for
subdivision, site plan, conditional use, or use variance approval, and
which is located in a wellhead protection area, shall be subject to the
standards and limitations set forth for wellhead protection.
§ 425-84 VINELAND CODE § 425-84
1:526
D. Prohibited activities. The following activities shall not be allowed within
a wellhead protection area:
(1) Permanent storage or disposal of hazardous wastes, industrial or
municipal sludge or radioactive materials, including solid waste
landfills.
(2) Collection and transfer facilities for hazardous wastes, solid wastes
that contain hazardous materials, and radioactive materials.
(3) Any activity requiring the underground storage of hazardous
substances or waste in excess of an aggregate of 300 gallons.
E. Permitted activities. The following activities, involved, conducted or
proposed as part of an otherwise permitted use or accessory use in the
zone, shall be allowed in a wellhead protection area only upon the
finding as part of any required site plan, subdivision, conditional use or
variance approval that best management practices, or other procedures
or measures, as set forth below in Subsection H, are in place such that a
minimal threat is posed by the activity to groundwater quality in the
wellhead protection area in which the activity is to be conducted:
(1) On-site storage (above or below ground), use or disposal of
hazardous substances or waste in excess of an aggregate of 50
gallons or 100 pounds.
(2) Auto body and auto repair activities.
(3) New and used truck and auto repair activities.
(4) Contractor yards.
(5) Commercial car washes.
F. Exempted activities. The following activities are exempted from the
requirements of Subsection D, Prohibited activities, and Subsection E,
Permitted activities.
(1) Retail sales establishments that store and handle hazardous
substances in their original unopened containers.
(2) Police, fire and emergency medical service facilities.
(3) Municipal, county and state government facilities.
(4) The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a vehicle fuel
tank or as a lubricant in a vehicle.
(5) The transportation of a hazardous substance or waste through the
wellhead protection area, provided that the transporting vehicle is
in transit and meets all state and federal requirements for the
transportation of such materials.
§ 425-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-84
1:527
(6) The use or presence of small quantities of hazardous substances on
residential property that are appropriate to normal residential use.
G. Environmental impact statement (EIS) requirement. All activities
regulated pursuant to Subsection D, Prohibited activities, and
Subsection E, Permitted activities, seeking development approval
within a wellhead protection area, shall submit an environmental
impact statement demonstrating to the satisfaction of the City Planning
Board that the proposed use and/or activity employs, to the maximum
extent practicable, best management practices, as set forth in
Subsection H below, to protect groundwater quality and minimize the
risk of potential groundwater contamination.
H. Best management practices requirement. All site plan and major
subdivision applications shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that the proposed development is planned and designed
to the maximum extent practicable for best management practices for
the protection of groundwater quality and minimization of the risk of
potential groundwater contamination.
(1) All portions or areas of a facility in which hazardous substances or
hazardous wastes are stored, processed, manufactured or
transferred outdoors shall be designed so that the discharges of
hazardous substances will be prevented from overflowing, draining
or leaching into the groundwater or surface waters.
(2) Outdoor storage, dispensing, loading, manufacturing or processing
areas of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes must be
protected from precipitation, stormwater flows or flooding.
(3) Wherever hazardous substances are stored, processed,
manufactured or transferred outdoors, the design features shall
include secondary containment and/or diversionary structures,
which may include but not be limited to:
(a) Containers, dikes, berms or retaining walls sufficiently
impermeable to contain spilled hazardous substances for the
duration of a spill event.
(b) Curbing.
(c) Gutter, culverts and other drainage systems.
(d) Weirs, booms and other barriers.
(e) Lined diversion ponds, lined lagoons and lined retention
basins, holding tanks, sumps, slop tanks and other collecting
systems.
(f) Drip pans.
(4) Secondary containment and/or diversionary systems, structure or
equipment must meet the following standards:
§ 425-84 VINELAND CODE § 425-84
1:528
§ 425-85. Conservation of forests and trees. [Added 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2006-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(a) The system must block all routes by which spilled hazardous
substances could be expected to flow, migrate or escape into
the groundwater or surface waters.
(b) The system must have sufficient capacity to contain or divert
the largest probable single discharge that could occur within
the containment area plus an additional capacity to
compensate for any anticipated normal accumulation of
rainwater.
(c) In order to prevent the discharge of hazardous substances into
groundwater, all components of the system shall be made of or
lined with impermeable materials sufficient to contain the
substance for the duration of a spill event. Such material or
liner must be maintained in an impermeable condition.
(d) No manufacturing area, processing area, transfer area, dike
storage area, or other storage area, or secondary containment/
diversion system appurtenant thereto, shall drain into a
watercourse or into a ditch, sewer, pipe or storm drain that
leads directly or indirectly into a surface or subsurface
disposal area unless provision has been made to intercept and
treat any spilled hazardous substances in an NJDEP-approved
industrial wastewater treatment or pretreatment facility, or
other NJDEP-approved facility.
(e) Catchment basins, lagoons and other containment areas that
may contain hazardous substances should not be located in a
manner that would subject them to flooding by natural
waterways.
(5) Storage of hazardous materials shall, except as otherwise
regulated by state or federal regulation, allow access for physical
inspection and monitoring and shall utilize the best available
technology to provide for automatic and immediate alarm or
detection of releases.
(6) Users of hazardous materials shall have a plan to detect and
control hazardous material leaks and spills, including but not
limited to inspections, notification procedures, and emergency
containment and cleanup procedure.
A. Statement of purpose.
(1) Forests and trees are important to the City's identity and
environmental health. Vineland's forests are an important part of
the City's natural landscape and habitats and protect water and air
quality, control flooding, and reduce stormwater runoff and
erosion. Forests absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen into the
§ 425-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-85
1:529
atmosphere. Forests reduce greenhouse gas emissions, especially
carbon dioxide, and they help control global warming.
(2) The planting, maintenance and protection of trees benefits the
City's environment. Planting or preserving trees can reduce energy
demand in buildings and heating and cooling costs, and trees are
beneficial for stormwater management, for controlling erosion, and
for masking urban noise. Trees can mitigate the adverse impacts of
the urban heat island effect. When planted in parking lots and
streets, trees are effective in cooling and beautifying the urban and
the suburban environment.
(3) The clear cutting of forests and the removal of trees to prepare a
development site has substantially adverse environmental impacts
including increased drainage control costs, increased soil erosion,
increased buildup of atmospheric carbon, and increased dust.
(4) The purpose of these standards is to regulate and control
indiscriminate and excessive cutting of trees and forests and
preserve the maximum possible number of trees and forest area in
the course of development of a site; to protect larger, older
specimens of trees; and to provide a plan for replacement of trees.
B. Applicability.
(1) The standards set forth in this section shall apply to all applications
for subdivision, site plan, conditional use, or use variance approval
for sites greater than one acre in area and that have forest covering
more than one acre in area. An area or stand of trees shall be
considered as forest or forest acreage where 20% or more of the
trees covering an area greater than 1/4 acre have a diameter breast
height (DBH) of six inches or greater or where there are one or
more groves of mature trees, without regard to the minimum DBH,
consisting of a substantial number of individual specimens. The
DBH shall be measured from four feet above grade.141
(2) The goal of these requirements is to retain rather than replace
forest acreage.
(3) In the following zone districts, developments that result in the
removal of more than 65% of the forest acreage within the
development shall mitigate for the loss of forest and provide for the
replacement of trees as set forth by these design standards: Zones
R-B-1, R-B-2, R-P, I-1, I-B, I-2, I-3, I-4, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, MHP, IN-1,
IN-2, MF, and P. In all other zone districts, any development which
results in the removal of more than 30% of the forest acreage
within the development shall mitigate for the loss of forest and
provide for the replacement of trees as set forth by these design
standards.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-85 VINELAND CODE § 425-85
1:530
(4) No development shall cut or remove, or cause to be cut or removed,
any tree with a diameter breast height (DBH) of six inches or
greater, unless the cutting or removal is accomplished in
accordance with a site plan or subdivision approved in accordance
with the provisions of this section. No tree with a DBH of six inches
or greater shall be cut or otherwise removed from any lands that
are subject to a tree replacement plan except in accordance with a
tree replacement plan approved as part of the subdivision or site
plan application.
(5) All development design shall be arranged with particular attention
to conserve any significant trees, which are defined to be the
largest known individual trees of each species in New Jersey listed
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Forestry; and/or large trees approaching the diameter of
the known largest tree; and/or species that are rare to the area
and/or have particular horticultural or landscape value.
C. Replacement plan. An application for major subdivision or site plan
approval shall include a forest retention and tree save and replacement
plan. The plan shall be certified by a New Jersey approved forester, a
New Jersey certified landscape architect, or a New Jersey certified tree
expert. The forest retention and tree save and replacement plan shall
include the following:
(1) A tree save plan and inventory, on the scale otherwise set forth in
this chapter or of one inch equals 50 feet or less, showing the
location of existing forest areas and clearly marked boundaries of
the plots, used to determine the average forest acreage for the site.
For each plot there shall be a list identifying the number and
species of trees inventoried. The site plan shall include the lot and
block numbers, the street address, if assigned, and a certification
of compliance with the requirements of this section.
(2) The location of any areas on the site that were previously forest but
which were cleared within 24 months prior to the filing of the
application for development shall be shown. Such areas may be
included by the Planning Board for the purpose of determining the
total number of forest acres on the tract and the number of trees
that are subject to tree replacement
(3) The location of streams and watercourses.
(4) The locations of slopes of greater than 10% where any tree removal
is proposed.
(5) The location(s) on the tract where tree removal is to take place.
(6) The total acreage of the tract.
(7) The total number of forest acres within the tract.
§ 425-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-85
1:531
(8) The total number of forest acres allowed to be removed without
subjecting the development to the requirements for tree
replacement.
(9) The total number of forest acres proposed to be removed.
(10) The total number, by species, of existing trees with a DBH of six
inches or greater on the tract. For tracts greater than two acres in
size, the applicant may estimate the total number of trees by
multiplying the total number of forest acres permitted for
development by the number of trees on an average forest acre for
the site.
(11) The total number, by species, of trees with a DBH of six inches or
greater which are to be removed. For tracts greater than two acres
in size, the applicant may make an estimate of the total quantity of
trees to be removed, by species, based upon the average forest
acre for the site.
(12) Notwithstanding permitted estimates of the quantity of trees to be
removed, all trees with a DBH of 16 inches or greater shall be
specifically identified by location, species and common name. All
efforts shall be made to preserve such trees, including, if necessary,
relocation of infrastructure, roadways and buildings. Removal of
any tree within this category shall require specific approval, and
any such trees approved for removal shall be listed individually on
the approved plan.
(13) A specific plan for replacement of removed trees in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
(14) A City-approved method of disposal of removed trees, topping and
slash. No burning or burying of trees or parts of trees is permitted.
All disposal methods must comply with the requirements of the City
Code.
D. All specific plans for replacement of removed trees shall be based upon
the following formulas:
(1) For trees with a DBH equal to or greater than six inches and less
than 16 inches, replacement shall be based upon the percentage of
the trees removed as set forth in Table A below:
§ 425-85 VINELAND CODE § 425-85
1:532
Table A
Replacement of Trees with DBH Equal To or Greater Than 6
Inches and Less Than 16 Inches
Percentage of Trees
Removed from Forest Acres
Percentage of Removed Trees
to be Replaced
(using trees with a minimum
DBH of 2 1/2 inches)
60 to 100% 50%
40 to 59% 40%
20 to 39% 20%
Less than 20% 10%
(2) Any trees with a DBH equal to or greater than six inches and less
than 16 inches left standing in areas designated for removal or
trees planted in compliance with other requirements of the
development regulations shall be credited against the total
replacement count on a one-for-one basis. For trees with a DBH of
16 inches or greater, replacement shall be in accordance with Table
B below. The species or type of replacement trees shall be selected
from a list to be provided by the Environmental Commission or
shall be the same as the species removed from the tract under
consideration.
(3) For trees with a DBH equal to or greater than 16 inches, the
removed tree shall be replaced according to Table B below:
Table B
Replacement of Trees with DBH Equal To or Greater Than
16 Inches
Existing Tree To be Removed
(inches)
Number of Replacement
Trees
(minimum DBH of 2 1/2
inches)
Less than 18 3
Less than 21 4
Less than 24 5
Less than 27 6
Less than 29 7
Less than 31 8
(4) The species or type of replacement trees shall be selected from a
list maintained by the Environmental Commission or shall be the
same as the species removed from the tract under consideration.
§ 425-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-85
1:533
E. In lieu of planting of the replacement trees on site, the applicant may
request or may be required to contribute an amount equal to twice the
current value of each unplanted tree to a fund established by the City
for environmental programs such as tree planting, tree maintenance,
tree preservation, park development or landscaping and other
comparable projects as recommended by the Environmental
Commission. The applicant may apply this option to up to 50% of the
required number of replacement trees; all requests to make
contributions in lieu of planting replacement trees in excess of 50% of
the required number of replacement trees must be approved by the
Board.
F. Where an applicant claims that the cost of the required number of
replacement trees, as determined by the formula in this section, would
impose a development cost that exceeds 5% of the total bonded
improvement cost on development of the site, the Board may, at its
discretion, reduce the required number of replacement trees. In
support of such a claim, the applicant shall submit written cost
estimates from three sources for Board review. Replacement trees
required in accordance with this section are specifically excluded from
such estimates. Each estimate shall include the species, size, number
and price of the replacement trees. No reduction in the required
number of replacements trees shall exceed 1/2 of the original number
of replacement trees required by the formula in this section. No
reductions will be granted as to the number of replacement trees
required by Table B.
G. Regulations pertaining to delineation of clearing limits.
(1) The clearing limits shown on the replacement plan shall be fully
established prior to the cutting of permitted forest acreage and
shall be defined by snow fencing firmly secured along the dripline
but not less than six feet from the trunk of the remaining trees. In a
like manner, specimen trees and isolated groupings of trees which
are to remain on the site shall be clearly protected by snow fencing
or an equally visible and protective device installed along the
dripline of the tree(s) but not less than six feet from the tree
trunk(s).
(2) The grade of the land located along the dripline shall not be raised
or lowered more than six inches, unless compensated by welling or
retaining wall methods, and in no event shall the welling or
retaining wall methods be less than six feet from the trunk of the
tree.
(3) No soil stockpiling, storage of building materials or equipment
operation shall be permitted within the dripline or within six feet of
any remaining trees, whichever is greater.
§ 425-85 VINELAND CODE § 425-85
1:534
§ 425-86. Community design. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(4) Any clearing within the dripline or within six feet of the trunk of a
remaining tree must be done by hand or with hand-operated
equipment.
(5) Where clearing and/or construction on the site results in accidental
removal or severe damage which will eventually result in death and
removal of any tree delineated in the replacement plan as
remaining on the site, such removed or damaged tree shall be
replaced on a one-for-one basis (using trees with a minimum DBH
of 2 1/2 inches) for accidentally removed or damaged trees which
have a DBH from six inches to less than 16 inches. The species or
type of replacement trees shall be selected from a list maintained
by the Environmental Commission or shall be the same as the
species removed from the tract under consideration.
H. Regulations pertaining to clear cutting. No clear cutting is permitted
except in conjunction with subdivision or site plan approval in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1) The Board may refer the application to the Environmental
Commission for its report and recommendations. The Board may
rely on the report and recommendations of the Environmental
Commission in reaching its decision to approve the replacement
plan, disapprove the replacement plan or subject the replacement
plan to such conditions as have been recommended by the
Environmental Commission in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
(2) No approval shall be granted by the Board if the Board finds that
the proposed removal or destruction is contrary to the best interest
of the public health, safety or general welfare.
I. Change in tree save and replacement plan. Any substantial change in a
tree save and replacement plan shall necessitate the submission of a
revised plan to the Board for review and approval.
A. Purpose. Community design is the organization and coordination of the
different elements of the City's built and natural environment to achieve
a unified, functional, efficient and visually appealing physical setting.
The design, orientation, form and relationship of buildings,
landscaping, signage, lighting, streets, open spaces and parking to
meet the public need for a well ordered community are basic
considerations of community design. To direct community design, the
City's development regulations include these design standards to
maintain, establish or improve the visual qualities and amenities of the
City and provide for orderly, safe, efficient and convenient design within
the City. The purpose of the community design standards is to guide the
appropriate use and development of lands in order to promote the
§ 425-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-86
1:535
public safety and general welfare; to encourage the location and design
of transportation routes to promote the free flow of traffic; and to
promote a desirable visual environment through good civic design and
arrangement. These provisions for community design shall supplement
and be applied in conjunction with other design standards and
provisions of this chapter to guide the layout and design of development
in the City.
B. Applicability. All tracts that are the subject of an application for
subdivision, site plan, conditional use, or use variance approval shall be
subject to the standards set forth in this section. The illustrations
included with the community design standards are intended to further
the understanding of the application and the purpose of the design
standards. The illustrations, however, do not supersede the written text
of these regulations.142
C. Building design and placement. The following requirements are for
nonresidential and attached residential buildings.
(1) Front entrance.
(a) Buildings should orient towards the street with front entrances
and windows facing the street. For commercial, industrial,
mixed-use, public and institutional buildings, the front
entrance is the main public entrance to the building. In the
case where no public entrance exists, road connections shall
be provided to the main employee entrance. For multifamily
buildings in which each unit does not have its exterior
entrance, the front entrance may be a lobby, courtyard or
breezeway that serves as a common entrance for more than
one dwelling. For detached residential buildings, the front
entrance is the front door (i.e., facing the road).
(b) Nonresidential buildings shall have a front entrance for
pedestrians from the street side of the building to the building
interior. This entrance shall be designed to be attractive and
functionally be a distinctive and prominent element of the
architectural design. For buildings that are open to the public,
this entrance shall be open to the public during business hours.
Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass,
surface or finish to give emphasis to their front entrances.
D. Drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities shall only be located at
the rear or side of a building and screened from view from any street or
sidewalk. A drive-through shall be located and designed to meet the
following requirements:
(1) The drive-through facility shall be screened to minimize visual and
noise impacts to residences and to preclude visibility from any
142. Editor's Note: The Community Design Standards Illustrations are included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 425-86 VINELAND CODE § 425-86
1:536
streets or sidewalks. The screen may be a masonry wall or
landscape buffer or combination of wall and landscaping. The
screen shall be at least one-foot higher than the facilities being
screened.
(2) No portion of queuing or access lanes or driveways shall be located
between the building elevation facing the street and the street or
within 40 feet from the primary facade of the building.
(3) For corner lots, the drive-through shall be located on the side of the
building that is furthest from the corner.
E. Fences, service and loading areas, and mechanical equipment.
(1) Front yard fencing. Chain link fencing is discouraged in any yard
facing a street.
(2) Service and loading areas. Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor
storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash dumpsters, trash
compaction, and other service functions shall be incorporated into
the overall design of the primary building using screening walls of
compatible material, style, color, texture, pattern, trim, details and
landscaping. The wall shall be one foot higher than the largest
object being screened, but not more than 10 feet high, on all sides
where access is not needed. An opaque gate, with the same height
as the wall, shall be included where access is needed. Enclosures
should not be visible from any street or sidewalk. The maximum
height in the screening requirement takes into account the height
of a semi tractor-trailer. If such trucks will not be making deliveries
or staging in this area, the recommendation for maximum height
may be lowered to eight feet, at the discretion of the Planning
Board.
(3) Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment at ground level
shall be placed on the parking lot side of the building away from
view from any streets and sidewalks and shall be screened from
view by fencing, vegetation, or by being incorporated into a
building utilizing the same materials as the principal building, i.e.,
stone, brick or stucco. The screening shall be at least equal to the
width and height of the equipment to be screened from view.
F. Access. Adjacent shopping centers or office parks are often not directly
connected. As a result, customers or clients who wish to shop in both
centers or visit both sites must exit the parking lot of one, travel a short
distance on a major thoroughfare, and then access the next site. A
cross-access easement reduces traffic on the major thoroughfare and
reduces safety hazards. This, in turn, can have positive business
benefits by providing easy access to one site from another. The purpose
of these access regulations is to promote shared access and crossaccess
arrangements for the convenient, orderly and safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles.
§ 425-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-86
1:537
(1) Joint-use driveways and cross-access easements. A system of jointuse
driveways and cross-access easements should be established
wherever feasible, and the building site should incorporate the
following:
(a) A continuous service drive or cross access extending the entire
length of each parcel served, to provide for driveway
separation. Along a state highway, the driveway separation
shall be consistent with the state access management
classification system and standards.
(b) Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious
that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross
access via a service drive.
(c) A unified access and circulation system plan that includes
coordinated or shared parking areas is encouraged wherever
feasible.
(2) Access for outparcels and phased development plans. The design of
good internal vehicle circulation in parking areas and on local
streets reduces the number of driveways that businesses need for
access to the major roadway. Requiring a unified access and
circulation plan will ensure long-term coordination regardless of a
change in owners and tenants. In the interest of promoting unified
access and circulation systems, development sites under the same
ownership or consolidated for the purposes of development and
comprised of more than one building site should not be considered
separate properties in relation to the access standards of this
chapter. The number of connections permitted shall be the
minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to these
properties, not the maximum permitted for that frontage. All
necessary easements, agreements and stipulations required for
joint-use driveways and cross-access easements shall be met. This
shall also apply to phased development plans. All access to
outparcels must be internalized using the shared circulation
system of the principal development. Access to outparcels shall be
designed to avoid excessive movement across parking aisles and
queuing across surrounding parking and driving aisles.
G. Pedestrian access and circulation. To support multimodal
transportation options, pedestrian access and circulation is as
important as vehicle access and circulation. The basic pedestrian
network is the sidewalk system along public and private roads. This
section expands that network by establishing connections to pedestrian
pathways that are internal to development projects. The purpose and
intent of this section is to provide opportunities for alternative modes of
transportation by connecting existing and future public transportation
routes and pedestrian and bicycle pathways within the City to provide
safe passage from residential areas and the public right-of-way to
activity generators and destination buildings. This section is applicable
§ 425-86 VINELAND CODE § 425-86
1:538
to parcels within areas that generate or promote pedestrian activity and
movement. Such areas include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
central business district, park and recreational facilities, schools, public
library, shopping centers, multimodal trails, and areas served by public
transportation. The City should consider the existing and the planned
development pattern, as prescribed by the City Master Plan, to identify
areas that generate pedestrian or bicycle activity.
(1) Pathways shall connect all primary building entrances to one
another.
(2) Pathways shall extend throughout the development site and
connect all primary building entrances, surrounding streets,
external sidewalks, adjacent trails, transit stops, parking areas,
recreational facilities and common areas, outparcels, future phases
of development, and adjacent developments to the site, as
applicable. Shared pedestrian walkways are encouraged between
adjacent projects. An applicant may also be required to connect or
stub pathway(s) to adjacent roads and private property.
(3) Pathways within developments shall provide reasonably direct and
safe connections.
(4) Pathways shall comply with the New Jersey State Barrier-Free
Access Code and the Americans with Disabilities Act, which
requires accessible routes of travel. In addition, all pathways used
to comply with these standards shall conform to all the following
criteria:
(a) Pathway surfaces and multi-use paths shall be concrete,
colored concrete, stamped pattern concrete, asphalt, brick/
masonry pavers or other durable surfaces.
(b) Pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of five feet wide.
Multi-use paths (i.e., for bicycle and pedestrians) shall be a
minimum of 10 feet wide within a twenty-foot-wide right-ofway
or easement that allows access for emergency vehicles.
Stairs or switchback paths using a narrower right-of-way/
easement may be required in lieu of a multi-use pathway where
grades are steep.
(c) If the roads within the subdivision or neighborhood are lighted,
the pathways shall also be lighted.
(d) Where pathways are parallel and adjacent to a driveway or
road (public or private), they shall be raised six inches and
curbed or separated from the driveway/road by a five-footminimum
strip within bollards, a landscape berm or other
physical barrier. If a raised path is used, the ends of raised
portions must be equipped with curb ramps.
§ 425-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-86
1:539
(5) Pedestrian pathway shall be separated a minimum of five feet from
all residential living areas on the ground floor, except at building
entrances. Separation is measured from the pathway edge to the
closest dwelling unit. No pathway/building separation is required
for commercial, industrial, public or institutional uses.
(6) Crosswalks shall be designed and coordinated to move people
safely to and from buildings and parking areas. Where pathways
cross a parking area, driveways or road, they shall be clearly
marked with contrasting paving material, humps, raised crossing
or painted striping. If painted striping is used, it shall consist of
thermoplastic striping or similar type of durable application.
H. Shared parking. Two or more owners or operators of adjacent parcels
requiring off-street parking facilities may make collective provision for
such facilities. The Planning Board may approve shared parking
facilities for developments or uses with different operating hours or
different peak business periods if the shared parking complies with all
of the following standards.
(1) Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities
shall not be located off site.
(2) Shared parking spaces must be located within 600 feet of the
primary entrance of all uses served. Required parking spaces
reserved for persons with disabilities shall meet all requirements of
the New Jersey State Barrier-Free Access Code.
(3) Shared parking areas for uses located in a nonresidential district
shall not be located in any residential district.
(4) Those wishing to use shared parking as a means of satisfying offstreet
parking requirements must submit a shared parking analysis
to the Planning Board that clearly demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Board the feasibility of the proposed shared parking
arrangement. The study must address, at a minimum, the size and
type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the
anticipated rate of parking turnover and the anticipated peak
parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street
parking spaces.
(5) A shared parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement
among all owners of record. The owner of the shared parking area
shall enter into a written agreement with the City providing that
the land comprising the parking area shall never be disposed of
except in conjunction with the sale of the building which the
parking area serves so long as the facilities are required and that
the owner agrees to bear the expense of recording the agreement
and such agreement shall bind his or her heirs, successors, and
assigns. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of
record shall be submitted to the City Clerk and to the City Planning
Board. Recordation of the agreement must take place before
§ 425-86 VINELAND CODE § 425-86
1:540
issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy for any
use to be served by the shared parking area. A shared parking
agreement may be revoked only if all required off-street parking
spaces will be provided on site in accordance with the off-street
parking schedules of this chapter. The written agreement shall be
voided by the City if other off-street facilities are provided in accord
with this chapter.
(6) When the uses subject to a shared parking agreement change, it
shall be considered a substantial change to the terms of
development approval and the Planning Board shall have the
authority to require submission of a revised shared parking study
and a new shared parking agreement in the event the revised
shared parking study indicates additional parking is required.
I. Bicycle parking facilities. Inadequate facilities and fear of theft are
major deterrents to bicycle transportation. Bicycle parking and storage
are important ways to provide convenience and security for bicyclists at
important community destinations. In order to enhance multimodal
transportation opportunities, the following standards for bicycle
parking shall be met with the exception of single-family, two-family,
three-family and four-family housing (attached, detached or
manufactured housing), home occupations, agriculture and livestock
uses, or other developments with fewer than 10 vehicle parking spaces.
(1) Number of bicycle parking spaces. A minimum of two bicycle
parking spaces per use is required for all uses with more than 10
vehicle parking spaces. The following additional standards apply to
specific types of development:
(a) Every residential use of four or more dwelling units shall
provide at least one sheltered bicycle parking space for each
dwelling unit. Bicycle parking shall have a long-term design.
Residential bicycle parking spaces may be located within a
garage, storage shed, basement, utility room or similar area.
(b) All public and commercial parking lots and parking structures
shall provide a minimum of one bicycle parking space for every
10 motor vehicle parking spaces. All bicycle parking shall have
a long-term design.
(c) Elementary and middle schools, both private and public, shall
provide one bicycle parking space for every 10 students and
employees. High schools shall provide one bicycle parking
space for every five students and employees. All school bicycle
parking shall have a long-term design.
(d) Colleges and trade schools shall provide one bicycle parking
space for every 10 motor vehicle spaces plus one space for
every dormitory unit. Fifty percent of bicycle parking shall
have a long-term design; 50%, short-term design.
§ 425-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-86
1:541
(e) For buildings with multiple uses (such as a commercial or
mixed-use center), bicycle parking standards shall be
calculated by using the total number of motor vehicle parking
spaces required for the entire development. A minimum of one
bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle parking
spaces is required. Fifty percent of bicycle parking shall have a
long-term design; 50%, short-term design, as defined in the
following subsection.
(2) Short-term design of bicycle parking facility. Short-term design of
bicycle parking facilities shall be high-quality, inverted U type
construction. The Planning Board may approve alternative highquality
bicycle parking facilities if they can be shown to:
(a) Provide adequate theft protection and security; and
(b) Support the bicycle at two points of contact to prevent damage
to the bicycle wheels and frame.
(3) Long-term design of bicycle parking facility. In addition to the
requirements of short-term design, the bicycle parking spaces for
long-term parking shall be sheltered from sun and precipitation
under an eave, overhang, an independent structure or similar
cover. Bicycle parking requirements for long-term and employee
parking may be met by providing a bicycle storage room, bicycle
lockers, racks or other secure storage space inside or outside of the
building. The Planning Board may approve alternative measures if
they meet the intents for visibility, security and weather protection.
(4) Bicycle parking facilities shall be located with easy access, near
main building entrances, in areas with natural surveillance. Bicycle
parking facilities shall be conveniently located with respect to both
the road right-of-way and at least one building entrance (e.g., no
further away than the closest vehicle parking space).
(5) It is encouraged that bicycle parking facilities are incorporated
whenever possible into building design and coordinated with the
design of street furniture when it is provided.
(6) Bicycle parking should be located in areas that are close to lighting
fixtures on the parcel.
(7) Areas set aside for bicycle parking shall be clearly marked and
reserved for bicycle parking only.
(8) Bicycle parking shall not interfere with pedestrian passage and
shall not create a hazard to pedestrians. Parking areas shall be
located so as to not conflict with vehicle clear sight triangles.
J. Reverse frontage requirement for residential lots. Subdivision and site
plan design should be arranged so that residential lots abut and have
direct driveway access from minor streets, local streets, or minor
§ 425-86 VINELAND CODE § 425-86
1:542
collector streets. Residential lots abutting higher volume streets should
be designed as reverse frontage lots with a landscaped buffer at least
25 feet in width along the property line along the higher volume street.
The minimum yard requirement from the higher order street shall be
increased 25 feet, and the lot shall be designed with greater depth
or width, as applicable, to provided the space for the buffer. If the
buffer is planned as a separate open space lot to be held in common
ownership, then the minimum yard required for the residential lot shall
be measured from the buffer strip lot line. A deed restriction shall be
provided for the lot to preclude any future direct vehicular access from
the higher volume street. Any driveway on a residential lot which is
permitted to take access to a higher volume street shall be designed
to permit a K-turn movement to allow a vehicle to exit the lot without
backing into the higher order street.
K. Outdoor storage areas. Outdoor storage areas for the storage and sale
of seasonal inventory should be permanently defined and screened with
walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, trim, details and designs of
screening walls and/or fences and the cover should conform to those
used as predominant materials and colors of the building. If such areas
are to be covered, then the covering should conform to those used as
predominant materials and colors on the buildings.
L. Stormwater design strategy. To the maximum extent possible, the
design of development shall rely upon a natural strategy for stormwater
management that emphasizes the use of nonstructural measures. To
that end, development design shall be arranged to preserve the
significant natural features of the site, avoid areas of environmental
sensitivity, and minimize negative impacts. Design shall be arranged to
protect natural drainage features and vegetation; minimize land
disturbance from clearing and grading; minimize soil compaction;
reduce the use of stormwater management basins; promote the use of
vegetated open-channel drainage systems that discharge into and
through stable vegetated areas; and minimize impervious surfaces. An
application for development shall identify the nonstructural measures
for stormwater management that have been incorporated into the
design. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible to rely primarily
upon a natural strategy and nonstructural measures for stormwater
management, the applicant shall be required to substantiate that
contention to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
(1) No stormwater management basin which requires a fence shall be
located in a front yard. A stormwater management basin that is two
feet or less in depth shall not be required to be fenced.
(2) Stormwater management ponds and/or depressions, where
permitted, shall be designed and utilized as site amenities to
enhance the visual environment. Subject to the requirements of
other governmental agencies, and a consideration of safety-related
issues, stormwater facilities that are located in the front of a
property should be prohibited from having fencing. If fencing is
§ 425-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-86
1:543
required, a green or black vinyl/painted finish shall be provided.
Any walls or railings for structured stormwater boxes must be
decorative. Fenced or walled ponds shall not count toward open
space requirements within a project and shall only be located at the
side or rear of a site. Maximum fence height shall be no more than
four feet.
(3) Wet stormwater detention/retention facilities adjacent to public
streets or open to public view shall include a water feature such as
a fountain or spray jet and shall be landscaped appropriately.
(4) Detention/retention, if permitted along the front of a property, shall
be designed with curvilinear edges, not as a straight box, and shall
be attractively landscaped.
(5) Stormwater detention areas, where permitted, shall be planted
with suitable ground cover and, unless maintained as an open lawn
swale, shall be attractively landscaped to screen the view.
M. External site lighting. Commercial buildings and projects, including
their outparcels, shall be designed to provide safe, convenient and
efficient lighting for pedestrians and vehicles. Lighting shall be
designed in a consistent and coordinated manner for the entire project.
Lighting shall be used to accent key architectural elements and/or to
emphasize landscape features and shall be designed and installed to
avoid the creation of hot spots, glare or a nuisance.
(1) Light fixtures shall be designed as an integral design element that
complements the design of the project through style, material or
color. All light poles and fixtures shall be black, dark green or some
similarly dark color that is consistent with the architectural design
scheme of the property. Lighting of on-site buildings shall be
limited to wall-washer-type fixtures or uplights, which do not
produce spillover lighting or glare. Site lighting shall not
incorporate floodlight fixtures mounted on building walls, roofs or
poles.
(2) To provide cohesiveness and uniformity, a lighting plan shall be
submitted as part of an application for site plan approval.
(3) Lighting intensities for ATM machines shall comply with New
Jersey statutes.
(4) Lighting intensities shall be designed as recommended by the most
recent edition of the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) of
North America's Lighting Handbook.
(5) A light fixture (the pole and light source/luminary) shall be a
maximum of 30 feet in height within any parking lot and a
maximum of 16 feet in height within any nonvehicular pedestrian
area (with height being measured from the finished grade to the
top of the light fixture).
§ 425-86 VINELAND CODE § 425-86
1:544
(6) At service stations and convenience centers, lighting under
awnings, canopies, porte-cocheres, etc., should be recessed. If not
recessed, the box-type or other lighting fixture shall be opaque on
all sides (no light shall emanate from any side of the fixture).
Additionally, the following lighting standards shall apply:
(a) The light source shall be metal halide (a maximum of 250
watts) or fluorescent;
(b) The metal halide shall be phosphor coated when used with a
clear flat glass lens, or may be clear when used with a diffused
flat glass lens; and
(c) The maximum footcandle level shall be 30 fc (average
maintained maximum); see the IES Lighting Handbook, most
recent edition.
(7) Illumination levels at the property line shall range between a
minimum of 0.0 fc and a maximum of 1.0 fc with as close to 0.0 fc as
reasonably feasible when lighting is located next to residential. To
keep light rays and glare from encroaching onto adjacent
properties, illumination shall be installed with house-side shields
and reflectors and shall be maintained in such a manner as to
confine light rays to the premises.
(8) All parking areas, pedestrian walkways, bikeways, loading/service
and other areas shall, to the extent applicable, conform to the
requirements stated above.
(9) Parking area lighting.
(a) Parking area lighting shall be shielded from adjacent
properties by utilizing flat glass lenses, house-side shields, and
NEMA Type II, III and IV reflectors.
(b) Decorative acorn-type fixtures shall not exceed 18 feet in
height and 250 watts per bulb, and shall have a textured clear
lens/globe, frosted/phosphor-coated bulbs, and an internal
optical system.
(10) Lighting for pedestrian walkways and bikeways. Lighting along
pedestrian walkways and bikeways shall be decorative in
appearance, style and finish. Selected luminaries shall have the
lamp source shielded from view. Translucent diffusers may be an
acceptable substitute to avoid visual glare and brightness.
§ 425-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-86
1:545

ARTICLE VIII
Affordable Housing143
[Added 1-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-100; amended 11-14-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-93; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10144]
§ 425-87. Purpose. [Amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-42]
The purpose of these regulations is to provide affordable housing to meet
the City's obligation to provide for affordable housing. The intent is to
establish a program to bring about affordable housing consistent with the
current rules and regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH) and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC)
and in conformity with the principles espoused by the New Jersey Supreme
Court in So. Burl. Co. NAACP v. Mount Laurel, 92 N.J. 158 (1983) (Mount
Laurel II) and in the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. This
article is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income units
("affordable units") are created or preserved with controls on affordability
over time and that very low-, low- and moderate-income households shall
occupy these units. This article shall apply throughout the City of Vineland
except where inconsistent with applicable law.
§ 425-88. Affordable housing obligation. [Amended 9-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-42]
A. The City of Vineland Planning Board has adopted a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28b(3) and N.J.S.A. 52:27D-310. The Fair Share Plan has been
endorsed by the governing body. The Fair Share Plan describes the
ways the City of Vineland shall address its fair share of low- and
moderate-income housing as determined by COAH or successor agency
and documented in the Housing Element.
B. This article implements and incorporates the Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan and addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:97 and 5:80, as
they may be amended and supplemented. Should new or revised COAH
or UHAC rules change any provisions that the City of Vineland is
imposing upon developers, the COAH or UHAC rules shall prevail.
C. The City of Vineland shall file monitoring reports with COAH in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 to track the status of the implementation
of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. Any plan evaluation report
of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and monitoring prepared
by COAH in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 shall be available to the
public at Vineland City Hall, City Clerk's Office, 640 E. Wood Street,
143. Editor's Note: Former Art. VIII, Planned Residential Development and Planned Cluster
Development, added 8-22-1989 by Ord. No. 89-51, was repealed 8-20-1990 by Ord. No.
90-77.
144. Editor's Note: This ordinance and Ord. No. 2009-11 were readopted in their entirety,
without change, 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-72.
§ 425-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-88
1:547
§ 425-89. Definitions. [Amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-42]
Vineland, New Jersey 08360 or from COAH at 101 South Broad Street,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625.
A. Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth
in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but
defined elsewhere in this chapter shall be given the meanings set forth
in said chapter. Words and phrases not defined in this chapter but
defined in the New Jersey Administrative Code or the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be given the meanings set forth in said code or
statutes. For words and phrases for which no definition is available in
this article or the New Jersey Administrative Code or the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated, The Latest Illustrated Book of Development
Definitions, authored by Harvey S. Moskowitz and Carl G. Lindbloom
and published by Rutgers University (2003), may be used as a guide. All
other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary
meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
B. The following definitions shall be applicable to this article:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — Any entity responsible for the
administration of affordable units in accordance with this article,
N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:80-26.1 et seq.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — Any regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median
income at which restricted units in an affordable housing development
is affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — Any sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9; in the case
of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may
be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — Any housing development all or a
portion of which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Any development
included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but
is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100% affordable development.
§ 425-88 VINELAND CODE § 425-89
1:548
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's
fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — Any housing unit proposed or created pursuant
to the Act, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-4, and/or funded through
an affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — Any housing unit designed to meet the
needs of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment
of the population such that:
ASSISTED-LIVING RESIDENCE — Any facility licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartmentstyle
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted-living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and
a lockable door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — Any household that has been certified by
an administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH or COUNCIL — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in,
but not of, the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New
Jersey, that was established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.), or successor agency.
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — Any housing unit with health and safety
code violations that require the repair or replacement of a major
system. A major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load-bearing structural
systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
All the residents of the development where the unit is situated are
62 years or older; or
(1)
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person that is 55
years or older; or
(2)
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development as
"housing for older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the
Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
(3)
§ 425-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-89
1:549
DEVELOPMENT — Any division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Any money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with Sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A.
54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Any strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — Any development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, new construction, the conversion of a
nonresidential structure to residential and the creation of new
affordable units through the reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Any household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 50% or less of the median household
income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — Any restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural
systems.
MARKET-RATE UNIT — Any housing not restricted to low- and
moderate-income households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income of a household, by household
size, for Cumberland County and as adopted annually by COAH.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Any household with a total
gross annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of
the median household income.
§ 425-89 VINELAND CODE § 425-89
1:550
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — Any restricted unit that is affordable to
a moderate-income household.
NJHMFA — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a Class A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — Any process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income
at 80% of the regional median as defined by COAH's adopted regional
income limits published annually by COAH.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA
for its Section 8 program. In assisted-living residences, rent does not
include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — Any dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, but does not include
a market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
SUPPORTIVE AND SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING — A structure or
structures in which individuals or households reside, as listed in
N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.10(a); previously defined by COAH as "alternative living
arrangements."
SUPPORTIVE SHARED LIVING HOUSING — Permanent lease-based
supportive housing that provides access to supportive services to
individuals with special needs who maintain separate leases for
bedrooms and share common living space.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
UNIT — Any dwelling unit, as defined in § 425-270. For purposes of
this chapter, bedrooms shall also be considered units in those limited
§ 425-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-89
1:551
§ 425-90. Affordable housing programs. [Amended 9-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-42]
The City of Vineland has determined that it will use the following
mechanisms to satisfy its affordable housing obligations:
instances where state affordable housing regulations allow bedrooms
to be counted as units (e.g., group homes).
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Any household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the median household
income.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — Any restricted unit that is affordable to a
very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Any building insulation (for attic, exterior walls
and crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement
storm windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and
replacement doors, and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
A. A rehabilitation program.
(1) The City of Vineland's rehabilitation program shall be designed to
renovate deficient housing units occupied by low- and moderateincome
households such that, after rehabilitation, these units will
comply with the New Jersey State Housing Code pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:28.
(2) Both owner-occupied and renter-occupied units shall be eligible for
rehabilitation funds.
(3) All rehabilitated units shall remain affordable to low- and
moderate-income households for a period of 10 years (the control
period), unless COAH accepts a different means of affordability
control. For owner-occupied units, the control period will be
enforced with a lien; and for renter-occupied units, the control
period will be enforced with a deed restriction. Any money
provided to a property owner shall be repaid to the City when the
property is sold. The funds shall remain in the City's rehabilitation
program and shall be made available for the rehabilitation of
additional units.
(4) The City of Vineland shall dedicate an average of $10,000 for each
unit to be rehabilitated through this program, reflecting the
minimum hard cost of rehabilitation for each unit.
(5) The City of Vineland shall adopt a resolution committing to fund
any shortfall in the rehabilitation programs for the City of Vineland
if required by COAH.
(6) The City of Vineland shall designate, subject to the approval of
COAH, one or more administrative agents to administer the
§ 425-89 VINELAND CODE § 425-90
1:552
rehabilitation program in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97.
The administrative agent(s) shall provide a rehabilitation manual
for the owner occupancy rehabilitation program and a
rehabilitation manual for the rental occupancy rehabilitation
program to be adopted by resolution of the governing body and
subject to approval of COAH. Both rehabilitation manuals shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk and in
the office(s) of the administrative agent(s).
(7) Units in a rehabilitation program shall be exempt from N.J.A.C.
5:97-9 and Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC) but
shall be administered in accordance with the following:
(a) If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to
rehabilitation, or if a renter-occupied unit is re-rented prior to
the end of controls on affordability, the deed restriction shall
require the unit to be rented to a low- or moderate-income
household at an affordable rent and affirmatively marketed
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
(b) If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser of
the current rent or the maximum permitted rent pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
(c) Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based on
the standards in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.
(d) Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as
income-eligible in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC,
except that households in owner-occupied units shall be
exempt from the regional asset limit.
B. Market-to-affordable program.
(1) A market-to-affordable program is established to permit the
purchase or subsidization of units through a written agreement
with the property owner and sold or rented to low- and moderateincome
households. Subject to the provisions of Subsection B(2)(c)
below, the market-to-affordable programs may produce both lowand
moderate-income units (the program may be limited to only
low- or only moderate-income units as per the Fair Share Plan).
(2) The following provisions shall apply to market-to-affordable
programs:
(a) At the time they are offered for sale or rental, eligible units
may be new, pre-owned or vacant.
(b) The units shall be certified to be in sound condition as a result
of an inspection performed by a licensed building inspector.
§ 425-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-90
1:553
(c) The municipality will provide a minimum of $25,000 per unit to
subsidize each moderate-income unit and/or $30,000 per unit
to subsidize each low-income unit, with additional subsidy
depending on the market prices or rents in a municipality.
(d) The maximum number of creditable market-to-affordable units
shall be equal to no more than 10 for-sale units and 10 rental
units or a combined total of 10% of the fair-share obligation,
whichever is greater. (Additional units may be approved by
COAH if the municipality demonstrates the successful
completion of its initial market-to-affordable program.)
(3) The units shall comply with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC with the
following exceptions:
(a) Bedroom distribution pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b) and (c);
(b) Low-to-moderate-income-household ratios pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3(a); and
(c) Affordability average pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(d) and (e);
however:
[1] The maximum rent for a moderate-income unit shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 60% of
median income, and the maximum rent for a low-income
unit shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 44% of median income; and
[2] The maximum sales price for a moderate-income unit shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 70% of
median income, and the maximum sales price for a lowincome
unit shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 40% of median income.
C. Payments-in-lieu of construction.
(1) The standards for the collection of payments-in-lieu of constructing
affordable units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4.
(2) The amount of the payments-in-lieu shall be as established by
COAH for Region 6.
D. Construction of affordable units off site.
(1) The standards for constructing affordable units off site shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4.
(2) Affordable units constructed off site shall be scattered.
E. Inclusionary zoning. Where inclusionary affordable units are proposed
or required, the following shall apply:
§ 425-90 VINELAND CODE § 425-90
1:554
(1) Presumed densities. Where the densities in N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4(b)(2)
are reached in any residential development within the City of
Vineland corresponding to the geographic limitations of Planning
Areas 1 and 2 of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan,
or substantially similar land use designations, the threshold for
providing adequate incentive to developers to construct an
inclusionary affordable housing component shall be presumed to be
met when the underlying density of the zoning district is half or less
of the COAH density.
(2) Affordable housing setasides. The minimum percentage of
affordable housing units as a total of all housing units within an
inclusionary development shall be 15% when the developer
proposes a rental project and 20% when the developer proposes a
for-sale project, whether fee simple, condominium or cooperative
form of ownership.
(3) Phasing. In inclusionary developments the following ratios for the
issuance of certificates of occupancy shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units
Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25% 0%
25% + 1 10%
50% 50%
75% 75%
90% 100%
(4) Design. In inclusionary developments to the extent feasible, lowand
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market
units. The developer is encouraged to disburse the affordable units
being provided within the inclusionary development throughout the
development. The developer shall place the affordable units within
buildings designed to be architecturally indistinguishable from the
market rate units otherwise being constructed with the
development. To that end, the scale, massing, roof pitch and
architectural detailing (e.g., selection of exterior materials, doors,
windows, etc.) of the buildings containing the affordable housing
units shall be similar to and compatible with that of the market rate
units, except that an affordable unit(s) may have a lower roof
height than the market units.
(5) Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating
source as market units within the affordable development.
F. Redevelopment. Where redevelopment is proposed that creates
affordable housing under N.J.S.A. 40:12A-1 et seq., the following
provisions shall apply:
§ 425-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-90
1:555
(1) All sites shall meet the site suitability criteria set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.13.
(2) The municipality shall designate the site as an area in need of
redevelopment or rehabilitation.
(3) The municipality shall adopt a redevelopment plan.
(4) The redevelopment agreement shall comply with N.J.A.C.
5:97-6.4(b) through (h).
(5) The municipality shall issue a request for proposals for a
designated redeveloper, if applicable.
(6) The units shall comply with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
(7) Documentation shall be submitted comporting with COAH's
requirements under N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.6(d) and (e).
(8) Documentation shall be submitted prior to marketing the
completed units comporting with COAH's requirements under
N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.6(f).
G. Municipally sponsored and 100% affordable developments. When the
City proposes a municipally sponsored project or supports a 100%
affordable development by another entity, the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) All sites shall meet the site suitability criteria set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.13.
(2) The municipality or developer/sponsor shall have control or the
ability to control the site(s).
(3) The construction schedule shall provide for construction to begin
within two years of substantive certification from COAH or in
accordance with the City's implementation schedule pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.2(a)4.
(4) The first floor of all townhouse dwelling units and of all other
multistory dwellings shall comply with N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14 and
5:97-9 and UHAC.
(5) Documentation shall be submitted comporting with COAH's
requirements under N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.7(d).
(6) Documentation shall be submitted prior to marketing the
completed units comporting with COAH's requirements under
N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.7(e).
H. Supportive and special needs housing. Where special needs housing,
including but not limited to residential health-care facilities as licensed
and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs
or Department of Health and Senior Services (if the facility is located
§ 425-90 VINELAND CODE § 425-90
1:556
with, and operated by, a licensed health-care facility); group homes for
people with developmental disabilities and mental illness as licensed
and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of Human Services;
permanent supportive housing; and supportive shared-living housing
are proposed, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) The following provisions shall apply to group homes, residential
health-care facilities, and supportive shared-living housing:
(a) The unit of credit shall be the bedroom.
(b) Housing that is age-restricted shall be included with the
maximum number of units that may be age-restricted pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.8.
(c) Occupancy shall not be restricted to youth under 18 years of
age.
(d) All sites shall meet the site suitability criteria set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.13.
(e) The municipality or developer/sponsor shall have site control
or the ability to control the site(s).
(2) The following provisions shall apply to permanent supportive
housing:
(a) The unit of credit shall be the unit.
(b) Housing that is age-restricted shall be included with the
maximum number of units that may be age-restricted pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.8.
(c) Units shall not be restricted to youth under 18 years of age.
(d) All sites shall meet the site suitability criteria set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.13.
(e) The municipality or developer/sponsor shall have site control
or the ability to control the site(s).
(3) The bedrooms and/or units pursuant to Subsection H(1) and (2)
hereinabove shall comply with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC, with the
following exceptions:
(a) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); however, group
homes, residential health-care facilities, permanent supportive
housing and supportive shared-living housing shall be
affirmatively marketed to individuals with special needs in
accordance with a plan approved by the COAH's Executive
Director;
(b) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3); and
§ 425-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-90
1:557
§ 425-91. New construction.
The following general guidelines apply to all newly constructed
developments that contain low- and moderate-income housing units,
including any currently unanticipated future developments that will provide
low- and moderate-income housing units.
(c) With the exception of units established with capital funding
through a twenty-year operating contract with the Department
of Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities,
group homes, residential health-care facilities, supportive
shared-living housing and permanent supportive housing shall
have appropriate controls on affordability in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.
(4) Documentation shall be submitted comporting with COAH's
requirements under N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.10(e).
(5) Documentation shall be submitted prior to marketing the
completed units comporting with COAH's requirements under
N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.10(f).
I. Extension of expiring controls. Where the City of Vineland proposes to
extend affordability controls where such restrictions will expire during
the extant COAH time period, the following provisions shall be
followed:
(1) The unit meets the criteria for prior-cycle or post-1986 credits set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:97-4.2 or 5:97-4.3;
(2) The municipality shall obtain a continuing certificate of occupancy
or a certified statement from the municipal building inspector
stating that the restricted unit meets all code standards; and
(3) Documentation shall be submitted comporting with COAH's
requirements under N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.14(b) and (c).
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
§ 425-90 VINELAND CODE § 425-91
1:558
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. The standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements.
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and 5:97-3.14.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
(d) An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
(e) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and 5:97-3.14, or evidence that the City of
Vineland has collected funds from the developer sufficient to
make 10% of the adaptable entrances in the development
accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
§ 425-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-91
1:559
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the City of Vineland's Affordable Housing
Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the City of Vineland for the sole purpose of
making the adaptable entrance of any affordable unit
accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate for the conversion from adaptable
to accessible entrances to the Construction Official of the
City of Vineland.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and 5:97-3.14, and that the cost
estimate of such conversion is reasonable, payment shall
be made to the City of Vineland's Affordable Housing Trust
Fund in care of the Chief Financial Officer who shall
ensure that the funds are deposited into the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and 5:97-3.14.
C. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC and in COAH, utilizing the regional income limits
established by COAH.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
§ 425-91 VINELAND CODE § 425-91
1:560
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both low
income- and moderate-income units.
(a) At least 10% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 30% of
median income.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different prices
for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units other
than assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted
living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
§ 425-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-91
1:561
§ 425-92. Affirmative marketing requirements.
The following general guidelines apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently unanticipated
future developments that will provide low- and moderate-income housing
units:
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28%
of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household
as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall
be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing
Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase shall not
exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to
low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed
pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing tax
credits.
(11) Utilities. Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility
allowance shall be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent
with the utility allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8
program.
A. The City of Vineland shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative Marketing
Plan, subject to approval of COAH, compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15,
as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children, to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is also intended to target those potentially
§ 425-91 VINELAND CODE § 425-92
1:562
§ 425-93. Occupancy standards.
§ 425-94. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs all marketing activities
toward COAH Housing Region 6 and covers the period of deed
restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in COAH Housing Region 6
comprised of Atlantic, Cape May, Cumberland and Salem Counties.
D. The administrative agent designated by the City of Vineland shall
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units consistent with
the affirmative marketing plan for the municipality.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months prior to the expected date of occupancy.
G. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by the City of Vineland.
A. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying the
unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
(1) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(2) Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
(3) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
B. Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall be
provided in the City Operating Manual.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this article until the City of Vineland elects to release the unit from
such requirements; however, and prior to such an election, a restricted
ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, for at least 30 years.
§ 425-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-94
1:563
§ 425-95. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value.
D. At the time of the first sale of the unit, the purchaser shall execute and
deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note obligating the
purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors and assigns) to
repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's release from the
requirements of this article, an amount equal to the difference between
the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its restricted price, and
the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a
duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all code standards upon the first
transfer of title that follows the expiration of the applicable minimum
control period provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended
and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The method used to determine the condominium association fee
amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable between
the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the market unit owners.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements
§ 425-94 VINELAND CODE § 425-95
1:564
§ 425-96. Buyer income eligibility.
§ 425-97. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit
and subordination.
§ 425-98. Control periods for restricted rental units.
shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or the
addition of a bathroom.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's certified monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing that
the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section.
B. With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or
permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to
exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale price of that unit, as such
price is determined by the administrative agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article until the City of Vineland elects to release the unit from such
requirements pursuant to action taken in compliance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, and prior to such an
election, a restricted rental unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, for at least 30 years.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
§ 425-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-98
1:565
§ 425-98.1. Price restrictions for rental units and leases.
§ 425-98.2. Tenant income eligibility.
shall be filed by the developer or seller in the Cumberland County
Clerk's office. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article, despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, except
for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income, lowincome
or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit, and
§ 425-98 VINELAND CODE § 425-98.2
1:566
§ 425-98.3. Administration.
the rent proposed for the unit does not exceed 35%, or 40% for agerestricted
units, of the household's eligible monthly income as
determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if
one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35%, or 40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units, of its gross household
income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing
costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35%, or 40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units, of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents proposed third-party assistance from an
outside source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the
administrative agent and the owner of the unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection B(1) through (5) above
with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
A. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for the City of
Vineland has been established.145 City Council shall be responsible for
appointment of the MHL by means of a resolution.
(1) The Municipal Housing Liaison must be either a full-time or parttime
employee of the City of Vineland.
(2) The person appointed as the Municipal Housing Liaison must be
reported to COAH for approval.
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison must meet all COAH requirements
for qualifications, including initial and periodic training.
(4) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the City
of Vineland, including the following responsibilities which may not
be contracted out to the administrative agent:
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Officers and Employees, Art. VI, Municipal Housing Liaison.
§ 425-98.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-98.3
1:567
(a) Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(b) The implementation of the affirmative marketing plan and
affordability controls;
(c) When applicable, supervising any contracting administrative
agent;
(d) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the City of
Vineland's Fair Share Plan;
(e) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required
by COAH;
(f) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
(g) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH.
B. The City of Vineland shall designate by resolution of City Council,
subject to the approval of COAH, one or more administrative agents to
administer newly constructed affordable units in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 and UHAC.
C. An Operating Manual shall be provided by the administrative agent(s)
to be adopted by resolution of the City Council and subject to approval
of COAH. The Operating Manuals shall be available for public
inspection in the City Clerk's office and in the office(s) of the
administrative agent(s).
D. The administrative agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities
of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC and which are
described in full detail in the Operating Manual, including those set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 5:80-26.16 and 5:80-26.18 thereof, which
includes:
(1) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(2) Affirmative marketing;
(3) Household certification;
(4) Affordability controls;
(5) Records retention;
(6) Resale and re-rental;
§ 425-98.3 VINELAND CODE § 425-98.3
1:568
§ 425-98.4. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
(7) Processing requests from unit owners;
(8) Enforcement, though the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the City; and
(9) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities,
hereunder.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the City shall have all
remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal fines, a requirement for
household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in the violation of the
regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the
regulations, entry on the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the City may
take the following action against the owner, developer or tenant for any
violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after service of
the written notice:
(1) The City may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11
alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or tenant is found
by the court to have violated any provision of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, the owner, developer or tenant
shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties, at the
discretion of the court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of these provisions and not as a continuing
offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the City of Vineland's
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the court.
§ 425-98.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-98.4
1:569
(2) The City may file a court action in the Superior Court seeking a
judgment, which would result in the termination of the owner's
equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a mortgage
foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as if the same were
a judgment of default of the first purchase money mortgage and
shall constitute a lien against the low- and moderate-income unit.
C. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the City, by means
of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low- and moderateincome
unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sale price which is
not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first
purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the City, including attorney's
fees. The violating owner shall have the right to possession terminated
as well as the title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
D. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the first
purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the low- and
moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse
the City for any and all costs and expenses incurred in connection with
either the court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are
insufficient to reimburse the City in full as aforesaid, the violating
owner shall be personally responsible for and to the extent of such
deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred by the City in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a surplus
remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be
placed in escrow by the City for the owner and shall be held in such
escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such earlier time as
the owner shall make a claim with the City for such. Failure of the
owner to claim such balance within the two-year period shall
automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance to the City. Any
interest accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the City, whether such balance shall
be paid to the owner or forfeited to the City.
E. Foreclosure by the City due to violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions of the
regulations governing affordable housing units as the same apply to the
low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from
whom title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
F. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts
are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens,
the City may acquire title to the low- and moderate-income unit by
satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
§ 425-98.4 VINELAND CODE § 425-98.4
1:570
§ 425-98.5. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent designated pursuant
to this article shall be filed in writing with the Executive Director of COAH.
§ 425-99. Affordable housing development fees. [Added 1-10-2006
by Ord. No. 2005-101; amended 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-93;
8-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-65; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
between the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
costs of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income unit
could have been sold under the terms of the regulations governing
affordable housing units. This excess shall be treated in the same
manner as the excess which would have been realized from an actual
sale as previously described.
G. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at the
Sheriff's sale or acquired by the City shall obligate the owner to accept
an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser which may be
referred to the owner by the City, with such offer to purchase being
equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income
unit as permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing units.
H. The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
A. Purpose. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121
N.J. 550 (1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that
mandatory development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of
1985 (the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of
rules. This section establishes standards for the collection,
maintenance, and expenditure of development fees pursuant to the
COAH regulations and in accordance with P.L. 2008, c.46, Sections 8
and 32-38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing affordable housing. This section shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees,
codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8. [Amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-42]
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2), and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of COAH or a court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
§ 425-98.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-99
1:571
nonresidential development. [Amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-42]
C. Basic requirements. [Amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-42]
(1) This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1. Should new or revised COAH rules change any
provisions that the City of Vineland is imposing upon developers,
the COAH rules shall prevail.
(2) The City of Vineland shall not spend development fees until COAH
has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and 5:96-5.3.
D. Residential development fee schedule. [Amended 9-24-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-42]
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, developers who construct one or
more new dwellings, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of
1.5% of the equalized assessed value for residential
development, provided no increased density is permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of a
maximum of 6% of the equalized assessed value for each
additional unit that may be realized. However, if the zoning on
a site has changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application, the base density for the
purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the
highest density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
Example: If an approval allows three units to be constructed on
a site that was zoned for one unit, the fees could equal 1.5% of
the equalized assessed value on the one unit and the specified
higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value
for the two additional units, provided zoning on the site has
not changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential development.
(a) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
§ 425-99 VINELAND CODE § 425-99
1:572
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of the municipal development
fee ordinance on January 10, 2006, shall be exempt from
development fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial
change in the approval. Where a site plan or subdivision
approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for
this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date
that the building permit is issued.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to add an additional
dwelling (for example, from a single-family dwelling to a twofamily
dwelling), is demolished and replaced, or if the
expansion is not otherwise exempt from the development fee
requirement, but shall not apply to additions or changes that
do not result in the creation of a new dwelling. The
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(d) Developers of residential structures demolished and replaced
as a result of a natural disaster or catastrophic event (e.g., fire)
shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
E. Nonresidential development fees. [Amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-42]
(1) Applicability. Pursuant to P.L. 2009, c. 90, and P.L. 2011, c. 122, the
collection of a development fee on nonresidential construction is
suspended for all nonresidential projects that received preliminary
or final site plan approval after July 17, 2008, and until July 1, 2013,
provided that a permit for the construction of the building has been
issued prior to January 1, 2015. All other nonresidential
development not meeting this exemption criterion or an exemption
under Subsection E(3) hereinbelow shall pay a development fee in
accordance with these provisions.
(2) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures or
construction of additional structures to be used for
nonresidential purposes.
§ 425-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-99
1:573
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure (i.e., land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued). If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
(3) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market-rate development shall be subject to the 2.5%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(b) The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in Form N-RDF, the State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption form.
Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated
by that developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.
46, shall be subject to it at such time as the basis for the
exemption no longer applies and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by the City of Vineland as a lien against the
real property of the owner.
F. Collection procedures.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval, for a development, the applicable approving authority
§ 425-99 VINELAND CODE § 425-99
1:574
shall direct its staff to notify the Construction Official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" by the
Construction Official, to be completed as per the instructions
provided. The developer of a nonresidential development shall
complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions provided. The
Construction Official shall verify the information submitted by the
nonresidential developer as per the instructions provided in the
Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare
estimated and final assessments as per the instructions provided in
Form N-RDF.
(3) The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Tax Assessor, based on
the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized assessed
value of the development.
(5) The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the Tax Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the previously
estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of the
development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the Construction Official of the amount of the fee, who will transmit
it to the developer.
(7) Should the City of Vineland fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount
due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(8) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(9) Appeal of development fees.
§ 425-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-99
1:575
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by the City of Vineland. Appeals from a determination
of the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with
the provisions of the State Uniform Tax Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by the City of Vineland. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Tax
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(1) The City of Vineland has created a separate, interest-bearing
Affordable Housing Trust Fund to be maintained by the Chief
Financial Officer for the purpose of depositing development fees
collected from residential and nonresidential developers and
proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(b) Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with the City of
Vineland's affordable housing program.
§ 425-99 VINELAND CODE § 425-99
1:576
(3) The City of Vineland has provided COAH with written
authorization, in the form of a third-party escrow agreement
between the municipality, the bank, and COAH to permit COAH to
direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.13(b).
(4) All interest accrued in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall only
be used on eligible affordable housing activities approved by
COAH.
H. Use of funds.
(1) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund may be used for any activity approved by COAH to
address the City of Vineland's fair share obligation and may be set
up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include,
but are not limited to, preservation or purchase of housing for the
purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability controls,
rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units and
related costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance
with accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for
affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable
housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.9 and
specified in the approved spending plan.
(2) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the City of Vineland for
past housing activities.
(3) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan, unless COAH approves a waiver of this
affordability assistance requirement. One-third of the affordability
assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or
less of median income by region.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
§ 425-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-99
1:577
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
(4) The City of Vineland may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related
to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the
Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
I. Monitoring. The City of Vineland shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site,
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier free
escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing
program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with the
City of Vineland's housing program, as well as to the expenditure of
revenues and implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All
monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH.
J. Ongoing collection of fees. The ability for the City of Vineland to
impose, collect and expend development fees shall expire with its
substantive certification unless the City of Vineland has filed an
adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has
petitioned for substantive certification, and has received COAH's
approval of its development fee ordinance. If the City of Vineland fails
to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees prior to the
expiration of substantive certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of
any or all funds remaining within its Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey
§ 425-99 VINELAND CODE § 425-99
1:578
Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to Section 20 of
P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The City of Vineland shall not
impose a residential development fee on a development that receives
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision approval after the
expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance,
nor shall the City of Vineland retroactively impose a development fee on
such a development. The City of Vineland shall not expend development
fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of
compliance.
§ 425-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-99
1:579

ARTICLE IX
Mobile Home Parks
[Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4; 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69]
§ 425-100. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRADE — A reference plane consisting of the average finished ground level
adjacent to a structure, building or facility at all visible exterior walls.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A unit of housing which:
MOBILE HOME — A unit of housing which was fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility, designed to be a permanent residence, built prior to
enactment of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, which became effective on June 15, 1976.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land or two or more parcels of land
containing no fewer than 10 sites equipped for the installation of
manufactured homes, or mobile homes installed prior to the enactment of
this article, where these sites are under common ownership and control for
the purpose of leasing each site to the owner of a manufactured home for
the installation thereof, and where the owner or owners provide services
which are provided by the municipality in which the park is located for
property owners outside the park, which services may include but shall not
be limited to:
Consists of one or more transportable sections which are substantially
constructed off site and, if more than one section, are joined together
on site;
A.
B. Is built on a permanent chassis;
Is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling on
permanent or nonpermanent foundation; and
C.
Is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for a
manufactured home by the Secretary of the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,
Pub. L. 93-383 (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.), and the standards
promulgated for a manufactured or mobile home by the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
D.
A. The construction and maintenance of streets;
B. Lighting of streets and other common areas;
C. Garbage removal;
D. Snow removal; and
§ 425-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-100
1:581
MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE — A parcel of land
designated for the placement of a mobile or manufactured home.
NONPERMANENT FOUNDATION — A foundation consisting of
nonmortared blocks, wheels, concrete slab, runners or any combination
thereof, or any other system approved by the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs for the installation and anchorage of a
manufactured home on other than a permanent foundation.
OFF-SITE CONSTRUCTION OF MANUFACTURED HOME (or section
thereof) — The construction of that home or section at a location other than
the location at which the home is to be installed.
ON-SITE JOINING OF SECTIONS OF MANUFACTURED HOME — The
joining of those sections at the location at which the home is to be installed.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION — A system of support installed either
partially or entirely below grade, which is:
RUNNERS — A system of support consisting of poured concrete strips
running the length of the chassis of a manufactured home under the
lengthwise walls of that home.
TRAILER — A recreational vehicle, travel trailer, camper or other
transportable temporary dwelling unit, with or without its own motor power,
designed and constructed for travel and recreational purposes, to be
installed on a nonpermanent foundation if installation is required. Such
vehicles may be parked on a mobile or manufactured home space, if
registered, but cannot be occupied as a dwelling.
§ 425-101. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the construction and operation of
mobile home parks, a form of residential development that is a practical
means of providing affordable housing.
§ 425-102. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted by authority of N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 et seq., governing
licenses, and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., governing land use.
Provisions for the drainage of surface water from home sites and
common areas. While more appropriately called a "manufactured home
community" today, for purposes of this article, "mobile home park" will
continue to be used to maintain consistency with state statute.
E.
Capable of transferring all design loads imposed by or upon the
structure into soil or bedrock without failure;
A.
B. Placed at an adequate depth below grade to prevent frost damage; and
Constructed of material approved by the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs.
C.
§ 425-100 VINELAND CODE § 425-103
1:582
§ 425-103. Administration.
The licensing provisions of this article shall be under the jurisdiction of
City Council. The land use provisions of this article shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Planning Board.
§ 425-104. Number of licenses limited. [Amended 7-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-49]
City Council has provided for a maximum of 17 mobile home park licenses.
§ 425-105. Standards governing mobile home parks.
§ 425-106. Standards governing mobile home spaces.
A. Location. Mobile home parks are permitted to those areas designated
as Mobile Home Park Zones (MHP) in accordance with Article XV,
Zoning, of this chapter.
B. Lands restricted. No land which has been or is being mined shall be
included in a mobile home park unless proof is submitted that such land
is safe from subsidence, soil erosion, bad drainage conditions, stagnant
water ponding or other water hazards and such land has been
rehabilitated with the topsoil replaced, graded and landscaped. Such
filled areas, if approved, may be used only as open space and shall be
subject to the approval of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
C. Mobile homes and manufactured homes limited to mobile home parks.
It shall be unlawful within the City of Vineland for anyone to maintain,
occupy or park a mobile home or a manufactured home on any street,
alley, highway or public place. No mobile home or manufactured home
shall be placed on private premises or on the premises of a dwelling
unless said lot or premises is within an approved mobile home park or
as permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-100 et seq.
D. Application of regulations. These regulations shall apply to all existing
and proposed mobile home parks and mobile or manufactured home
spaces, except for mobile or manufactured home spaces included in
developments with valid licenses and preliminary or final site plan and
conditional use approvals under previous regulations.
E. Mobile home installation or relocation prohibited. Mobile homes may
not be installed or relocated to any approved space within a licensee
mobile home park. Only manufactured homes may be installed on any
vacant approved space within a licensed facility.
A. Area of park or community. The minimum area of a mobile home park
shall be 250,000 square feet.
§ 425-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-106
1:583
§ 425-107. Density and design standards.
B. Area. The minimum area of a mobile or manufactured home space shall
be 5,000 square feet. The mobile or manufactured home space
boundaries shall be measured from the back of the curb.
C. Frontage. The minimum frontage on park drives shall be 50 feet, except
along culs-de-sac or along curved park drives, where it shall be 30 feet.
D. Numbering of spaces. A consecutive numbering system shall be
established and each mobile or manufactured home space shall be
clearly identified by a number in accordance with Chapter 258,
§§ 258-5B and C and 258-10, of the City of Vineland Code.
E. Home orientation. All mobile homes and manufactured homes shall
front on a park drive. No mobile or manufactured home space shall be
placed closer than 75 feet of a public street line.
A. Spaces per acre. The number of mobile or manufactured home spaces
per acre shall not exceed five.
B. Distance between mobile homes or manufactured homes.
(1) No mobile home or manufactured home shall be placed closer than
20 feet from the side of another mobile home or manufactured
home.
(2) The end-to-end distance between mobile homes or manufactured
homes shall not be less than 20 feet.
C. Setback along park drives. No mobile home, manufactured home or
accessory building shall be placed closer than 20 feet to any park drive,
as measured from the back of the curb.
D. Electric and communication utility easements. A fifteen-foot-wide
easement for electric and communication uses shall be provided to the
rear of the curb when located in the service area of a utility company or
authority requiring same. The easement area may not be used for
fences, landscaping or other obstructions. Paved driveways, sidewalks
and street trees are permitted.
E. Setback from side and rear boundaries of park. No mobile or
manufactured home space shall be placed closer than 50 feet to the side
or rear boundaries of any park, if a boundary adjoins residentially zoned
land not permitting mobile home parks. The setback to other zones not
permitting mobile home parks shall be 25 feet. The setback shall be 15
feet to land zoned for mobile home parks. The fifty-foot setback
requirement for side or rear boundaries may be reduced to 25 feet if the
buffering proposed is in accordance with § 425-123C(3). Where utility
or drainage easements are required along side or rear boundary lines,
the easement area shall not be used for a mobile home or manufactured
home.
§ 425-106 VINELAND CODE § 425-107
1:584
§ 425-108. Nonconforming mobile home parks.
Nonconforming mobile home parks may be continued, notwithstanding the
provisions of this article, provided that:
§ 425-109. Replacement of existing mobile homes in licensed
mobile home parks.
§ 425-110. Nonconforming mobile homes on fee-simple lots.
F. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be placed in
conformance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.146
G. Design occupancy. No mobile home or manufactured home shall be
inhabited by a greater number of occupants than the number registered
in the mobile home park or the number permitted by the applicable
codes, whichever is less.
A. If the park is discontinued for a period of six months, it shall be updated
to conform to the provisions of this article.
B. The park shall pay all license and other specified fees.
A. The applicant shall submit to the Zoning Officer a plot plan of the
mobile or manufactured home space, accurately drawn and showing, by
dimensions, the existing placement as well as the proposed placement
of the new manufactured home. (NOTE: All proposed setbacks shall
equal or exceed the original required setbacks as well as conform to the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.)
B. The Zoning Officer shall send a letter of approval to the Department of
Licenses and Inspections to proceed with the issuance of the required
permits.
C. Only manufactured homes may be used as replacement units.
D. Upon completion of the construction necessary for the replacement of
the manufactured home, the new certificate of occupancy may be
issued.
A. A mobile home legally located prior to July 11, 1983, on a fee simple lot
shall be considered a nonconforming mobile home.
B. Nonconforming mobile homes shall not be replaced or relocated
without approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the issuance of
the required permits.
C. The removal of a nonconforming mobile home from a lot shall be
considered the abandonment of that use from the property.
146. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 425-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-111
1:585
§ 425-111. Signs.
All signs in a mobile home park shall comply with the standards set for the
multifamily uses in residential zones.
§ 425-112. Construction standards.
A. A detailed illustration of all signs to be installed shall be submitted for
review and approval prior to the issuance of permits.
B. In reviewing signs, the Board shall consider appropriateness and the
degree to which the signs enhance the visual appearance of the park,
the public areas, the public streets and the architectural style of the
existing or proposed accessory buildings, as well as the quality of the
residential environment for those who live in the park.
C. Along the park drive at each entrance to a mobile home park, a plan of
the park, depicting accurate drive names and mobile or manufactured
home space numbers, shall be posted. Said plan shall be a maximum of
32 square feet in size.
D. Signs shall be required at all intersections identifying drive names.
A. The standards established by the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards Act147 and the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code,148 the Illuminating Engineering Society, the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the Soil Conservation
District, and such other statutory provisions which pertain shall apply.
Each phase or type of construction shall comply with the applicable
codes and standards. See Subsection J of § 425-71, Flood damage
prevention, and § 425-79, Construction standards, of Article VII.
B. Two hundred square feet of concrete shall be provided in each mobile
or manufactured home space to coincide with the entrance to the
mobile home or manufactured home prior to the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy. An elevated deck of equal size may be
substituted for the 200 square feet of concrete.
C. Two paved parking spaces shall be provided in each mobile or
manufactured home space.
D. Subject to the approval of a waiver of the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, a right-of-way of less than 50 feet in width sufficient
to contain the required cartway and curbing may be provided. The
Planning Board may require that the right-of-way and cartway widths of
a new street that is a continuation of an existing street be at least the
same widths as the existing street.
147. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.3 et seq.
148. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 425-111 VINELAND CODE § 425-112
1:586
§ 425-113. Traffic impact statement and circulation.
E. Curbing for all mobile home developments shall be made of concrete
and may be designed as vertical curb or mountable curb in accordance
with the construction standards in the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards.
F. Bicycle paths and lanes, a minimum of six feet in width, shall be
provided when the Master Plan Circulation Element requires them in
the location of a proposed mobile home park.
G. The minimum levels of illumination to be provided are 0.1 average
maintained footcandle for all parts of the park zone system and 0.3
average maintained footcandle for potentially hazardous locations. For
other specifics, refer to the Illuminating Engineering Society standards.
A. A traffic impact statement (TIS) shall be submitted with an application
to expand a mobile home park, if the proposed expansion generates
traffic flows in excess of 10% of the existing flows as measured on a
weekday between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. at the access/exit points. See
Article VII, § 425-80, for the contents of a traffic impact statement.
B. Roadways within a mobile home park shall be private drives unless,
based on the provisions of the Official Map and the Master Plan of
Street Extensions, the Planning Board requires the street to be
dedicated to public use in order to serve the overall community plan.
C. Park drives shall be designed to provide convenient access to all mobile
or manufactured home spaces. Where dead-ended drives are necessary,
culs-de-sac shall be installed.
D. Park drives shall follow existing lane contours to the fullest possible
extent while providing satisfactory gradients and fire protection access
to mobile homes and manufactured homes.
E. Park drives shall be designed to avoid destruction of natural resources
such as trees, scenic views and waterways.
F. The overall clarity of the vehicular circulation plan must be evident.
G. Landscaping and barrier plantings shall be used to insulate residents of
the park from public thoroughfares.
H. Block sizes shall be the maximum consistent with the shape of the site
and the convenience and safety of the park residents. Blocks longer
than 600 feet shall be designed with midblock pedestrian easements at
least 10 feet in width to be improved with a four-foot-wide concrete
sidewalk.
I. Clear sight triangles shall be provided and maintained at intersections
with public streets.
§ 425-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-114
1:587
§ 425-114. Requirements for street dedication.
The following criteria shall apply to streets which are required to be
dedicated:
§ 425-115. Parking and service area regulations.
§ 425-116. Refuse storage and collection.
A. Said street or portion of a street shall be an integral part of the Official
Map or the Master Plan of Street Extensions, as approved and
amended, or where necessary shall be so integrated.
B. Where traffic flows warrant, acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be
provided.
C. Where necessary, intersection expansion and other improvements shall
be made.
D. The street shall be dedicated to public use by deed to the City of
Vineland.
A. Entrances to parking and service areas shall be from a park drive and
shall be at least 50 feet away from a public street intersection.
B. Parking and service areas shall be fully screened from public streets,
adjacent residences and mobile or manufactured home spaces.
A. Refuse shall be stored in tightly covered containers and kept under
sanitary conditions.
B. Each mobile or manufactured home space or centralized location shall
be provided with one of the following:
(1) A slab of impervious material large enough to accommodate the
number of required containers.
(2) A rack or holder which provides at least six inches of clear space
beneath or a cart which provides at least four inches of clear space
beneath.
(3) A properly protected container in an underground storage
installation.
C. The area surrounding refuse containers and collection areas shall be
kept free of litter, stagnant pools or articles which hold water and
provide insect-breeding places.
D. Centralized locations shall be screened with solid fencing and
landscaping.
E. Refuse containers shall be repaired or replaced when damaged.
F. Refuse shall be collected at least once a week.
§ 425-114 VINELAND CODE § 425-117
1:588
§ 425-117. Open space.
§ 425-118. Soil and topographic conditions.
A. A minimum of 15% of the total acres of a mobile home park shall be
reserved as open space. At least 25% of the required open space for
non-age-restricted developments shall be located in one defined area
suitable for active recreation and field sports and shall be free of
environmental constraints, including stormwater detention or retention
basins.
B. Recreation areas shall be so located and arranged as to provide for the
maximum efficiency of function, benefit and convenience to all the park
residents. Details of active recreational facilities shall be shown on the
site plan to be approved by the Planning Board. Facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the standards included in Article VII,
§ 425-82, Recreation facilities, except for provisions for payments in
lieu of providing such facilities.
C. For age-restricted development (i.e., for persons 55 years of age or
older), the minimum massed open space referred to in Subsection A
above may be waived if a community building or center is provided. The
size of the building or center shall be based on 30 square feet per
mobile or manufactured home space in the development, up to a
maximum of 7,200 square feet, with a minimum building area of 1,500
square feet. At a minimum, the community building or center must
include a meeting room, kitchen and rest room facilities.
D. Setback areas abutting public streets shall not be used to meet the open
space requirements nor shall such areas be put to recreational use.
E. Any areas devoted to active sports, such as softball, tennis or
swimming, shall be enclosed by fencing of sufficient height to minimize
potential hazard and nuisance to adjacent residences, mobile homes or
manufactured homes. In addition to fencing, screening may be required
to ensure privacy and buffer noise.
F. Open space and recreational facilities' maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the park manager and shall include maintenance of
lawns, landscaping, paved areas, screening materials, including fences,
as well as all the facilities to be used in common.
A. Soil and subsoil conditions shall be found to be suitable under the
applicable standards for excavation and construction.
B. Topography shall be found suitable under the applicable standards for
the proposed land use.
C. Land located within areas designated as flood hazard areas shall not be
developed or used for any purpose unless it conforms to the standards
set by the Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water
Resources, and the provisions of Article VII, § 425-71, of this chapter.
§ 425-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-119
1:589
§ 425-119. Grading and drainage.
Adequate provision for surface water drainage facilities is essential. The
provisions of Article VII, § 425-72, shall be met. In preparing and reviewing
drainage proposals, the following criteria shall apply:
§ 425-120. Environmental conditions and impact statement.
In reviewing an application for mobile home park development, the
Planning Board shall ensure that adequate provisions are made to preserve,
protect and make maximum use of the natural features and resources of the
site. To this end, an environmental impact statement shall be submitted with
each application to expand a mobile home park. See Article VII, § 425-81,
for the contents of an environmental impact statement.
§ 425-121. Energy conservation.
§ 425-122. Aesthetics and safety features.
A. Natural stream beds and all related floodplain areas shall be clearly
defined and protected. Care shall be taken to minimize peak
downstream runoff.
B. Surface drainage systems may include, where necessary, detention
structures which will assure no additional runoff from the mobile home
park subsequent to completion of the park.
C. Surface drainage systems shall be designed to accommodate all runoff
coming to or accumulating on the development site.
D. Grading and drainage development shall conform to the soil erosion
and sediment control standards as applied by the Soil Conservation
District.
A. The orientation of mobile homes and manufactured homes which can
most effectively reduce the consumption of natural or artificial fuels
shall be given priority in the design stage of the development.
B. Natural vegetation shall be utilized and supplemented throughout the
site to aid in achieving the fullest practical degree of climate
moderation. The Planning Board shall evaluate the extent to which the
development plan has met the goal for energy conservation.
A. Visual considerations. In designing the layout of a mobile home park
development, emphasis shall be placed on the visual effect. The
perimeter of off-street parking areas, refuse containers and collection
areas and other service-related stations shall be attractively screened
by the use of appropriate fencing or landscaping. The Planning Board
shall determine that the developer has made every effort to design a
development which is visually pleasing.
§ 425-119 VINELAND CODE § 425-122
1:590
§ 425-123. Buffers and landscaping.
B. Quality of design. The nature, size, shape, lighting and style of signs
and of street and recreation area furnishings shall be found to be in
good taste, creating a sense of harmony. The layout shall be designed to
avoid the appearance of congestion. Aesthetically pleasing natural
features shall be protected and enhanced.
C. Lighting and safety features. Proper lighting promotes safety and can
attractively illuminate. Special attention shall be given to lighting for
steps, ramps, intersections or any potentially hazardous location.
Lighting shall not be aimed directly into the windows of a mobile home
or manufactured home or directly into patios.
A. Perimeter buffers intent. Mobile home parks are typically adjacent to
lower density residential development or land zoned for lower density
residential development. It is the intention of this article to use larger
boundary setbacks and existing or proposed landscaping to provide
adequate buffering between parks and existing or future lower density
development. In approving a buffering plan, the Planning Board shall
take into consideration the depth and quality of existing vegetation as
supplemented by the developer in determining if adequate screening is
provided.
B. Existing perimeter vegetation. No trees or vegetation shall be removed
from street line or property line setback areas, except for the removal
of noxious, dead or diseased materials needed to improve the health of
the existing trees and shrubs or to accommodate supplemental
landscaping. Clearing for streets, drives or utility connections or
similar, required improvements shall be permitted but only to the extent
needed to accommodate the improvement and necessary regrading.
C. Perimeter buffers standards:
(1) The minimum standard for a planted buffer, assuming there is no
existing perimeter vegetation, is as follows.
(a) Deciduous shade trees: two for every 100 feet.
(b) Deciduous flowering or ornamental trees: three for every 100
feet.
(c) Deciduous shrubs: 10 for every 100 feet.
(d) Evergreen trees: five for every 100 feet.
(e) Evergreen shrubs: five for every 100 feet.
(2) Where existing vegetation is preserved, the minimum buffer
quantities listed in Subsection C(1) above may be reduced to no
less than 1/3 of the total, depending on the quality of the existing
materials and their buffering performance. The proposed
additional buffer materials will be judged based on compatibility
§ 425-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-123
1:591
§ 425-124. Development phasing regulations.
If the applicant chooses phasing, these regulations shall apply to all mobile
home parks:
with the existing vegetation and their ability to thrive in the
proposed conditions.
(3) When the perimeter buffer depth is reduced to less than the
minimum, the quantities listed in Subsection C(1) above must be
increased by no less than 1/3.
(4) If a screening fence or wall is used, the minimum buffer quantities
listed in Subsection C(1) above may be reduced to no less than 1/3
of the total.
(5) In calculating the required open space areas, 25 feet of the
perimeter buffer and setback depth is presumed to be dedicated to
the buffering function and is not to be counted toward open space.
D. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be an essential feature of the mobile
home park and shall be used as a means of unifying the total site. Tall
trees and massing of plants can be used to create focal points and
define public areas. To the fullest practical extent, shade trees shall be
retained or planted at appropriate locations throughout the park and
shall be provided along public streets, at least one for each 50 feet of
drive and/or street frontage. Additional trees must also be provided
when spaces back up to other spaces or facilities in the development. At
least one tree for every three lots must be planted along these rear lot
areas. Deciduous trees shall have at least one-and-three-fourths-inch
caliper at planting; evergreen trees shall be at least five feet tall; and all
shrubs, other than dwarf varieties, shall be at least two feet tall at
planting.
E. Planning Board review. In reviewing the screening/landscaping plan,
the Board shall determine that:
(1) Erosion-resistant plants are planned for slope areas.
(2) The extent to which plantings along public roads will buffer noise
and light.
(3) The adequacy of climate controls by the use of plants to serve as
windscreens in winter and to provide shade in summer.
(4) The plan makes all possible attempt to break up the vista of long
rows of mobile homes and manufactured homes.
(5) The plan provides for a variety of species to avoid extensive disease
or winter-kill losses.
(6) The plan provides some seasonal variations.
§ 425-123 VINELAND CODE § 425-124
1:592
§ 425-125. Responsibilities of park owners and management.
In every mobile home park, a manager's office shall be established, which
may be in a manufactured home or in a permanent building. The
responsibilities of the manager and/or licensee shall be:
A. The development of open space shall be completed in proportion to
match the area of the section for which final approval is sought.
B. The length of the development period for the entire park shall be
determined by the developer unless the Planning Board finds that the
proposed time schedule is not reasonable, would create excessive
demands on City services and facilities or would not protect the health,
safety and welfare of the community, in which case the Planning Board
shall modify the time for completion accordingly.
C. Each section of the mobile home park shall be functionally selfcontained
and capable of sustained occupancy and maintenance and
shall be properly related to utility services to be provided for the
completed park.
D. Each section of the park shall be provided adequate transitional
features to avoid damage or detriment to a completed section or to
adjoining properties.
E. Each section shall be covered by performance and maintenance
guaranties.
A. To keep a copy of the park license, the approved mobile home park site
plan and this article posted in the office, as well as the park register
listing names and addresses of current owners and occupants of each
mobile home and manufactured home in the park, all of which shall be
available to officers of the law and to public health officials at all times.
B. To maintain the park in a clean and orderly condition, including weed
and rodent control, and to comply with all other applicable City
standards, such as the City Property Maintenance Code149 and the
Housing Code.
C. To report any violation of City standards by the resident tenants to the
proper authorities as soon as it becomes known.
D. To prohibit the use of a mobile home or manufactured home by a
greater number of occupants than are registered at the mobile home
park office or permitted by code, whichever is less.
E. To report animals in the park which violate applicable municipal animal
control codes.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 537, Property Maintenance.
§ 425-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-125
1:593
§ 425-126. Responsibilities of tenants.
The responsibilities of tenants shall be:
§ 425-127. Conceptual presentations.
See Article VI, § 425-58, Concept plans.
§ 425-128. Site plan details.
F. To ensure that a certificate of smoke detector compliance is issued prior
to the sale, release or other change of occupancy for residential
purposes of any unit.
A. To maintain the mobile home or manufactured home and mobile or
manufactured home space in a sanitary condition.
B. To keep personal property in enclosed storage at their own expense.
C. To provide for the mobile home or manufactured home connection to
the water and sewer riser outlets.
D. To provide protection to prevent freezing of the water riser.
E. To supply a refuse container to be maintained at a specified location if
refuse containers are not provided at central locations by the
management.
F. To cut grass, brush and weeds to maintain the mobile or manufactured
home space in a clean, attractive condition and to be responsible for
rodent control.
G. To provide a suitable fire extinguisher, in a readily accessible location,
and a smoke alarm, which meet local codes.
A. The site plan data required under Article VI, § 425-61B, shall apply.
B. In addition, the following information is required:
(1) Name of the mobile home park.
(2) The floodplain boundaries and/or area of soils limitations.
(3) The location of open space, with dimensions and area.
(4) The location of active recreation and field sports, if any, with plan of
each type.
(5) Report of soils analysis and percolation tests.
(6) Location of easements, with type and dimensions noted.
(7) Location of drives and accessways, with widths and lengths.
(8) Location of each mobile or manufactured home space.
§ 425-125 VINELAND CODE § 425-128
1:594
§ 425-129. Improvements.
§ 425-130. Submission of preliminary plan.
(9) Number of originally granted spaces.
(10) Number of spaces added, if any, and number proposed to be added.
(11) Delineation of all buffer areas, dimensioned.
(12) Delineation of setback lines from public streets, dimensioned.
(13) Location, type and plan of screening.
(14) Any other data found to be pertinent to the particular site.
A. On-site improvements such as drives, lights, signs, curbs and gutters,
as well as sidewalks, shall be provided as specified under the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards150 or, when applicable,
the construction standards of the City of Vineland. See Article VII,
Design Standards, § 425-79.
B. Off-tract improvements, if required, shall be in accordance with the
provisions of Article VI, § 425-47.
A. A complete site plan application for mobile home park development
shall consist of the following:
(1) Ten copies of the plan showing the data required, plus four copies if
the application must go to the County Planning Board. See
§ 425-128 above.
(2) Two copies of the soils analysis and percolation tests.
(3) Phasing and timing schedule and density for the total site and for
each phase.
(4) A description of covenants, grants, easements and restrictions.
(5) A written statement setting forth how the project will meet the
public need and any special need within an established park.
(6) A description of the proposed open space management and
maintenance plan.
(7) A description of circulation conditions or a traffic impact
statement. See § 425-113 regarding TIS requirements.
(8) A description of environmental conditions or an environmental
impact statement. See § 425-120 regarding an EIS.
(9) A completed application form.
150. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.3 et seq.
§ 425-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-130
1:595
§ 425-131. Schedule of development review fees.
To help defray the municipal costs of reviews and inspections, the following
fees shall be paid:
§ 425-132. Exceptions, variances and public hearings.
§ 425-133. Conditions for preliminary approval.
Prior to preliminary approval, the Planning Board shall find:
(10) The development review fee. See § 425-131.
B. The procedure cited under § 425-66D, E and F of Article VI shall apply.
A. With the application for preliminary approval: $10 per proposed mobile
home space, with a minimum of $100.
B. With a resubmission for preliminary approval: $5 per proposed mobile
home space, with a minimum of $50.
C. With the application for final approval: $5 per proposed mobile home
space, with a minimum of $100. If an application for preliminary/final
approval is submitted, only the fee for preliminary approval is required.
D. With a resubmission for final approval: $2.50 per proposed mobile
home space, with a minimum of $50. If an application for preliminary/
final approval is submitted, only the fee for preliminary approval is
required.
A. For provisions regarding exceptions, see Article VI, Subdivision and
Site Plan Review and Approval, § 425-50.
B. For provisions regarding variances, see the Zoning Schedule (§ 425-308
of Article XV, Zoning).
C. For provisions regarding public hearings, see Article I, General
Provisions, § 425-9 et seq.
A. The proposals for maintenance and conservation of open space are
reliable and that the space is adequate for the intended purpose.
B. The physical layout of the plan provides for public services, traffic
control and a good environmental climate.
C. The development will not have an unreasonably adverse impact upon
the area or upon municipal services.
D. The conditions applied to protect the public and the residents of the
completed park are adequate in the case of each phase or stage of
development.
§ 425-130 VINELAND CODE § 425-134
1:596
§ 425-134. Effect of preliminary site plan approval.
See Article VI, § 425-68, of this chapter.
§ 425-135. Submission of final site plan.
See Article VI, § 425-69, of this chapter.
§ 425-136. Performance guaranties; surety for improvements.
See Article VI, § 425-52, of this chapter.
§ 425-137. Effect of final site plan approval.
§ 425-138. Sale before approval; violations and penalties.
See Article VI, § 425-54, of this chapter.
§ 425-139. License to operate required.
A. See Article VI, § 425-70, of this chapter.
B. Final approval grants the applicant the right to:
(1) Make application to the Construction Official for the necessary
permits to construct park improvements and the supporting
systems for each mobile or manufactured home space.
(2) To apply to City Council for a license to operate in accordance with
the requirements of this article.
A. It is unlawful to operate a mobile home park within the City of Vineland
without a license to operate. All licenses to operate shall expire on
December 31 of each year.
B. The City Council must issue a license to operate for all authorized
mobile or manufactured home spaces within a mobile home park prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for those spaces. Final site
plan approval must be secured and the mobile or manufactured home
spaces must be constructed before a license to operate can be
considered.
C. The City Council must find a proposed or existing park to be in
compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances and must
receive a report from the Department of Licenses and Inspections on
the conditions of the park prior to the issuance or renewal of a license
to operate.
D. The number of mobile or manufactured home spaces included under a
license to operate shall be equal to the number approved by the
Planning Board during the review of an application for final site plan
approval or as previously approved by the City prior to the passage of
§ 425-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-139
1:597
§ 425-140. License to operate renewal; required information;
inspection.
this article. Mobile or manufactured home spaces can be constructed
and licensed by phases if so approved by the Planning Board.
E. Mobile home parks may develop additional spaces in accordance with
valid site plan approvals under the previous ordinance or to the limits of
a Mobile Home Park (MHP) Zone, if a park is so zoned.
F. Licensed parks located outside of MHP Zones must apply to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment for a variance, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(2), to expand a nonconforming use and for final site plan
approval.
A. License to operate renewal. Applications for license to operate
renewals shall be made to the Director of the Department of Licenses
and Inspections for submission to the City Council no later than
December 10 of each year.
(1) The licensee shall submit four copies of a signed application form.
If the park is owned by a corporation, the applicant shall give the
name and address of each owner having 10% or more of the issued,
outstanding capital stock of the corporation.
(2) The applicant shall also submit a copy of the approved mobile home
park plan which shall clearly indicate all the constructed spaces
and all the unconstructed spaces. All spaces, constructed and
unconstructed, shall not exceed the total number of spaces
approved by the Planning Board.
(3) The management shall provide an inventory of all developed
spaces, which shall include the identification of the space, the type
of space (i.e., vacant, renter-occupied or owner-occupied), the
owner of any space which is renter-occupied and any citations that
may have been received during the licensing year being completed.
B. Required information. In addition to the signed application form and a
copy of the approved mobile home park plan, the applicant shall
provide the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections
with the name, address and telephone number of each of the following:
(1) The licensee.
(2) The officers of the corporation, if licensee is incorporated.
(3) The mobile home park manager.
(4) The maintenance supervisor of the water system.
(5) The maintenance supervisor of the sewerage system.
(6) The maintenance supervisor of the park drives system.
§ 425-139 VINELAND CODE § 425-140
1:598
§ 425-141. Fees.
§ 425-142. Suspension or revocation of license; reinstatement.
The license to operate a mobile home park may be suspended or revoked by
City Council at any time if the park is in violation of any provision herein,
upon 10 days' written notice to the licensee and manager of the park. The
reason for the notice and the remedial action required shall be given. The
licensee may request the opportunity to be heard prior to the effective date
of the suspension or revocation. An application for reinstatement may be
made at any time thereafter. Satisfactory proof that the violation has been
corrected shall be required prior to reinstatement.
§ 425-143. Requirements for permits and certificates of occupancy.
C. Annual inspection. The Department of Licenses and Inspections shall
perform an annual inspection of each licensed mobile home park and
shall report the results of the inspection to City Council prior to the
issuance of the license to operate for the mobile home park. The
Department of Licenses and Inspections shall notify the park manager
at least 24 hours in advance of the annual inspection and shall inform
him of the results of the inspection.
A. The annual license to operate fee for the mobile home park shall be:
(1) Two hundred dollars per park comprising 24 spaces or less.
(2) Two hundred dollars per park comprising 25 spaces or more, plus
$15 for each approved, constructed space in excess of 24 spaces
which is occupied by a mobile home or manufactured home or
which is ready to receive a manufactured home.
B. The annual license fee, or municipal service fee, for each mobile home
space shall be $10 per month for the remainder of calendar year 1999;
$12 per month for calendar year 2000; $14 per month for calendar year
2001; and $16 per month for calendar year 2002 (and until such time as
it is recalculated) for each approved, constructed space which is
occupied by a mobile home or manufactured home. These annual fees,
due quarterly, shall be collected on the 10th day of January, April, July
and October of each year.
C. The fees collected under Subsections A and B shall comprise the total
license to operate fee. Failure to pay either one shall constitute a
violation and, in addition to penalties, the license to operate may be
revoked.
D. The fee for a transfer of a license to operate shall be $100.
E. No entrance fee shall be imposed on the mobile home or manufactured
home owner by the licensee or by the park manager.
§ 425-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-143
1:599
§ 425-144. Notices.
§ 425-145. Responsibility for park maintenance.
§ 425-146. Enforcement.
A. The granting of a license to operate by the City Council conveys no right
to erect any building, install a mobile home and its support system or to
do any other work which requires the issuance of a permit.
B. No permit shall be issued prior to final site plan approval for any part of
an authorized mobile home park.
C. Permits to construct park improvements and the supporting systems for
each mobile or manufactured home space shall be issued by the
Construction Official.
D. Certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued
prior to the occupation of a mobile home. No certificate shall be issued
unless all the required installations have been inspected and approved
by the appropriate officials.
A. Notice shall not be required for the development of authorized spaces
which meet the standards of this chapter and the applicable state and
local codes.
B. Notice shall be required for all development of new expansions of
spaces or lands which were not part of the mobile home park prior to
January 1, 1998.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain all common
facilities and improvements of the park in good operating order at all
times.
B. Park drives shall be cleared of snow as soon as conditions reasonably
permit.
C. Failure to comply within 24 hours after notice of a maintenance
deficiency from the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall
constitute a violation of this article.
A. During construction of a mobile home park or any expansion thereto,
the City Engineer shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the
provisions of the Planning Board approval.
B. During the operation of a mobile home park, the following departments
shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the maintenance of
the park in accordance with the requirements of the related codes and
the approved final site plans:
(1) Fire Department. New Jersey Fire Prevention Code, as amended,
smoke detector certification for owner-occupied units at the sale of
a unit.
§ 425-143 VINELAND CODE § 425-146
1:600
§ 425-147. Violations and penalties.
(2) Department of Licenses and Inspections. New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, as amended; regarding installation, including
foundations and tie-downs or strapping, utility connections, etc.;
the issuance of certificates of occupancy for new units; inspection
of overall park conditions as part of the annual licensing to operate
renewal; the maintenance of all aspects of approved site plans.
(3) Health Department. Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Vineland, as amended;151 City of Vineland Remittal Registration
Ordinance, as amended, including the inspection of rental units at
changes in occupancy or as requested; New Jersey Standards for
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems, including all
septic systems not under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection; New Jersey regulations
governing public noncommunal water supplies, including all wells
not under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
C. During the operations of a mobile home park, the Zoning Officer shall
be responsible for enforcement of the land use provisions of this article.
A. Any person found guilty of violating a provision of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense, and each day
a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
B. The Municipal Court shall also have the power to suspend the license to
operate of a violator pending the elimination of the violation.
C. The penalties set forth in this section are in addition to any other lawful
penalties which may be imposed.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 537, Property Maintenance.
§ 425-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-147
1:601

ARTICLE X
Campgrounds
§ 425-148. Definitions.
§ 425-149. Purpose.
This article is enacted to provide standards and regulations to which all
campgrounds and owners thereof shall comply to ensure the protection of
public health and safety.
§ 425-150. Statutory authority.
This article is authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:52-1, pertaining to licenses, and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., pertaining to land use.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPER — Any individual who occupies a campsite or otherwise
assumes charge of, or is placed in charge of, a campsite.
CAMPGROUND — A plot of ground on which two or more campsites
are located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units
of the general public as temporary living quarters for children, adults,
or both, for recreation, education and vacation purposes.
CAMPING UNIT — Any tent or camping vehicle temporarily located
on a campsite, or a cabin, lean-to or similar structure established,
maintained and operated in a campground as temporary quarters for
children, adults, or both, for recreation, education or vacation
purposes, but shall not include any camping unit kept by its owner on
land occupied by him in connection with his dwelling or any camping
unit which is not occupied and which is kept at a campground for
storage purposes only at a location reserved for the storage of such
camping units.
CAMPING VEHICLE — A vehicular-type portable structure without
permanent foundation which can be towed, hauled or driven and
primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational
camping and travel use, including but not limited to travel trailers,
truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.
CAMPSITE — Any plot of ground within a campground intended for
exclusive occupation by a camping unit or units under the control of a
camper.
OWNER — The owner, lessee, tenant or other person having
authorization to permit, and who does permit, the occupancy of a
campground by campers or overnight occupants.
B. In addition, all definitions of N.J.A.C. 8:22-1.6 shall apply.
§ 425-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-151
1:603
§ 425-151. Administration.
The licensing provisions of this article shall be under the jurisdiction of the
City Council; the land use development shall be under Planning Board and
Department of Health approval.
§ 425-152. Number of licenses limited.
No more than six licenses for campgrounds within the City of Vineland shall
be issued at any time.
§ 425-153. Location and size requirements; lands restricted.
§ 425-154. Density.
A. Location. Campgrounds shall be permitted in the W-5, W-6 and P-F
Zones under conditional use regulations. See Sheet 2, Conditional Use
Specific Standards (§ 425-308 of Article XV of this chapter).
Campgrounds and campsites may also be permitted in the Pinelands
Agricultural Production and the Pinelands Forest Zones as specified by
the Pinelands Commission and by provisions of this article. See Article
XI for regulations governing development in the Pinelands. [Amended
1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
B. Minimum size. A campground shall comprise a minimum of three acres
of contiguous unencumbered land.
C. Lands restricted. No land being mined or which has ever been mined
shall be included in a campground site unless:
(1) The applicant submits proof that said land is reasonably safe from
soil erosion, bad drainage conditions, stagnant water ponding and
unusual water hazards.
(2) Said land has been rehabilitated, including the replacement of
topsoil.
(3) Measures are taken for gas venting.
(4) Such land is approved for the use by the DEP (Department of
Environmental Protection).
A. Campsites per acre. The number of campsites per gross acre shall not
exceed 18.
B. Minimum area per campsite. The minimum area per campsite shall not
be less than 1,000 square feet.
C. Maximum persons per acre. A campsite may accommodate one or more
camping units occupied by persons within the same party in charge of a
camper, but in no case shall the total number of overnight occupants
exceed 180 persons per acre.
§ 425-151 VINELAND CODE § 425-155
1:604
§ 425-155. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 425-156. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 425-157. Prohibited uses.
The following uses shall be prohibited:
§ 425-158. Signs.
A. Campsites, to be occupied only by camping units and campers' vehicles.
B. Permanent platforms, ramps, cabins or lean-tos provided only by the
owner of the campgrounds.
C. Normal camping equipment, such as canvas awnings, screened
enclosures and temporary platforms, which will be removed with the
camping unit.
A. Campground office and storage facilities.
B. Gasoline filling stations.
C. Campground convenience stores.
D. Restaurants.
E. Showers and rest room facilities.
F. Outdoor fireplaces, picnic facilities and drinking fountains.
G. Tennis courts and swimming pools.
H. Recreation halls.
A. Permanent or semipermanent huts or other living room additions to
camping units.
B. Unenclosed storage of any materials, tools, equipment or trash.
C. Outdoor displays, temporary signs, pennants or banners, except as may
be authorized by permit for a special event.
D. Any use that would result in a violation of the New Jersey State Sanitary
Code, Chapter XI, the zoning standards of this chapter and the
purposes of this article, or any use which would destroy the natural
features of the land or pollute the water or create potential hazard to
the public health, safety and welfare.
A. Signs shall be permitted as follows:
§ 425-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-158
1:605
§ 425-159. Construction standards.
The standards set by the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,152 the
Illuminating Engineering Society, the Department of Environmental
Protection, the Soil Conservation District Office, the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code (Chapter XI) and such other statutory provisions which
pertain shall apply to the development of a campground. Each phase and
type of construction shall comply with the applicable codes and standards.
See Subsection J of § 425-71, Flood damage prevention, and § 425-79,
Construction standards, of Article VII.
§ 425-160. Circulation requirements; impact statements.
§ 425-161. Utility lines, grounding and illumination.
(1) One sign, not to exceed a total of 32 square feet, at the main
entrance to a campground.
(2) Directional signs, not to exceed four square feet, with the number
kept to the minimum necessary to achieve their purpose.
(3) Temporary signs, limited to a maximum total of 30 calendar days
during the period from April 1 through November 1 of each year.
B. A detailed illustration of all signs shall be submitted for review and
approval prior to the issuance of permits.
A. Access. Each campground shall be provided with a safe, convenient
access to a dedicated public thoroughfare.
B. Accessways and parking areas shall be built on a stable base, be
conveniently located and shall be maintained free of potholes, dust and
hazards.
C. Accessways and pedestrian paths shall be so located so as to preserve
the maximum number of shade trees and natural features and shall not
be placed closer than 40 feet to any property line.
D. Width of access drives shall be a minimum of 30 feet for two-way access
and a minimum of 14 feet for one-way access.
E. Access drives within a campground shall be private drives unless the
Planning Board requires a dedication in order to implement the Official
Map and the Master Plan of Street Extensions.
F. Impact statements (traffic and/or environmental) may be required to
establish or expand a campground when the campsites exceed 100. See
§§ 425-80 and 425-81 of Article VII.
A. All electrical trunk lines shall be installed below ground.
152. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 425-158 VINELAND CODE § 425-161
1:606
§ 425-162. Campsite layout.
§ 425-163. Responsibilities of owner.
§ 425-164. Responsibilities of caretaker or manager.
B. All metal parts of a camping vehicle that is equipped for electrical
service shall be properly grounded.
C. All access drives shall be lighted to permit safe movement of vehicles
and pedestrians at night.
D. Lights shall be focused away from campsites and the adjoining
properties.
A. Each campsite shall be well-drained and laid out to provide sufficient
open and graded space to accommodate camping units and parking
space for an automobile in such manner as will not interfere with
convenient and safe traffic flow.
B. Consistent with safe traffic flows, shade trees shall be preserved and
protected and, wherever practicable, trees, underbrush, large rocks
and other natural features shall be left intact at the edges of adjoining
campsites as well as around the perimeter of the entire site.
C. Natural ground cover shall be maintained within the campground
wherever possible to facilitate drainage, prevent erosion and preserve
the scenic attributes of the area.
D. Platforms, cabins, camping equipment and campsites shall be placed no
closer than 30 feet to any access drive and at least 100 feet from all
campground boundary lines.
A. No campground owner shall cause or permit any services, facilities,
equipment or utilities required under this article to be removed, shut off
or discontinued while the campground is occupied except during
temporary emergencies while repairs are in progress after
authorization by the Municipal Health Official.
B. The campground owner shall maintain in continuous good condition all
access drives, water and sewer systems, disposal facilities, drainage
systems, electrical and other utilities, all buildings, site improvements
and services.
C. The owner shall see that the entire site is kept in a sanitary condition
and shall carry out any measures for pest control found necessary by
the Municipal Health Official.
D. The owner shall see that the entire site is kept free of litter and trash
and shall be responsible for compliance with all the regulations set
under N.J.A.C. 8:22-1.1 through 8:22-1.46.
§ 425-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-164
1:607
§ 425-165. Responsibilities of campers.
A. Every campground shall be under the care and supervision of a
caretaker or manager who, if not resident at the campground, shall be
present at the site each day that it is occupied.
B. Information shall be posted as to where the caretaker can be reached,
as well as the telephone number and location of the nearest ambulance
service, hospital, police station and fire company.
C. The caretaker shall maintain the grounds in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be responsible for the removal of trash and refuse
and the collection of solid waste as often as necessary.
D. The caretaker shall maintain order within the campground and shall
have the right to terminate the occupancy of any campers who violate
these provisions.
E. The owner may assume the duties of supervision as well as the
responsibilities of ownership.
A. Each camper shall maintain a clean and safe campsite.
B. Each camper shall deposit all waste materials in the containers
specified for the purpose.
C. Dogs or other pets, if permitted, shall be maintained under control at all
times and shall not be permitted to create a public health or noise
nuisance. Pets shall not be left unattended at the campsite.
D. Campers shall build fires only in the fireplaces provided, shall not
create any hazard and shall extinguish the fire completely before the
campsite is vacated and before retiring for the night.
E. Campers shall comply with all regulations governing the use of any
campground facility.
F. Campers shall discharge sanitary sewage from camping vehicles only
into individual sewer connections or holding tank emptying stations and
shall comply with all regulations governing disposal set by the State
Code.153
G. Campers shall not use a potable water supply location to wash clothes,
utensils, equipment or themselves.
H. Campers shall not make undue noise at any time, particularly during
the hours from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
I. Vandalism or other unseemly or rowdy behavior shall not be permitted.
153. Editor's Note: See Title 8, Ch. 22, Public Campgrounds, of the New Jersey State Sanitary
Code.
§ 425-164 VINELAND CODE § 425-165
1:608
§ 425-166. Soil and topographic conditions; flood hazards.
§ 425-167. Grading and drainage.
Adequate provision for draining off surface water is essential. The
provisions of Article VII, § 425-72, shall be met as required by the specific
conditions. In preparing and reviewing drainage proposals, the following
criteria shall apply:
§ 425-168. Environmental conditions and impact statement.
In reviewing an application for a campground development, the Planning
Board shall find that provisions are made to preserve, protect and make
maximum use of the natural attributes and resources of the site. To this
end, an environmental impact statement shall be submitted with each
application to expand a campground when the campsites exceed 100. See
Article VII, § 425-81, for details of an EIS.
§ 425-169. Protection of water supply lines.
Water supply lines and connections to individual campsites shall be
protected from possible damage by parking of automobiles or camping
units. Campsite layout shall allow for adequate maneuvering room.
§ 425-170. Parking and service areas.
J. Campers shall not cut, disturb or remove any vegetation or live plant
from the area.
A. Soil, subsoil and topographic conditions shall be found suitable for the
proposed uses.
B. Land located within flood hazard areas shall not be used or developed
for any purpose unless it conforms to the standards set by DEP and the
provisions of Article VII, § 425-71, of this chapter.
A. Natural stream beds and floodplain areas shall be clearly defined and
protected. Peak downstream runoff shall be minimized.
B. Surface drainage systems may include detention structures which
assure no additional runoff subsequent to completion of the
campground development.
C. Surface drainage systems shall accommodate all runoff coming to or
accumulating on the development site.
D. Grading and drainage development shall conform to the soil erosion
and sediment control standards as set by the Cumberland County Soil
Conservation Service.
§ 425-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-170
1:609
§ 425-171. Buffers, screening and landscaping.
§ 425-172. Resolution of City Council required.
The application for approval of a campground development shall include
a copy of the resolution adopted by the City Council which indicates no
objection to the proposed development.
§ 425-173. Conceptual presentations.
See Article VI, § 425-58, Concept plans.
§ 425-174. Site plan details.
A. Entrances and exits to general parking areas or to service areas shall
be located at least 50 feet away from the right-of-way line of a dedicated
public street.
B. Parking arrangements which require a vehicle to back into the traffic
flow of an access drive or a public street shall be prohibited.
C. Areas providing space for more than five vehicles, service areas,
commercial areas or public area parking shall be set back at least 15
feet from an access drive and 30 feet from the right-of-way line of a
public street.
D. Service areas shall be screened from public view. Existing shrubs and
trees shall be retained wherever possible and supplemented, if
necessary, to provide screening and/or landscaping around all public or
general activity areas.
A. The side and rear boundaries of campgrounds shall be provided with a
buffer area at least 20 feet wide. No campsite or parking facility shall
be permitted within said buffer.
B. Where natural vegetation does not exist in density sufficient to create a
visual barrier, supplemental vegetation shall be provided to screen
campsites from adjacent properties. A rustic fence may be combined
with vegetation to achieve screening.
C. Plantings along road frontages shall be required to buffer noise and
light. Such plantings shall not exceed a height of four feet at access
points in order to maintain proper visibility.
D. Existing shade trees shall be supplemented wherever necessary
throughout the campground in order to provide maximum shade.
Shrubbery shall be retained and supplemented at appropriate locations
to serve as windscreens.
A. The site plan data required under Article VI, § 425-61B, shall apply.
B. In addition, the following information is required:
§ 425-170 VINELAND CODE § 425-174
1:610
§ 425-175. Improvements.
§ 425-176. Submission of preliminary plan.
(1) The name of the campground.
(2) The floodplain boundaries and/or areas of soils limitations.
(3) The location of all service areas, with dimensions.
(4) The location of campsites, with dimensions.
(5) The location of group recreational activity areas, if any.
(6) The location of easements, type and dimensions noted.
(7) The location of drives and accessways, widths and lengths.
(8) A delineation of all buffer areas, dimensioned.
(9) A delineation of setback lines from access drives and public streets,
dimensioned.
(10) The location, type and plan of screening.
(11) A report of soils analyses and percolation tests.
(12) Any other data found to be pertinent to the particular site.
A. On-site improvements listed under Article VI, § 425-62B, shall apply as
required for the specific site and the specific use. See § 425-79 of
Article VII, Design Standards.
B. Off-tract improvements, if required, shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 425-47 of Article VI.
A. A complete site plan submission for a campground development shall
consist of the following:
(1) Six copies of the plan showing data required, plus four copies if the
application must go to the County Planning Board. (See § 425-174.)
(2) Two copies of the soils analyses and percolation tests.
(3) A schedule of development, if any.
(4) A description of easements and any restrictions.
(5) A description of the maintenance plan.
(6) A traffic impact statement (TIS) if the plan is for over 100
campsites. (See Article VII, § 425-80.)
(7) An environmental impact statement (EIS) if the plan is for over 100
campsites. (See Article VII, § 425-81.)
§ 425-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-176
1:611
§ 425-177. Development review fees.
To help defray the municipal costs of reviews and inspections required prior
to final approval of a campground development, the following fees shall be
paid:
§ 425-178. Exceptions; variances and public hearings.
§ 425-179. Conditions for preliminary approval.
Prior to preliminary approval, the Planning Board shall find that:
§ 425-180. Effect of preliminary approval.
See Article VI, § 425-68, of this chapter.
(8) A completed application form, signed by the developer.
(9) The development review fee. (See § 425-177 herein.)
B. The procedure cited under § 425-66D, E and F of Article VI shall apply.
A. With the application for preliminary approval: $5 per proposed
campsite, with a minimum of $100.
B. With the application for final approval: $2.50 per proposed campsite,
with a minimum of $50.
C. With a resubmission for preliminary or final approval: $2.50 per
campsite, with a minimum of $50.
A. For provisions regarding exceptions, see Article VI, Subdivisions and
Site Plan Review and Approval, § 425-50.
B. For provisions regarding variances, see specific standards for
campgrounds, Sheet 2, Conditional Use Specific Standards (§ 425-308
of Article XV, Zoning). [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
C. For provisions regarding public hearings, see Article I, General
Provisions, § 425-9 et seq.
A. The proposals for maintenance and conservation of open space are
reliable, and the space is adequate for the purpose.
B. The physical layout of the plan provides for the necessary public
services, traffic control and a good environmental climate.
C. The development will not have an unreasonably adverse impact upon
the area or upon municipal services.
D. Any conditions applied to protect the general public and the campers
are adequate in the case of phased development.
§ 425-176 VINELAND CODE § 425-181
1:612
§ 425-181. Submission of final site plan.
See Article VI, § 425-69, of this chapter.
§ 425-182. Performance guaranties; surety for improvements.
See Article VI, § 425-52, of this chapter.
§ 425-183. Effect of final approval.
§ 425-184. Violations and penalties.
See Article VI, § 425-54, of this chapter.
§ 425-185. License required; contents of application.
§ 425-186. Limits of license; permit; certificate of occupancy.
A. See Article VI, § 425-70, of this chapter.
B. Note: Final approval grants the applicant the right to:
(1) Make application to the City Council for a license to operate a
campground.
(2) Make application to the construction officials for the necessary
permits.
A. It is unlawful to operate a campground within the City of Vineland
without a license.
B. Applications for licenses to operate or to expand the area of license
shall be made to the City Council and shall provide the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner and
applicant, with certification from the owner authorizing
representation by the applicant.
(2) A legal description of the campground location, plus Tax Map
sheet, block and lot numbers.
(3) A copy of the resolution and site plan approved by the Planning
Board.
A. The granting of a license conveys no right to erect any building or to do
any work which requires a permit.
B. No permit shall be issued prior to final site plan approval.
C. A certificate of occupancy which may be issued prior to the completion
of the required site improvements shall be valid only so long as there is
compliance with the approved site plan and surety. If, upon expiration
of the time set under surety, all conditions of approval have not been
§ 425-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-186
1:613
§ 425-187. License fees.
§ 425-188. Information required for license renewal.
§ 425-189. Display of license.
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the campgrounds
premises at all times.
met, the surety shall be called and the certificate of occupancy shall be
revoked. See § 425-52 of Article VI.
A. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Applications for
license renewals shall be made to the City Council on or before
December 10 of each year. The licensee shall pay the following fees:
(1) For a campground comprising 24 campsites or less: $200 per year.
(2) For a campground comprising 25 campsites or more: $200 per
year, plus $15 per year per campsite for each campsite in excess of
24.
B. In addition to the annual fee, which shall not be prorated, the following
fee shall be collected:
(1) Campsites: $2 per each week of occupancy. This fee shall be
considered part of the license fee and shall be collected on the 10th
day of January, April, July and October of each year by the City
Clerk. The applicant shall file under oath a statement of the number
of campsites occupied in the campground during the preceding
three calendar months. Failure to pay all parts of the license fee
shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and in addition to
penalties, the license may be revoked.
(2) Transfer of license fee: $100.
A. The licensee shall provide the name, address and telephone number of
the following to the City Clerk no later than December 31 of each year:
(1) The licensee.
(2) The officers of the corporation, if the licensee is incorporated.
(3) The campgrounds supervisor.
(4) Maintenance supervisors.
B. The application for renewal shall reveal any changes which have
occurred since the last application for renewal.
§ 425-186 VINELAND CODE § 425-190
1:614
§ 425-190. Suspension or revocation of license; reinstatement.
The license to operate a campground may be suspended or revoked by the
City Council at any time if the campground is in violation of any provision
herein, upon 10 days' notice in writing to the owner and supervisor. The
reason for such action and the remedial action required shall be given.
An application for reinstatement may be made any time thereafter with
satisfactory proof that the violations have been corrected. No license shall
be reinstated prior to compliance.
§ 425-191. Enforcement.
§ 425-192. Violations and penalties.
A. During construction, the City Engineer shall be responsible to ensure
compliance with the provisions of the approvals pertaining to physical
improvements.
B. During the operation of a campground, the City of Vineland Health
Department shall be responsible to ensure compliance with codes in
accordance with the approved plan and the resolution of approval.
A. Any person found guilty of violating a provision of this article shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each offense, and each day a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
B. The Municipal Court shall also have the power to suspend the license of
a violator pending the elimination of the violation.
C. The penalties herein are in addition to any other lawful penalties which
may be imposed.
§ 425-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-192
1:615

ARTICLE XI
Pinelands
[Amended 3-28-1989 by Ord. No. 89-17]
§ 425-193. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the orderly development of the
Pinelands Area so as to preserve and protect the unique natural, ecological,
agricultural, scenic, historic, cultural and recreational resources of this
area. All development in the Pinelands Area shall comply with the standards
set forth in this article in addition to all other regulations in this chapter.
The standards and regulations in this chapter applicable to the Pinelands
Area are intended to be the minimum provisions necessary to achieve the
objectives of this chapter and the Pinelands Protection Act.154
§ 425-194. Definitions and word usage.
A. In the event of a conflict between a definition of City-wide application
and a Pinelands Area definition, the Pinelands Area definition shall
control in the Pinelands Area.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A structure or use which:
AGRICULTURAL COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — A retail sales
establishment primarily intended to sell agricultural products produced
in the Pinelands. An agricultural commercial establishment may be
seasonal or year-round and may or may not be associated directly
with a farm; however, it does not include supermarkets, convenience
stores, restaurants and other establishments which coincidentally sell
Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use,
including but not limited to the production, harvesting and storage,
as well as washing, grading and packaging, of unprocessed
produce grown on the site;
(1)
Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal
structure or principal building or a principal use served;
(2)
Contributes primarily to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
the occupants, business or industry of the principal structure or
principal use served; [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
and
(3)
Is located on the same parcel as the principal structure or principal
use served, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the
provisions of this article. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
(4)
154. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.
§ 425-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-194
1:617
agricultural products, nor does it include agricultural processing
facilities such as a farm itself, nor facilities which are solely processing
facilities.
AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYEE HOUSING — Residential dwellings for
the seasonal use of employees of an agricultural or horticultural use
which, because of their character or location, are not to be used for
permanent housekeeping units and which are otherwise accessory to a
principal use of the lot for agriculture.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USES — The production of
plants, animals, poultry, bees, forest products, fruits or flowers with
all related pursuits, as well as land used in a federal soil conservation
program.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS PROCESSING FACILITY — A facility
designed, constructed and operated for the express purpose of
processing agricultural products grown in the Pinelands, including
washing, grading and packaging of those products.
ANIMALS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED — See N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.32.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Any application filed with any
permitting agency for any approval, authorization or permit which is a
prerequisite to initiating development in the Pinelands Area, except as
provided in § 425-205B of this article.
APPROVAL AGENCY — Any board, body or other authority within the
City which has power to approve or disapprove subdivisions, site plans,
construction permits or other development applications.
APPROVAL, FINAL — Any approval to develop issued by the approval
agency which represents the final action to be taken on the application
for development by that agency, including but not limited to final
approval of major subdivisions and site plans, approval of minor
subdivisions and the issuance of zoning or construction permits.
APPROVAL, PRELIMINARY — Any approval to develop issued by the
approval agency which is a prerequisite to the issuance of a final
approval by that agency, including but not limited to preliminary
approvals of major subdivisions and site plans.
ARTIFICIAL REGENERATION — The establishment of tree cover
through direct or supplemental seeding or planting.[Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
BEDDING — A silvicultural practice involving the preparation of land
before planting in the form of small mounds so as to concentrate
topsoil and elevate the root zone of seedlings above temporary standing
water.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
BROADCAST SCARIFICATION — A silvicultural practice involving the
dragging of cut trees or other objects across a parcel to remove or
reduce aboveground shrub cover, debris, leaf litter and humus without
§ 425-194 VINELAND CODE § 425-194
1:618
disturbance to mineral soil horizons and associated roots.[Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a
roof and designed, intended or used for the sheltering or protection of
persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind.
CAMPER — A portable structure which is self-propelled or mounted on
or towed by another vehicle, designed and used for temporary living
for travel, recreation, vacation or other short-term uses. "Camper" does
not include mobile homes or trailers.
CAMPSITE — A place used for or suitable for camping on which
temporary shelter, such as a tent or camper, may be placed and
occupied on a temporary and seasonal basis.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A notification from the
Planning Board designating that a site approved for development has
historic, archeological or cultural significance.
CERTIFICATE OF FILING — A certificate issued by the Pinelands
Commission, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34, that a complete application
for major development has been filed.
CLEAR-CUTTING — A silvicultural practice involving the removal of an
entire forest stand in one cutting for purposes of regeneration, either
obtained artificially, by natural seed or from advanced regeneration.
Clear-cutting typically results in the removal of all woody vegetation
from a parcel in preparation for the establishment of new trees;
however, some trees may be left on the parcel.[Added 12-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-65]
COMMISSION — The Pinelands Commission created under Section 5 of
the Pinelands Protection Act.155
COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan adopted by the
Commission pursuant to Section 7 of the Pinelands Protection Act,156
also known as the "CMP."
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion, demolition, removal or equipping of buildings.
CONTIGUOUS LAND — Land which is connected or adjacent to other
land so as to permit the land to be used as a functional unit, provided
that separation by lot lines, streams, dedicated public roads which are
not paved, rights-of-way and easements shall not affect the contiguity
of land unless a substantial physical barrier is created which prevents
the land from being used as a functional unit.[Amended 3-9-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-14]
COPPICING — A silvicultural practice involving the production of forest
stands from vegetative sprouting by the trees that are harvested (stump
155. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-5.
156. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-7.
§ 425-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-194
1:619
sprouts, root suckers, and naturally rooted layers). Coppicing typically
involves short rotations with dense stands of short trees.[Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
DENSITY — The average number of housing units per unit of land.
DEVELOPMENT — Any change affecting the land, its area, its use or
the intensity of its use; affecting resource extraction, rights of access,
riparian rights or easements; affecting the size, appearance or use
of structures; affecting forests, deposits of solid or liquid wastes or
landfills; or any changes which affect noise levels, thermal conditions,
emissions, floodplains, rivers, streams, lakes, wetlands or any manmade
bodies of water and their banks.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL — Authorized approval granted for land
development in accordance with the CMP and this chapter, except
certifications of occupancy and variances pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70 which do not otherwise include the issuance of a
construction permit, subdivision or site plan approval.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five or
more dwelling units; any construction or expansion of any commercial
or industrial use or structure on a site of more than three acres; or any
grading, clearing or disturbance of an area in excess of 5,000 square
feet.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — All development not classed as major.
DISKING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of one or
more heavy, round, concave, sharpened, freely rotating steel disks
across a site for the purposes of cutting through soil and roots or
cutting and turning a furrow over an area.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-65]
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRUM CHOPPING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of a
large cylindrical drum with cutting blades mounted parallel to its axis
across a site to break up slash and crush scrubby vegetation prior to
burning or planting or to chop up and disturb the organic turf and roots
in the upper foot of soil.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
DWELLING — Any structure or portion thereof which is designed or
used for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
structure forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and
sanitation by one family.
§ 425-194 VINELAND CODE § 425-194
1:620
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION LINES — All electric lines other than
electric transmission lines.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION LINES — Electric lines which are part of
an electric company's transmission and subtransmission system which
provide a direct connection between a generating station or substation
of the utility company and:
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil/rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR — The chief administrative officer of the
Pinelands Commission or the authorized representative.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption
or guardianship, or any number of persons not so related occupying a
dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit.
FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT — A program of actions designed
to promote, protect and enhance the ecological integrity of fish and
wildlife and their habitats.
FORESTRY — The planting, cultivating and harvesting of trees for
the production of wood products, including firewood, or for forest
health. It includes such practices as reforestation, site preparation
and other silvicultural practices, including but not limited to artificial
regeneration, bedding, broadcast scarification, clear-cutting,
coppicing, disking, drum chopping, group selection, individual
selection, natural regeneration, root raking, seed tree cut, shelterwood
cut and thinning. For purposes of this chapter, the following activities
shall not be defined as forestry and, although they may otherwise
require an application for development, they shall not require the
issuance of a forestry permit:[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42;
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
(1) Another substation of the utility company;
A substation of or interconnection point with another
interconnecting utility company; or
(2)
(3) A substation of a high-load customer of the utility.
Removal of trees located on a parcel of land one acre or less on
which a dwelling has been constructed;
(1)
Horticultural activities involving the planting, cultivating or
harvesting of nursery stock or Christmas trees;
(2)
Removal of trees necessitated by the development of the parcel as
otherwise authorized by this chapter;
(3)
Removal of trees necessary for the maintenance of utility or public
rights-of-way;
(4)
§ 425-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-194
1:621
FOREST STAND — A uniform group of trees of similar species,
composition, size, age and similar forest structure.[Added 12-27-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-65]
GROUP SELECTION — A silvicultural practice whereby a group of trees
is periodically selected to be removed from a large area so that age
and size classes of the reproduction are mixed.[Added 12-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-65]
HABITAT — The natural environment of an individual animal, plant or
population.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from grade to the highest
point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline for mansard roofs and to
the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any site, building, area, district, structure
or object important in American history or prehistory, architecture,
archaeology and culture at the national, state, county, local or regional
level.[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity for economic gain, carried out
in a residential dwelling or accessory structure thereto, in which an
occupant of the residence and not more than two other individuals are
employed and which is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling as a
residence.
HYDROPHYTES — Any plant growing in water or a substrata that is
deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Those persons related by blood or legal
relationship in the following manner: spouses, domestic partners,
great-grandparents, grandparents, great-grandchildren,
grandchildren, parents, sons, daughters, brothers and sisters, aunts
and uncles, nephews, nieces and first cousins.[Amended 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-42; 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]158
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it prevents, impedes or slows
infiltration or absorption of fluid, including stormwater, directly into
the ground, and results in either reduced groundwater recharge or
increased stormwater runoff sufficient to be classified as impervious in
urban areas by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service Title 210 - Engineering, 210-3-1 -
Removal or planting of trees for the personal use of the parcel
owner; and
(5)
(6) Removal of trees for public safety.157
157. Editor's Note: The former definition of "forestry management plan," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42.
158. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "impermeable surface," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65.
§ 425-194 VINELAND CODE § 425-194
1:622
Small Watershed Hydrology (WINTR-55) Version 1.0. Such surfaces
may have varying degrees of permeability.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-65]
INDIVIDUAL SELECTION — A silvicultural practice whereby single
trees are periodically selected to be removed from a large area so
that age and size classes of the reproduction are mixed.[Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
INSTITUTIONAL USE — Any land used for the following public or
private purposes: educational facilities, including universities, colleges,
elementary and secondary and vocational schools, kindergartens and
nurseries; cultural facilities, such as libraries, galleries, museums,
concert halls, theaters and the like: hospitals, including such
educational, clinical, research and convalescent facilities as are
integral to the operation of the hospital; medical and health service
facilities, including nursing homes, supervised residential institutions,
rehabilitation therapy centers and public health facilities; law
enforcement facilities; military facilities; churches; public office
buildings; cemeteries; and other similar facilities.
INTERESTED PERSON — Any persons whose right to use, acquire or
enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken under this
article, or whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property under this plan
or under any other law of this state or of the United States has been
denied, violated or infringed upon by an action or a failure to act under
this plan.159
INTERIM RULES AND REGULATIONS — The regulations adopted by
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act160
to govern the review of applications from the adoption of the
regulations until the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan took
effect on January 14, 1981. These regulations were formerly codified as
N.J.A.C. 7:1G-1 et seq.
LAND — The surface and subsurface of the earth, as well as
improvements and fixtures on, above or below the surface and any
water found thereon.
LANDSCAPING — The installation of plants as part of land
development.
LOCAL COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — An antenna and any support
structure, together with any accessory facilities, which comply with
the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4 and which are intended to serve
a limited, localized audience through point-to-point communication,
including cellular telephone cells, paging systems and dispatch
communications. It does not include radio or television broadcasting
159. Editor's Note: The term "this plan" apparently refers to the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan.
160. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.
§ 425-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-194
1:623
facilities or microwave transmitters.[Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit manufactured in one or more
sections, designed for long-term occupancy, and which can be
transported after fabrication to a site where it is to be occupied.
NATURAL REGENERATION — The establishment of a plant or plant
age class from natural seeding, sprouting, suckering or
layering.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
NAVIGABLE WATERS — Water capable of being traversed by pleasure
craft.161
OFF-SITE COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on
which the sign is located, including signage placed upon New Jersey
Transit weather shelters.[Amended 7-25-1995 by Ord. No. 95-46]
PARCEL — Any quantity of land, consisting of one or more lots, that
is capable of being described with such definiteness that its location
and boundaries may be established.[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — For the Vineland Pinelands Area,
those contained in this article or elsewhere in this chapter, whichever
is stricter.
PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a unit area
of soil, rock, or other material at hydraulic gradient of one.[Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
PERSON — An individual, corporation, public agency, business trust,
partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common
interest or any other legal entity.
PINELANDS — The Pinelands National Reserve as designated by
Section 3(i) of the Pinelands Protection Act162 and the Pinelands Area
as designated by Section 10(a) of said Act.163 For the Pinelands Area
located within the City of Vineland, refer to the Zone Map which is part
of this chapter.
PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT CREDIT — A use right allocated to
certain lands within the Vineland Pinelands that can be used to secure
a residential density bonus on certain other lands within the Pinelands
under N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.43.
PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD — The agency
responsible from February 8, 1979, until June 28, 1979, for the review
of and action on applications for development in the Pinelands Area
161. Editor's Note: The definition of "notice of filing," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34.
162. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-3i.
163. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18-11a.
§ 425-194 VINELAND CODE § 425-194
1:624
which required approvals of other state agencies, except where the
Pinelands Commission acted on applications during that time period.
PINELANDS NATIVE FOREST TYPE — See N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.43.[Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
PINELANDS PROTECTION ACT — N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 to 13:18A-29.
PINELANDS PROTECTION AREA — All land within the Pinelands which
is not included in the preservation area. (The Vineland Pinelands are
within the Pinelands Protection Area.)
PINELANDS RESOURCE-RELATED USE — Any use based on resources
that are indigenous to the Pinelands Area.
PLANTS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED — A Pinelands plant
species whose survival worldwide, nationwide or in the state is in
jeopardy.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — An informal conference with the
Executive Director prior to filing an application.
PROVISIONAL USE — A use permitted only upon compliance with the
standards of the CMP as incorporated in this chapter.
PUBLIC AGENCIES — All governmental agencies and their political
subdivisions.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT — Development, including subdivision, by any
township or other governmental agency.
PUBLIC SERVICE INFRASTRUCTURE — Sewer service, gas,
electricity, water, telephone, cable television and other public utilities
developed linearly, roads and streets and other similar services
provided or maintained by any public or private entity.
RECOMMENDED MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — That management
program which employs the most efficient use of technology.
RECORD TREE — The largest tree of a particular species in New Jersey
based on its circumference at 4.5 feet above ground level. A listing of
the largest known tree of each species and its location is maintained at
the principal offices of the Commission.[Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A plan, prepared in
accordance with the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service New Jersey Field Office Technical
Guide, dated June 2005. Such plan shall prescribe needed land
treatment and related conservation and natural resources management
measures, including forest management practices, for the conservation,
protection and development of natural resources, the maintenance and
enhancement of agricultural or horticultural productivity, and the
control and prevention of nonpoint source pollution, and shall establish
criteria for resource sustainability of soil, water, air, plants and
animals.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
§ 425-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-194
1:625
RECREATION FACILITY, INTENSIVE — Any recreation facility not
classified as low-intensive, including but not limited to golf courses,
marinas, amusement parks, hotels and motels.
RECREATION FACILITY, LOW-INTENSIVE — A facility or area which
complies with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-5, Part III, utilizes and
depends on the natural environment of the Pinelands and requires
no significant modifications of that environment other than to provide
access and which has an insignificant impact on surrounding uses
or on the environmental integrity of the area. It permits such lowintensity
uses as hiking, hunting, trapping, fishing, canoeing, nature
study, orienteering, horseback riding and bicycling.[Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]164
RESOURCE EXTRACTION — The dredging, digging, extraction, mining
and quarrying of sand, gravel, clay or ilmenite for commercial
purposes, not including, however, the private or agricultural extraction
and use of extracted material by a landowner.
ROOT RAKING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of a set
of tines, mounted on the front or trailed behind a tractor, over an area
to thoroughly disturb tree and vegetation roots and/or to collect stumps
and slash.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
SCENIC CORRIDOR — All paved public roads, navigable streams, lakes
or ponds of the P-R (Pinelands Rural Development) and the P-F
(Pinelands Forest) Zones of the Pinelands.
SEASONAL HIGH-WATER TABLE — The level below the natural ground
surface to which water seasonally rises in the soil in most years.
SEED TREE CUT — A silvicultural practice involving the removal of
old forest stand in one cutting, except for a small number of trees left
singly, in small groups or narrow strips, as a source of seed for natural
regeneration.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
SHELTERWOOD CUT — A silvicultural practice involving the
establishment of a new, essentially even-aged forest stand from release,
typically in a series of cuttings, of new trees started under the old forest
stand. A shelterwood cut involves the establishment of the new forest
stand before the old forest stand is removed.[Added 12-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-65]
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify,
display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event or location by any
means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures,
colors, illumination or projected images. Signs do not include the flag
or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state or city, or
any fraternal, religious or civic organization, merchandise, pictures or
164. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "resource conservation plan," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65.
§ 425-194 VINELAND CODE § 425-194
1:626
models of products or services incorporated in a window display, works
of art which in no way identify a product, or scoreboards located on
athletic fields.165
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY — A solar energy system and all associated
components, including, but not limited to, panels, arrays, footings,
supports, mounting and stabilization devices, inverters, electrical
distribution wires and other on-site or off-site infrastructure necessary
for the facility, which converts solar energy into usable electrical
energy, heats water or produces hot air or other similar
function.[Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in either the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and
girders, or in the dimensions or configuration of the roof or exterior
walls.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation having a fixed location on, above or
below the surface of land or attached to something having a fixed
location on, above or below the surface of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land. The following shall not
be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this article if no
development occurs or is proposed in connection therewith:
SUBMERGED LAND — Land which is overflowed by water throughout
the year.
THINNING — A silvicultural practice involving the removal of
competing trees to favor certain species, sizes and qualities of
trees.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
UTILITY DISTRIBUTION LINE — Lines, conduits or pipes located in a
street, road, alley or easement through which natural gas, electricity,
telephone, cable television, water or sewage or stormwater discharge
is distributed to or from service lines extending from the main line
to the distribution system of the building or premises served. Utility
distribution lines do not include electric transmission lines.[Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
WETLAND — Land which is saturated by water for a duration and
frequency sufficient to support the growth of hydrophytes, including
(1) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
(2) Divisions of property upon court order.
Conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument.
(3)
165. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "specimen tree" and "standard subsurface sewage
disposal system," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-42.
§ 425-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-194
1:627
§ 425-195. Description of area; enumeration of zones.
The Pinelands Area within the City of Vineland, which comprises all the
lands between Union Road and the Manumuskin River, is designated on the
City of Vineland Zone Map and comprises the following Pinelands Zones:
§ 425-196. P-A (Pinelands Agricultural Production) Zone standards.
The following standards shall apply in P-A (Pinelands Agricultural
Production) Zones.
such poorly drained areas as designated by the Soils Conservation
Service and described in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.3 to 7:50-6.5.
WETLANDS MANAGEMENT — The establishment of a characteristic
wetland or the removal of exotic species or Phragmites from a wetland
in accordance with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.10. For purposes of
this definition, exotic species are those that are not indigenous to North
America.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
WETLAND SOILS — Those soils designated as "very poorly drained"
or "poorly drained" by the Soil Conservation Service of the United
States Department of Agriculture, including but not limited to Atsion,
Bayboro, Berryland, Colemantown, Elkton, Keansburg, Leon, Muck,
Othello, Pocomoke, St. Johns, Freshwater Marsh and Tidal Marsh soil
types.
A. P-A Pinelands Agricultural Production.
B. P-F Pinelands Forest.
C. P-R Pinelands Rural Development.
A. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Forestry.
(2) Agriculture.
(3) Agricultural products processing facilities.
(4) Fish and wildlife management and wetlands management.
[Amended 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
(5) Public services and infrastructure. Centralized wastewater
treatment and collection facilities shall be permitted to service the
Pinelands Agricultural Production Zone only in accordance with
§ 425-202O(2). [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(6) Signs.
(7) Pinelands development credits.
(8) Home occupations.
§ 425-194 VINELAND CODE § 425-196
1:628
(9) Accessory uses.
B. Provisional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Residential dwelling units and accessory uses not to exceed a gross
density of one unit per 10 acres, provided that:
(a) The dwelling is accessory to an active agricultural operation;
(b) The dwelling is for an operator or employee of the farm who is
actively engaged in and essential to the agricultural operation;
(c) The dwelling is to be located on a lot which is under or
qualified for agricultural assessment under N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1;
(d) The dwelling is located on a lot which has an active production
history or where a farm management plan has been prepared
which demonstrates that the property will be farmed as a unit
unto itself or as part of another farm operation in the area; and
(e) A residential lot has not been subdivided from the property
within the previous five years.
(2) Residential units and accessory uses on a minimum of 3.2 acres,
provided that the dwelling unit will be the principal residence of
the property owner or a member of the immediate family of the
property owner; the individual whose principal residence the
dwelling unit will be has not developed a dwelling unit under this
section within the previous five years; the parcel of land on which
the dwelling is to be located has been in the continuous ownership
since February 7, 1979, of the person whose principal residence
the dwelling unit will be; a member of that person's immediate
family or a partnership or corporation in which members of the
immediate family collectively own more than a majority interest in
such partnership or corporation and the person whose principal
residence the dwelling unit will be has resided in the Pinelands for
at least five years and that person or one or more members of that
person's immediate family has resided in the Pinelands for a total of
at least 20 different years. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
(3) Residential unit and accessory uses on a minimum of one acre,
provided that the conditions of § 425-199 herein, pertaining to
nonconforming lots, are met.
(4) Low-intensity recreational uses, provided that the lot comprises 50
acres; that motorized vehicles are prohibited except for
transportation; that access to bodies of water is limited to 15 feet of
frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage; that clearing or soil
disturbance does not exceed 5% of that lot area, and further
provided that impervious surfaces shall not exceed 1% of the lot
area.
§ 425-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-196
1:629
(5) Agricultural/commercial establishments, excluding supermarkets,
restaurants and convenience stores, provided that the principal
goods for sale are produced in the Pinelands and that the sales area
does not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(6) Agricultural employee housing, provided that it serves an active
agricultural operation.
(7) Airports or heliports, provided that they serve an active
agricultural operation.
(8) Residential dwelling units at a gross density of one unit per 40
acres, provided that: [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(a) The unit(s) shall be clustered on one-acre lots;
(b) The remainder of the parcel, including all contiguous lands in
common ownership, which is not assigned to individual
residential lots shall be permanently dedicated for agricultural
uses through recordation of a restriction on the deed to the
parcel; and
(c) The restriction on the deed to the parcel, including any rights
to be redeemed for future residential development, shall be
done in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-5, Part IV, so as to sever
any Pinelands development credits allocated to the parcel.
(9) Waste management facilities in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:50-5.24(b)8 and 7:50-6, Part VII. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-42]
(10) Residential units and accessory uses on a minimum of 1.0 acre,
provided that: [Added 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
(a) The applicant satisfies all of the requirements set forth in
Subsection B(2) above;
(b) The lot to be developed existed as of February 8, 1979, or was
created as a result of an approval granted by the Pinelands
Development Review Board or by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to the Interim Rules and Regulations prior to January
14, 1981;
(c) The applicant qualifies for and receives from the City a
variance from the three-and-two-tenths-acre lot size
requirement set forth in Subsection B(2) above;
(d) The applicant purchases and redeems 0.25 Pinelands
development credits; and
(e) Any Pinelands development credits allocated to the lot to be
developed are reduced pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.43(b)3.
C. Additional regulations shall be as follows:
§ 425-196 VINELAND CODE § 425-196
1:630
(1) Lot area. Except for nonconforming lots which existed by record
prior to February 7, 1979, no residential unit shall be located on a
lot which comprises less than 3.2 acres.
(2) Height of structures. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(a) No structure, including radio and television transmission and
other communication facilities which are not accessory to an
otherwise permitted use, shall exceed a height of 35 feet. This
height limitation shall not apply to any of the following
structures, provided that such structures are compatible with
uses in the immediate vicinity:
[1] Antennas which do not exceed a height of 200 feet and
which are accessory to an otherwise permitted use;
[2] Silos, barns or other agricultural structures;
[3] Church spires;
[4] Cupolas;
[5] Domes;
[6] Monuments;
[7] Water towers;
[8] Fire observation towers;
[9] Electric transmission lines and supporting structures;
[10]Windmills;
[11] Smokestacks;
[12] Derricks;
[13] Flagpoles and masts or aerials;
[14] Solar energy facilities; and
[15] Chimneys and similar structures to be placed above the
roof level and not for human occupancy.
(b) This height limitation shall also not apply to the antenna and
any supporting structure of a local communications facility of
greater than 35 feet, provided that the standards set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c) are met.
(3) Lot area for nonresidential uses. Notwithstanding the minimum lot
areas set forth above in Subsection B, no such minimum lot area for
a nonresidential use within the P-A Zone shall be less than that
needed to meet the water quality standards of § 425-202O(4),
§ 425-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-196
1:631
§ 425-197. P-F (Pinelands Forest) Zone standards.
The following standards shall apply in P-F (Pinelands Forest) Zones:
whether or not the lot may be served by a centralized sewer
treatment or collection system.
(4) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill and community residences for
persons with head injuries shall be subject to the same
requirements as single-family dwelling units, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1. [Added 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3]
D. Except for land which was owned by a public agency on January 14,
1981, land which is thereafter purchased by the state for conservation
purposes, land which is subject to an easement limiting the use of land
to nonresidential uses or land otherwise excluded from entitlement,
every parcel of land in the Pinelands Agricultural Zone shall have a use
right known as "Pinelands development credits" that may be used to
secure a density bonus for lands located in the regional growth areas of
other Pinelands municipalities. Pinelands development credits may also
be allocated to certain properties in the City by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq. The allocation and
use of Pinelands development credits shall conform to § 425-202Q of
this chapter and N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.42 through 7:50-5.47. [Amended
3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
A. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Forestry.
(2) Agriculture.
(3) Public service infrastructure intended to primarily serve the needs
of the Pinelands. Centralized wastewater treatment and collection
facilities shall be permitted to service the Pinelands Forest Zone
only in accordance with § 425-202O(2). [Amended 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-42]
(4) Signs.
(5) Fish and wildlife management and wetlands management.
[Amended 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
(6) Agricultural employee housing, as an element of and accessory to
an active agricultural operation.
(7) Home occupations.
(8) Accessory uses.
§ 425-196 VINELAND CODE § 425-197
1:632
(9) Residential dwelling units, provided that clustering of the
permitted dwelling units shall be required in accordance with
§ 425-202U whenever two or more units are proposed as part of a
residential development. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-65]
B. Provisional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Residential dwelling units, which are not clustered in accordance
with the standards of § 425-202U, may be permitted as a
conditional use, provided that: [Amended 12-27-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-65]
(a) The Planning Board finds that:
[1] Clustering of the proposed dwellings would be
inconsistent with the minimum environmental standards
set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6; or
[2] Clustering of the proposed dwellings would disrupt the
contiguity of the forest ecosystem to a greater degree than
nonclustered development.
(b) Minimum lot area requirement: 20 acres.
(2) Residential unit and accessory uses on a minimum of 3.2 acres,
provided that the provisions of § 425-196B(2) are met.
(3) Residential unit and accessory uses on a minimum of one acre,
provided that the conditions of § 425-199 herein, pertaining to
nonconforming lots, are met.
(4) Campgrounds with a maximum of one site per gross acre with
campsites clustered at a net density not to exceed 10 sites per acre.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(5) Low-intensity recreational uses, provided that the provisions of
§ 425-196B(4) are met.
(6) Institutions, provided the use does not require or will not generate
subsidiary or satellite development within the Pinelands Forest
Zone; the applicant has demonstrated that adequate public service
infrastructure will be available to service the use; and the use is
primarily designed to serve the needs of the Pinelands Forest Zone.
[Amended 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-66]
(7) Agricultural/commercial uses, excluding supermarkets,
restaurants and convenience stores, provided that the provisions of
§ 425-196B(5) are met. [Amended 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34]
(8) Residential unit and accessory uses on a minimum of 1.0 acre,
provided that the provisions of § 425-196B(10) are met. [Added
3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
§ 425-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-197
1:633
(9) Residential dwelling units on one-acre lots existing as of January
14, 1981, provided that: [Added 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
(a) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires
sufficient vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which,
when combined with the acreage of the lot proposed for
development, equals at least 20 acres;
(b) All lands acquired pursuant to Subsection B(9)(a) above, which
may or may not be developable, are located within the P-F
Zone;
(c) All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Subsection
B(9)(a) and (b) above shall be permanently protected through
recordation of a deed of restriction in accordance with the
following requirements: [Amended 12-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-65]
[1] The deed of restriction shall permit the parcel to be
managed for the following uses, subject to the limitations
listed:
[a] Low-intensity recreation, ecological management and
forestry, provided that no more than 5% of the land
may be cleared, no more than 1% of the land may be
covered with impervious surfaces and any such uses
or activities are approved and conducted in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
[b] Where an agricultural use exists on a parcel proposed
to be protected, the following standards shall apply:
[i] For those agricultural uses in existence as of April
6, 2009, the deed of restriction may provide for
the continuation of agricultural uses and the
expansion of the area of agricultural use by up to
50%;
[ii] For those agricultural uses established after April
6, 2009, the deed of restriction may provide for
the continuation of agricultural uses, provided the
agricultural use has been in existence for a period
of at least five years prior to submission of an
application for density transfer;
[iii] For those agricultural uses established after April
6, 2009, which do not meet the standards of
Subsection B(9)(c)[1][b][ii] above, the deed of
restriction shall permit the land to be managed
only in accordance with Subsection B(9)(c)[1][a]
above and shall not provide for continuation of
any agricultural uses on the parcel; and
§ 425-197 VINELAND CODE § 425-197
1:634
[iv] The deed of restriction to be recorded pursuant to
Subsection C(9)(c)[1][b][i] or [ii] above shall
authorize agricultural uses and provide that
impervious surfaces may not exceed that which
currently exists or 3%, whichever is greater,
unless a resource management system plan has
been prepared. Before these impervious surface
limits may be exceeded, evidence of Pinelands
Commission approval of the resource
management system plan shall be provided. If the
deed of restriction is in favor of Cumberland
County or the State Agricultural Development
Committee, evidence of their approval shall also
be provided.
[2] The deed of restriction shall be in favor of the parcel to be
developed and the City or another public agency or
nonprofit conservation organization. In all cases, such
restriction shall be expressly enforceable by the Pinelands
Commission. The deed of restriction shall be in a form to
be approved by the City Solicitor and the Pinelands
Commission.
(d) Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are
combined and assigned to the land to be developed; and
(e) The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the
minimum standards of this article.
C. Additional regulations shall be as follows:
(1) Height of structures shall be in accordance with § 425-196C.
(2) Building lines shall be a minimum of 200 feet measured back from
the center of a paved, publicly owned road. See conditions for
modification set under § 425-202J(2) and (3) below.
(3) Lot area for nonresidential uses. Notwithstanding the minimum lot
areas set forth above in Subsection B, no such minimum lot area for
a nonresidential use within the P-F Zone shall be less than that
needed to meet the water quality standards of § 425-202O(4),
whether or not the lot may be served by a centralized sewer
treatment or collection system.
(4) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill and community residences for
persons with head injuries shall be subject to the same
requirements as single-family dwelling units, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1. [Added 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3]
§ 425-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-198
1:635
§ 425-198. P-R (Pinelands Rural Development) Zone standards.
The following standards shall apply in P-R (Pinelands Rural Development)
Zones:
A. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Agriculture.
(2) Forestry.
(3) Public service infrastructure, except that centralized wastewater
treatment and collection facilities shall be permitted in the
Pinelands Rural Development Zone only in accordance with
§ 425-202O(2). [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(4) Resource extraction.
(5) Recreational uses, except amusement parks.
(6) Institutions.
(7) Signs.
(8) Accessory uses.
(9) Residential dwelling units, provided that clustering of the
permitted dwelling units shall be required in accordance with §
425-202U whenever two or more units are proposed as part of a
residential development. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-65]
B. Provisional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Residential dwelling units, which are not clustered in accordance
with the standards of § 425-202U, may be permitted as a
conditional use, provided that: [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42; 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
(a) The Planning Board finds that:
[1] Clustering of the proposed dwellings would be
inconsistent with the minimum environmental standards
set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6; or
[2] Clustering of the proposed dwellings would disrupt the
contiguity of the forest ecosystem to a greater degree than
nonclustered development.
(b) Minimum lot area requirement: 3.2 acres.
(2) Residential unit and accessory uses on a minimum of one acre,
provided that the conditions of § 425-196B(3) are met.
§ 425-198 VINELAND CODE § 425-198
1:636
(3) Agricultural employee housing, provided that it is accessory to an
active agricultural operation.
(4) Agricultural products processing facilities, provided that they are
accessory to an active agricultural operation.
(5) Agricultural commercial establishments for the sale of produce,
provided that the products are produced on the premises.
(6) Agricultural/commercial uses, provided that the conditions of
§ 425-196B(5) are met. [Amended 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34]
(7) Waste management facilities in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:50-5.26(b)9 and 7:50-6, Part VII. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-42]
(8) Residential unit and accessory uses on a minimum of 1.0 acre,
provided that the provisions of § 425-196B(10) are met. [Added
3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
(9) Residential dwelling units on one-acre lots existing as of January
14, 1981, provided that: [Added 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
(a) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires
sufficient vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which,
when combined with the acreage of the lot proposed for
development, equals at least 3.2 acres;
(b) All lands acquired pursuant to Subsection B(9)(a) above, which
may or may not be developable, are located within the P-R
Zone;
(c) All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Subsection
B(9)(a) and (b) above shall be permanently protected through
recordation of a deed of restriction in accordance with the
following requirements:
[1] The deed of restriction shall permit the parcel to be
managed for the following uses, subject to the limitations
listed:
[a] Low-intensity recreation, ecological management and
forestry, provided that no more than 5% of the land
may be cleared, no more than 1% of the land may be
covered with impervious surfaces and any such uses
or activities are approved and conducted in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
[b] Where an agricultural use exists on a parcel proposed
to be protected, the following standards shall apply:
[i] For those agricultural uses in existence as of April
6, 2009, the deed of restriction may provide for
§ 425-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-198
1:637
the continuation of agricultural uses and the
expansion of the area of agricultural use by up to
50%;
[ii] For those agricultural uses established after April
6, 2009, the deed of restriction may provide for
the continuation of agricultural uses, provided the
agricultural use has been in existence for a period
of at least five years prior to submission of an
application for density transfer;
[iii] For those agricultural uses established after April
6, 2009, which do not meet the standards of
Subsection B(9)(c)[1][b][ii] above, the deed of
restriction shall permit the land to be managed
only in accordance with Subsection B(9)(c)[1][a]
above and shall not provide for continuation of
any agricultural uses on the parcel; and
[iv] The deed of restriction to be recorded pursuant to
Subsection B(9)(c)[1][b][i] or [ii] above shall
authorize agricultural uses and provide that
impervious surfaces may not exceed that which
currently exists or 3%, whichever is greater,
unless a resource management system plan has
been prepared. Before these impervious surface
limits may be exceeded, evidence of Pinelands
Commission approval of the resource
management system plan shall be provided. If the
deed of restriction is in favor of Cumberland
County or the State Agricultural Development
Committee, evidence of their approval shall also
be provided.
[2] The deed of restriction shall be in favor of the parcel to be
developed and the City or another public agency or
nonprofit conservation organization. In all cases, such
restriction shall be expressly enforceable by the Pinelands
Commission. The deed of restriction shall be in a form to
be approved by the City Solicitor and the Pinelands
Commission.
(d) Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are
combined and assigned to the land to be developed; and
(e) The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the
minimum standards of this article.
C. Additional regulations shall be as follows:
(1) The regulations of § 425-197C shall apply.
§ 425-198 VINELAND CODE § 425-198
1:638
§ 425-199. Nonconforming lots. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
Notwithstanding the density limitations of other provisions of this article, a
single-family dwelling may be developed on any parcel of land of one acre
or more in the P-A, P-F or P-R Zone, provided that:
§ 425-200. Expansion of existing uses. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-42]
(2) Lot area for nonresidential uses. Notwithstanding the minimum lot
areas set forth above in Subsection B, no such minimum lot area for
a nonresidential use within the P-R Zone shall be less than that
needed to meet the water quality standards of § 425-202O(4),
whether or not the lot may be served by a centralized sewer
treatment or collection system.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill and community residences for
persons with head injuries shall be subject to the same
requirements as single-family dwelling units, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1. [Added 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3]
A. The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the property owner
or a member of the immediate family of the property owner;
B. The parcel has been in the continuous ownership since February 7,
1979, of the person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be
or of a member of that person's immediate family or a partnership or
corporation in which members of that person's immediate family
collectively own more than a majority interest in such partnership or
corporation;
C. The parcel was not in common ownership with any contiguous land on
or after February 8, 1979, that contains substantial improvements; and
D. The parcel includes all vacant contiguous lands in common ownership
on or after February 8, 1979.
A. Notwithstanding the use restrictions contained in §§ 425-196 through
425-198, any use existing on January 14, 1981, that is currently
nonconforming or any use which was constructed based upon an
approval granted pursuant to the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan that is currently nonconforming, other than intensive
recreational facilities and those uses which are expressly limited in
§§ 425-202 through 425-204, may be expanded or altered, provided
that:
(1) The use was not abandoned or terminated subsequent to January
14, 1981;
§ 425-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-200
1:639
§ 425-201. Change in existing uses. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
§ 425-202. Development regulations.
Regulations for development in the Pinelands shall be as follows:
(2) The expansion or alteration of the use is in accordance with all of
the minimum standards of §§ 425-202 through 425-204; and
(3) The area of expansion does not exceed 50% of the floor area, the
area of the use or the capacity of the use, whichever is applicable,
on January 14, 1981, or which was approved pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4, Part V.
A. Notwithstanding the use restrictions contained in §§ 425-196 through
425-198, any use existing on January 14, 1981, that is currently
nonconforming or any use which was constructed based upon an
approval granted pursuant to the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan that is currently nonconforming, other than those
uses which are expressly limited in §§ 425-202 through 425-204, may be
changed to another use, provided that:
(1) The use was not abandoned or terminated subsequent to January
14, 1981;
(2) The new use is in accordance with all of the minimum standards of
§§ 425-202 through 425-204, including § 425-202O(4), unless a new
septic system permit will not be required as a result of the change
in use, in which case the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.83(b) and (c)
must be met; and
(3) The area, capacity and intensity of the new use is comparable to
that of the existing use.
A. Air quality. All development shall adhere to the relevant air quality
standards of N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. Adherence to the standards of this
section shall be determined by means of an air quality simulation model
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27-18.3. Applications for residential development
of 100 or more units and any other development involving more than
300 parking spaces located in the Pinelands Area shall ensure that all
state ambient air quality standards in N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. for carbon
monoxide shall not be exceeded at places of maximum concentration
and at sensitive receptors. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
B. Agriculture.
(1) Agricultural activities, as well as fish and wildlife management,
shall be conducted in accordance with recommended management
practices established for the use by the New Jersey Department of
§ 425-200 VINELAND CODE § 425-202
1:640
Agriculture, the Soil Conservation Service and the New Jersey
Agricultural Experimental Station at Rutgers University.
(2) Where an area in the P-A Zone has been found to have substandard
surface or groundwater, the Soil Conservation District office shall
prepare and/or review a resource conservation plan.
(3) Except for regulations strictly necessary to maintain public health,
all agricultural operations in the P-A Zone shall be exempt from any
ordinance or regulation which inhibits efficient crop production,
imposes time or dusting limits to the operation or imposes odor
restrictions.
C. Energy conservation methods, such as southern orientation of
buildings, landscaping to permit solar access and the use of energyefficient
materials, shall apply to all developments.
D. Fire management. No development shall be permitted in the vegetated
areas of the Pinelands which have been classified as moderate, high or
extreme fire hazard areas as set under N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.123 unless the
development complies with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.124 and 7:50-6.125.
E. Fish and wildlife. No development shall be carried out in the Pinelands
Area unless it is designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on
habitats that are critical to the survival of any local populations of those
threatened or endangered animal species designated by the
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et
seq. All development or authorized activity shall be carried out in a
manner which avoids disturbance to distinct fish and wildlife habitats
that are essential to the continued nesting, resting, breeding and
feeding of the species.
F. Forestry. All forestry operations shall meet the standards set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.43 et seq. Permits authorizing forestry operations shall
be valid for a period of 10 years. Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to prohibit any person from securing additional permits,
provided that the requirements of this chapter and the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan are met. [Amended 12-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-65]
G. Historic resource preservation.
(1) The Planning Board shall exercise all the powers and perform all
the duties set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.153(a), including
recommendations to the governing body for designation of historic
resources, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which are
determined to be significant pursuant to Subsection G(5)(c) below.
(2) Authority to issue certificates of appropriateness.
§ 425-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-202
1:641
(a) The Planning Board shall issue all certificates of
appropriateness except as specified in Subsection G(2)(b)
below.
(b) The Board of Adjustment shall issue certificates of
appropriateness for those applications for development which
it is otherwise empowered to review.
(3) Certificates of appropriateness shall be required for the following:
(a) Construction, encroachment upon, alteration, remodeling,
removal, disturbance or demolition of any resource designated
by the governing body or the Pinelands Commission pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154 or any action which renders such a site
inaccessible; and
(b) Development not otherwise exempted from review pursuant to
§ 425-205B of this article where a significant resource has
been identified pursuant to Subsection G(5) below.
(4) Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall include the
information specified in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(b).
(5) A cultural resource survey shall accompany all applications for
major development in order to determine whether any significant
historic resources exist on the parcel. Guidelines for this survey are
contained in Appendix B of the Cultural Resource Management
Plan, dated April 1991, as amended. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-42]
(a) In general, the survey shall include:
[1] A statement as to the presence of any properties listed on
the National and State Registers of Historic Places on the
site or within the area of the project's potential
environmental impacts.
[2] A thorough search of state, local and any other pertinent
inventories to identify sites of potential significance.
[3] A review of the literature and consultation with
professional and avocational archaeologists
knowledgeable about the area.
[4] Thorough pedestrian and natural resource surveys.
[5] Archaeological testing as necessary to provide reasonable
evidence of the presence or absence of historic resources
of significance.
[6] Adequate recording of the information gained and
methodologies and sources used.
§ 425-202 VINELAND CODE § 425-202
1:642
[7] A list of personnel involved and qualifications of the
person(s) performing the survey.
(b) This requirement for a survey may be waived by the local
approval agency if:
[1] There is insufficient evidence of significant cultural
activity on the project site or, in the case of archaeological
resources, within the vicinity;
[2] The evidence of cultural activity on the site lacks the
potential for importance because further recording of the
available data will not contribute to a more comprehensive
understanding of Pinelands culture; or
[3] The evidence of cultural activity lacks any potential for
significance pursuant to the standards of Subsection
G(5)(c) below.
(c) A resource shall be deemed to be significant if it possesses
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling and association which reflects its significance in
American history, architecture, archaeology or culture under
one or more of the following criteria:
[1] The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with
events of significance to the cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state, local community or the
Pinelands.
[2] The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with
the lives of persons or institutions of significance to the
cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation,
state, local community or the Pinelands.
[3] The presence of structures that represent the work of a
master or that possess high artistic values or that embody
the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method
of construction or that represent a distinguishable entity
of significance to the architectural, cultural, political,
economic or social history of the nation, state, local
community or the Pinelands, although its components may
lack individual distinction.
[4] The presence of a site or area which has yielded or is likely
to yield significant information regarding the history or
archaeological history of the Pinelands.
(6) The standards governing the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(c) shall be followed by the
Planning Board and Board of Adjustment.
§ 425-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-202
1:643
(7) The effect of the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness is as
follows:
(a) All subsequent development approvals shall be issued or
denied in a manner consistent with the certificate of
appropriateness, except as provided in Subsection G(7)(b)
below.
(b) A certificate of appropriateness issued as a result of the
cultural resource survey requirement set forth in Subsection
G(5) above shall be effective for two years. If the resource is
not designated by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154 or by the City Council pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., within that two-year period, the historic
resource standards of this shall no longer apply to the resource
in question until such time as the Pinelands Commission
designates the resource pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(8) The following information will be required to document resources
which are not found to be significant but which are otherwise found
to present graphic evidence of a cultural activity:
(a) A narrative description of the resource and its cultural
environment.
(b) Photographic documentation to record the exterior
appearance of buildings, structures and engineering
resources.
(c) A site plan depicting, in correct scale, the location of all
buildings, structures and engineering resources.
(d) A New Jersey State inventory form as published by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection for buildings,
and a narrative description of any process or technology if
necessary to elaborate upon the photographic record.
(9) If archaeological data is discovered on a site at any time after
construction has been commenced, the developer shall
immediately cease construction, notify the Planning Board and the
Pinelands Commission and take all reasonable steps to protect the
archaeological data in accordance with the Guidelines for the
Recovery of Scientific, Prehistoric, Historic and Archaeological
Data: Procedures for Notification, Reporting, and Data Recovery
(36 CFR 66).
H. Recreation. All recreation areas and facilities shall be designed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.143(a) and 7:50-6.144(a)1-3, and with
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection publication
Administration Guidelines: Barrier-Free Design Standards for Parks
and Recreational Facilities.
§ 425-202 VINELAND CODE § 425-202
1:644
I. Resource extraction.
(1) Except as otherwise authorized in this chapter, the extraction or
mining of mineral resources other than sand, gravel, clay and
ilmenite is prohibited.
(2) Planning Board approval authorizing resource extraction shall be
effective for a period of two years.
(3) Resource extraction operations shall comply with the standards set
under N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.68 to 7:50-6.69.
J. Scenic corridors. All paved, public roads, except for those roads which
provide for internal circulation within residentially developed areas, in
the P-R (Pinelands Rural Development) and P-F (Pinelands Forest)
Zones shall be considered scenic corridors.
(1) No building, except for agricultural commercial establishments,
shall be erected closer than 200 feet from the center of a scenic
corridor.
(2) If compliance with the two-hundred-foot setback is constrained by
environmental or physical limitations, the building shall be erected
as close to the two-hundred-foot setback as practical, and the site
shall be landscaped to provide screening along the corridor to
comply with Subsection N below.
(3) If the applicant demonstrates that existing buildings within 1,000
feet of the site are set back less than 200 feet from the center line
of the corridor, the building shall be set to be consistent with the
established line and screening provided between the building and
the corridor.
(4) The requirements of Subsection J(1) through (3) above shall not
apply to residential cluster developments in the P-F and P-R Zones
that comply with the standards of § 425-202U. [Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-65]
K. Signs. All signs in the Pinelands Area of Vineland shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.107. Signs not in compliance shall be discontinued on
January 14, 1991.
L. Screening and storage of motor vehicles. No more than 10 automobiles,
trucks or other motor vehicles, in operating condition or not, shall be
stored on any lot unless they are adequately screened from adjacent
residences and scenic corridors. All vehicles not in operating condition
shall be drained of all gasoline. This subsection shall not apply to
vehicles used for agricultural purposes which are in operating
condition.
M. Utilities.
§ 425-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-202
1:645
(1) New utility distribution lines shall be placed underground except
on or adjacent to active agricultural operations.
(2) All aboveground facilities other than storage tanks shall be
adequately screened, by vegetation, from adjacent uses and in
compliance with Subsection N below.
(3) Electric transmission lines shall be located on existing towers or be
placed underground to the maximum practical extent.
N. Vegetation and landscaping. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(1) All clearing and soil disturbance activities shall be limited to that
which is necessary to accommodate an activity, use or structure
which is permitted by this article.
(2) Where practical, all clearing and soil disturbance activities
associated with an activity, use or structure, other than agriculture,
forestry and resource extraction, shall:
(a) Avoid wooded areas, including New Jersey's record trees as
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection in 1991 and periodically updated; and
(b) Revegetate or landscape areas temporarily cleared or
disturbed during development activities.
(3) All applications for major development shall contain a landscaping
or revegetation plan which incorporates the elements set forth in
Subsection N(4) below.
(4) In order to conserve water, conserve natural features and reduce
pollution from the use of fertilizers, pesticides and other soil
supplements, all landscaping or revegetation plans prepared
pursuant to Section N(3) above or required pursuant to § 425-61B
shall incorporate the following elements:
(a) The limits of clearing shall be identified.
(b) Existing vegetation, including New Jersey's record trees as
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection in 1991 and periodically updated, shall be
incorporated into the landscape design where practical.
(c) Permanent lawn or turf areas shall be limited to those
specifically intended for active human use, such as play fields,
golf courses and lawns associated with a residence or other
principal nonresidential use. Existing wooded areas shall not
be cleared and converted to lawns except when directly
associated with and adjacent to a proposed structure.
§ 425-202 VINELAND CODE § 425-202
1:646
(d) Shrubs and trees authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 shall be used
for revegetation or landscaping purposes. Other shrubs and
trees may be used in the following circumstances:
[1] When the parcel to be developed or its environs contain a
predominance of shrubs and tree species not authorized
by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25;
[2] For limited ornamental purposes around buildings and
other structures; or
[3] When limited use of other shrubs or trees is required for
proper screening or buffering.
(5) Development shall be prohibited in the vicinity of threatened or
endangered plants. No development shall be carried out by any
person in the Pinelands Area unless it is designed to avoid
irreversible adverse impacts on the survival of any local
populations of threatened or endangered plants of the Pinelands
designated in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27.
O. Water quality. All development shall be designed and maintained to
protect the quality of surface water and groundwater. For purposes of
this section, agricultural use shall not be considered development.
Except as specifically authorized in this section, no development which
degrades surface water or groundwater quality or which establishes
new point sources of pollution shall be permitted. The following point
and nonpoint sources may be developed and operated in the Pinelands:
(1) Development of new or the expansion of existing commercial,
industrial and wastewater treatment facilities or the development
of new or the expansion of existing nonpoint sources, except those
specifically regulated in Subsection O(2) through (6) below,
provided that: [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(a) There will be no direct discharge into any surface water body.
(b) All discharges from the facility or use are of a quality and
quantity such that groundwater exiting from the parcel of land
or entering a surface body of water will not exceed two parts
per million nitrate/nitrogen.
(c) All public wastewater treatment facilities are designed to
accept and treat septage.
(d) All storage facilities, including ponds or lagoons, are lined to
prevent leakage into the groundwater.
(2) Development of new wastewater treatment or collection facilities
which are designed to improve the level of nitrate/nitrogen
attenuation of more than one existing on-site wastewater treatment
system where a public health problem has been identified may be
§ 425-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-202
1:647
exempted from the standards of Subsection O(1)(b) above,
provided that:
(a) There will be no direct discharge into any surface water body.
(b) The facility is designed only to accommodate wastewater from
existing residential, commercial and industrial development.
(c) Adherence to Subsection O(1)(b) above cannot be achieved due
to limiting site conditions or that the costs to comply with the
standard will result in excessive user fees. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(d) The design level of nitrate/nitrogen attenuation is the
maximum possible within the cost limitations imposed by such
user fee guidelines, but in no case shall groundwater exiting
from the parcel or entering a surface body of water exceed five
parts per million nitrate/nitrogen. [Amended 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-42]
(3) Improvements to existing commercial, industrial and wastewater
treatment facilities which discharge directly into surface waters,
provided that:
(a) There is no practical alternative available that would adhere to
the standards of Subsection O(1)(a) above. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(b) There is no increase in the existing approved capacity of the
facility.
(c) All discharges from the facility into surface waters are such
that the nitrate/nitrogen levels of the surface waters at the
discharge point do not exceed two parts per million. In the
event that nitrate/nitrogen levels in the surface waters
immediately upstream of the discharge point exceed two parts
per million, the discharge shall not exceed two parts per
million nitrate/nitrogen.
(4) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems which are
not intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the
wastewater, provided that: [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
(a) The proposed development to be served by the system is
otherwise permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(b) The design of the system and its discharge point and the size of
the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems is
located will ensure that groundwater exiting from the entire
contiguous parcel or entering a surface body of water will not
exceed two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen, calculated
pursuant to the Pinelands dilution model dated December
§ 425-202 VINELAND CODE § 425-202
1:648
1993, as amended, subject to the provisions of Subsection
O(4)(c) below. The entire contiguous parcel may include any
contiguous lands to be dedicated as open space as part of
the proposed development but may not include previously
dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous lands that have
been deed restricted pursuant to § 425-197B(9) or 425-198B(9)
or N.J.A.C. 7:50-5:47.
(c) Only contiguous lands located within the same zoning district
as the proposed system or systems may be utilized for septic
dilution purposes, except for the development of an individual
single-family dwelling on a lot existing as of January 4, 1981,
nonresidential development on a lot of five acres or less
existing as of January 4, 1981, or cluster development as
permitted by N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.19.
(d) The depth to the seasonal high-water table is at least five feet.
(e) Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth of at
least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an impermeable clay
aquiclude, in which case the well shall be cased to at least 50
feet.
(f) The system will be maintained and inspected in accordance
with the requirements of § 425-202T.
(g) The technology has been approved for use by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(h) Flow values for nonresidential development shall be
determined based on the values contained in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4,
as amended, except that the number of employees may not be
utilized in calculating flow values for office uses. In the event
that N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4 does not provide flow values for a specific
use, but a flow value is assigned for that use in N.J.A.C.
7:14A-23.3(a), the flow value specified in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3(a)
shall be used in calculating flow.
(5) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems which are
intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the wastewater,
provided that: [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(a) The standards set forth in Subsection O(4)(a) and (c) through
(h) above are met;
(b) The proposed development is residential, or if nonresidential,
the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.84(a)5iii(2) are met.
[Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
(c) The design of the system and its discharge point and the size of
the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems is
located will ensure that groundwater exiting from the entire
§ 425-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-202
1:649
contiguous parcel or entering a surface body of water will
not exceed two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen, calculated
pursuant to the Pinelands dilution model dated December
1993, as amended, subject to the provisions of Subsection
O(4)(c) above and the assumptions and requirements set forth
in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.84(c)5iv. The entire contiguous parcel may
include any contiguous lands to be dedicated as open space
as part of the proposed development but may not include
previously dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous
lands that have been deed restricted pursuant to § 425-197B(9)
or 425-198B(9) or N.J.A.C. 7:50-5:47.
(6) Surface water runoff, provided that all requirements of § 425-217
are met. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42; 5-22-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-40]
P. Maintenance of petroleum tanks. The owners of commercial petroleum
storage tanks shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 102 of the
Laws of 1986.166
Q. Pinelands development credits. [Added 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
(1) Pinelands development credits shall be used in the following
manner:
(a) When a variance for cultural housing is granted by the City in
accordance with § 425-196B(1) of this article; and
(b) When a waiver of strict compliance is granted by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq.
(2) In no case shall a building or construction permit be issued for any
development involving the use of Pinelands development credits
until the developer has provided the Pinelands Commission and the
City with evidence of his ownership of the requisite Pinelands
development credits and those Pinelands development credits have
been redeemed with the City.
R. Maintenance of wastewater treatment facility.
(1) The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment system in the
Pinelands shall have the system inspected by a technician at least
once every three years.
(2) The inspection shall be in accordance with Chapter 326 of the Solid
Waste Management Act (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.) and Section 201
of the Clean Water Act.
(3) The owner shall have the system cleaned at least once every three
years and submit a sworn statement to the Vineland Health
Department that it has been inspected and cleaned and is
166. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:10A-21 et seq.
§ 425-202 VINELAND CODE § 425-202
1:650
functional, giving the date as well as the name of the person who
performed the services.
S. Prohibited chemicals and materials.
(1) Septic tank cleaners and waste oil are prohibited anywhere in the
Pinelands.
(2) All storage of deicing chemicals shall be lined to prevent leakage
into the soil and shall be covered with an impermeable surface to
shield from precipitation.
(3) The application of any herbicide to any road or utility right-of-way
is prohibited unless it is necessary to protect an adjacent
agricultural activity. Such applications shall be controlled to
prevent runoff of residual chemicals into surface water or
groundwater.167
T. Water management. Inter-basin transfer of water between watersheds
shall be avoided to the maximum practical extent. Water shall not be
exported from the Pinelands except as otherwise provided in N.J.S.A.
58:1A-7.1.
U. Residential cluster development in the P-F and P-R. In the P-F and P-R
Zones, clustering of single-family detached dwellings shall be required
whenever two or more units are proposed as part of a residential
development. The following standards shall apply: [Added 12-27-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-65]
(1) Permitted density:
(a) In the P-F Zone: one unit per 20 acres.
(b) In the P-R Zone: one unit per 3.2 acres.
(2) The number of residential lots permitted within the cluster shall be
calculated on the basis of the size of the parcel of land and the
density permitted in Subsection U(1) above, with a bonus applied
as follows:
Parcel Size P-R District P-F District
Less than 50 acres 0 0
50 to 99.99 acres 10% 20%
100 to 149.99 acres 15% 25%
Equal to or greater than 150
acres
20% 30%
(3) The residential cluster shall be located on the parcel such that the
development area:
167. Editor's Note: Former Subsection U(4) through (6), restricting disposal of certain wastes,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42.
§ 425-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-202
1:651
(a) Is located proximate to existing roads;
(b) Is located proximate to existing developed sites on adjacent or
nearby parcels;
(c) Is or will be appropriately buffered from adjoining or nearby
nonresidential land uses; and
(d) Conforms with the minimum environmental standards of this
article.
(4) Development within the residential cluster shall be designed as
follows:
(a) Residential lots shall be one acre in size, but may be larger if
dictated by unusual site conditions. In no case shall the
average size of residential lots within a cluster exceed 1.1
acres;
(b) The following minimum yard and bulk requirements shall
apply:
[1] Minimum lot frontage: 125 feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard, each: 30 feet.
[5] Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
[6] Minimum rear yard: 60 feet.
(c) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems, which
are not intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the
waste, that comply with the standards of § 425-202O(4), may
serve the lots within the cluster development area. However, in
the event that existing agricultural uses will continue on the
parcel in accordance with Subsection U(5)(b)[2] below,
individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems shall
comply with the standards of § 425-202O(5) or N.J.A.C.
7:50-10.21 through 10.23. Community on-site wastewater
treatment systems serving two or more residential dwelling
units, which meet the standards of § 425-202O(5) or N.J.A.C.
7:50-10.21 through 10.23, shall also be permitted;
(d) The residential cluster development area shall include such
land and facilities as are necessary to support the
development, including wastewater facilities, stormwater
management facilities and recreation amenities; and
(e) Permitted recreational amenities may include playgrounds, tot
lots, swimming pools, tennis courts and other such
§ 425-202 VINELAND CODE § 425-202
1:652
recreational facilities, which are solely for use by the residents
of the cluster development. Recreational amenities shall not
be limited to the foregoing so that the applicant may propose
additional facilities. All such facilities shall be accessory to the
residential cluster development. No advertising or commercial
enterprise shall be permitted. In no case may such amenities
occupy more than 1/2 acre of land or the equivalent of one acre
of land for every 25 residential lots, whichever is greater.
(5) The balance of the parcel located outside of the residential cluster
development shall be owned and managed by a duly constituted
homeowners' association, a nonprofit conservation organization,
the City or incorporated as part of one of the lots within the cluster
development area.
(a) All such land shall be permanently protected through
recordation of a deed of conservation restriction. Such
restriction shall be in favor of the City or another public agency
or nonprofit conservation organization. In all cases, such
restriction shall be expressly enforceable by the Pinelands
Commission; and
(b) The deed of restriction shall permit the parcel to be managed
for the following uses, subject to the limitations listed:
[1] Low intensity recreation, ecological management and
forestry, provided that no more than 5% of the land may be
cleared, no more than 1% of the land may be covered with
impervious surfaces and any such uses or activities are
approved and conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter;
[2] Where an agricultural use exists on a parcel proposed to
be protected, the following standards shall apply:
[a] For those agricultural uses in existence as of April 6,
2009, the deed of restriction may provide for the
continuation of agricultural uses and the expansion of
the area of agricultural use by up to 50%;
[b] For those agricultural uses established after April 6,
2009, the deed of restriction may provide for the
continuation of agricultural uses, provided the
agricultural use has been in existence for a period of
at least five years prior to submission of an application
for density transfer;
[c] For those agricultural uses established after April 6,
2009, which do not meet the standards of Subsection
U(5)(b)[2][b] above, the deed of restriction shall
permit the land to be managed only in accordance
§ 425-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-202
1:653
§ 425-203. Wetlands.
with Subsection U(5)(b)[1] above and shall not provide
for continuation of any agricultural uses on the parcel;
[d] The deed of restriction to be recorded pursuant to
Subsection U(5)(b)[2][a] or [b] above shall authorize
agricultural uses and provide that impervious surfaces
may not exceed that which currently exists or 3%,
whichever is greater, unless a resource management
system plan has been prepared. Before these
impervious surface limits may be exceeded, evidence
of Pinelands Commission approval of the resource
management system plan shall be provided. If the
deed of restriction is in favor of Cumberland County or
the State Agricultural Development Committee,
evidence of their approval shall also be provided; and
[e] For parcels which meet the standards of Subsection
U(5)(b)[2][a] or [b] above, a provision shall be
recorded in the deed for each residential lot within the
cluster development area which acknowledges
agricultural use of the protected land outside the
cluster development area and recognizes the legal
protections afforded to that use through the deed of
restriction and any applicable statutes.
A. No development in the Pinelands Area shall be permitted in a wetland
or wetlands transition area except for the following uses: [Amended
3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
(1) Horticulture of native Pinelands species.
(2) Berry culture.
(3) Beekeeping.
(4) Forestry, as per § 425-202F.
(5) Fish and wildlife management and wetlands management in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.10. [Amended 12-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-65]
(6) Low-intensity recreational uses which do not involve use of a
structure, including hunting, fishing, trapping, hiking, boating and
swimming, and other low-intensity recreational uses, provided that
any development associated with those other uses does not result
in a significant adverse impact on the wetland as set forth in
Subsection B(2) and (3) below.
(7) Private docks, piers, moorings and boat launches for use by the
landowner, as per Subsection B.
§ 425-202 VINELAND CODE § 425-203
1:654
(8) Commercial or public docks, piers, moorings and boat launches,
provided that there is demonstrated need that cannot be met by
existing facilities, that the development meets all state and federal
regulations and that the development complies with Subsection B.
(9) Bridges, roads, trails and utility transmission and distribution
facilities and other similar linear facilities, provided that:
(a) There is no feasible alternative route for the facility that does
not involve development in a wetland or, if none, that another
feasible route which results in less significant adverse impacts
on wetlands does not exist;
(b) The need for the proposed linear improvement cannot be met
by existing facilities or modification thereof;
(c) The use represents a need which overrides the importance of
protecting the wetland;
(d) Development of the facility will include all practical measures
to mitigate the adverse impact on the wetland; and
(e) The resources of the Pinelands will not be substantially
impaired as a result of the facility and its development as
determined exclusively based on the existence of special and
unusual circumstances.
B. Performance standards.
(1) No development shall be permitted in a wetland or within 300 feet
of a wetland area unless the developer demonstrates that no
significant adverse impact on the wetlands will result.
(2) A significant adverse impact will exist if it is determined that one or
more of the following modifications of a wetland will cause
irreversible adverse effect on its ecological integrity and its biotic
components, including but not limited to threatened or endangered
species of plants or animals:
(a) An increase of surface water runoff discharging into a wetland.
(b) A change in the normal seasonal flow patterns within the
wetland.
(c) An alteration of the water table.
(d) An increase in erosion which increases sedimentation.
(e) A chemical change in the groundwater or surface water.
(f) A loss of wetland habitat.
(g) A reduction in the diversity of habitats.
(h) A change in the composition of wetlands species.
§ 425-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-203
1:655
§ 425-204. Waste management. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
No hazardous or toxic substances, including hazardous wastes, shall be
stored, transferred, processed, discharged, disposed or otherwise used in
the Pinelands Area. The land application of waste or waste-derived
materials is prohibited in the Pinelands Area, except as expressly
authorized in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79. Waste management facilities shall only be
permitted in the Pinelands Area in accordance with the standards set forth
in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.
§ 425-205. Approval for development required; exceptions.
(i) A significant disturbance of areas used by the indigenous and
migratory wildlife for breeding, nesting or feeding.
(3) Determinations under Subsection B(2) above shall consider the
cumulative modifications of the wetland due to the development
being proposed and any other existing or potential development
which may affect the wetland.
A. No person shall carry out any development within the Pinelands Area
without obtaining approval from an approval agency and without
obtaining development approval in accordance with the procedures set
forth in §§ 425-206 through 425-215.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C below, the following shall not be
subject to the procedures set forth in §§ 425-206 through 425-215:
(1) The improvement, expansion or reconstruction, within five years of
destruction or demolition, of any single-family dwelling unit or
appurtenance thereto.
(2) The improvement, expansion, construction or reconstruction of any
structure accessory to a single-family dwelling.
(3) The improvement, expansion, construction or reconstruction of any
structure used exclusively for agricultural or horticultural
purposes.
(4) The construction, repair or removal of any sign, except for the
construction or replacement of any off-site commercial advertising
sign.
(5) The repair of existing utility distribution lines. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(6) The clearing of less than 1,500 square feet of land.
(7) The construction of any addition or accessory structure for any
nonresidential use or any multifamily residential structure
provided that: [Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
§ 425-203 VINELAND CODE § 425-205
1:656
(a) If the addition or structure will be located on or below an
existing impervious surface, either the existing use is served by
public sewers or the addition or structure will generate no
wastewater flows, and said addition or structure will cover an
area of no more than 4,999 square feet; and
(b) If the addition or structure will not be located on or below an
impervious surface, said addition or structure will generate no
wastewater flows and will cover an area of no more than 1,000
square feet.
(8) The demolition of any structure that is less than 50 years old.
(9) The installation of utility distribution lines, except for sewage lines,
to serve areas which are effectively developed or development
which has received all necessary approvals and permits. [Added
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(10) The repair or replacement of any existing on-site wastewater
disposal system. [Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(11) The repaving of existing paved roads and other paved surfaces,
provided no increase in the paved width or area of said roads and
surfaces will occur. [Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42;
amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
(12) The clearing of land solely for agricultural or horticultural
purposes. [Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42; amended
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
(13) Fences, provided that no more than 1,500 square feet of land is to
be cleared. [Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(14) Aboveground telephone equipment cabinets. [Added 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-42]
(15) Tree pruning. [Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(16) The following forestry activities: [Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-42]
(a) Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially
improved parcels of land that are five acres or less in size.
(b) Tree harvesting, provided that no more than one cord of wood
per five acres of land is harvested in any one year and that no
more than five cords of wood are harvested from the entire
parcel in any one year.
(c) Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does not
exceed five acres in any one year, no soil disturbance occurs
other than that caused by the planting activity and no trees
§ 425-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-205
1:657
§ 425-206. Application requirements for minor development.
Any application for approval of minor development shall include at least the
following information:
other than those authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 are to be
planted.
(d) Forest stand improvement designed to selectively thin trees
and brush, provided that no clearing or soil disturbance occurs
and that the total land area on the parcel in which the activity
occurs does not exceed five acres in any one year.
(17) Prescribed burning and the clearing and maintaining of fire breaks.
[Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(18) Normal and customary landscape plantings, unless a landscaping
plan is required pursuant to § 425-202N(3) or 425-61B. [Added
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
(19) The installation of an accessory solar energy facility on any existing
structure or impervious surface. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-22]
(20) The installation of a local communications facilities antenna on an
existing communications or other suitable structure, provided such
antenna is not inconsistent with any comprehensive plan for local
communications facilities approved by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c)6. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-22]
(21) The establishment of a home occupation within an existing
dwelling unit or structure accessory thereto, provided that no
additional development is proposed. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-22]
(22) The change of one nonresidential use to another nonresidential
use, provided that the existing and proposed uses are or will be
served by public sewers and no additional development is
proposed. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
C. The exceptions contained in Subsection B above shall not apply to any
historic resources designated by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154.
D. Nothing herein shall preclude any local or state agency from reviewing,
in accordance with the provisions of any applicable ordinance or
regulation, any proposed development which does not require an
application to the Pinelands Commission pursuant to this section.
A. The applicant's name and address and his interest in the subject
property.
§ 425-205 VINELAND CODE § 425-206
1:658
B. The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's, and the
owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
C. The legal description, including block and lot designation and street
address, if any, of the subject property.
D. A description of all existing uses of the subject property.
E. A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development.
F. A United States Geological Survey Quadrangle map, or copy thereof,
and a copy of the Municipal Tax Map sheet on which the boundaries of
the subject property and the Pinelands Management Area designation
and the zoning designation are shown.
G. A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the subject
property, the location of all proposed development and existing or
proposed facilities to provide water for the use and consumption of
occupants of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will serve the
proposed development. The following information shall be included
with respect to existing or proposed sanitary facilities:
(1) On-site treatment facilities. The location, size, type and capacity of
any proposed on-site wastewater treatment facilities shall be
provided.
(2) Soil borings and percolation tests. If on-site sewage disposal is
proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq., and the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, shall be submitted at suitable locations
with a tract map showing location, logs, elevations of all test holes,
indicating where groundwater was encountered, estimating the
seasonal high-water table and demonstrating that such facility is
adequate to meet the water quality standards contained in
§ 425-202 of this article.
H. A location map, including the area extending at least 300 feet beyond
each boundary of the subject property, showing ownership boundary
lines, the boundary of the proposed development, owners of holdings
adjoining and adjacent to the subject property, existing facilities,
buildings and structures on the site, all proposed development,
wetlands, streams (including intermittent streams), rivers, lakes and
other water bodies and existing roads.
I. A soils map, including a county soils survey which conforms to the
guidelines of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, showing the location of all proposed
development.
J. A map showing existing vegetation, identifying predominant vegetation
types in the area and showing proposed landscaping of the subject
§ 425-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-206
1:659
§ 425-207. Application requirements for other development.
§ 425-208. Referral of application to Environmental Commission.
All development applications shall be referred to the Environmental
Commission for review and comment.
§ 425-209. Notification of Pinelands Commission of development
application. [Amended 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34; 3-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-22]
property, including the location of the tree line before and after
development, and all areas to be disturbed as a result of the proposed
development.
K. A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence of prior approval
from the Pinelands Development Review Board or the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and Regulations. [Amended
6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34]
L. When prior approval for the development has been granted by the City,
evidence of Pinelands Commission review pursuant to § 300-228.168
A. All applications for major development, other than forestry and
resource extraction operations, shall be accompanied by the
information required in § 425-217, information required in N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.2(b)5, as well as the following: [Amended 5-22-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-40]
(1) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence
of prior approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and
Regulations.
(2) When prior approval for the development has been granted by the
City, evidence of Pinelands Commission review pursuant to
§ 425-211.
B. An application for approval of forestry operations shall be subject to the
application requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.43. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
C. An application for approval of resource extraction operations shall be
subject to the application requirements set forth in the N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.2(b)6. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-42]
168. Editor's Note: Former Subsection b, which outlined procedures for applications for
individual single-family dwellings and which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34.
§ 425-206 VINELAND CODE § 425-209
1:660
A. Submission of and modification (revisions) to application. Written
notification shall be given by the applicant, by email or regular mail, to
the Pinelands Commission within seven days after a determination is
made by the City that an application for development in the Pinelands
Area is complete or if a determination is made by the Planning Board
that the application has been modified. Said notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel that
the applicant proposes to develop.
(3) A brief description of the proposed development, including uses
and intensity of uses proposed.
(4) The application number of the certificate of filing issued by the
Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(5) The date on which the application, or any change thereto, was filed,
and any application number or other identifying number assigned
to the application by the approval agency.
(6) The approval agency with which the application or change thereto
was filed.
(7) The content of any change made to the application since it was filed
with the Commission, including a copy of any revised plans or
reports.
(8) The nature of the municipal approval or approvals being sought.
B. Meetings and hearings. Where a meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding on an application for development approval in the Pinelands
Area is required, the applicant shall provide notice to the Pinelands
Commission by email, regular mail or delivery of the same to the
principal office of the Commission at least five days prior to such
meeting, hearing, or other formal proceeding. Such notice shall contain
at least the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The application number of the certificate of filing issued by the
Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(3) The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding.
(4) The name of the approval agency or representative thereof that will
be conducting the meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding.
(5) Any written reports or comments received by the approval agency
on the application for development that have not been previously
submitted to the Commission.
§ 425-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-209
1:661
§ 425-210. Notification of Pinelands Commission of action on
application. [Amended 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 80-34; 3-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-22]
§ 425-211. Review of approved applications by Pinelands
Commission.
(6) The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding is to be held.
A. The Pinelands Commission shall be notified of all approvals and denials
of development in the Pinelands Area, whether the approval occurs by
action or inaction of any approval agency or an appeal of any agency's
decision. The applicant shall, within five days of the approval or denial,
give notice by email or regular mail to the Pinelands Commission.
B. The notice shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel that
the applicant proposes to develop.
(3) The application number of the certificate of filing issued by the
Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(4) The date on which the approval or denial was issued by the
approval agency.
(5) Any written reports or comments received by the approval agency
on the application for development that have not been previously
submitted to the Commission.
(6) Any revisions to the application not previously submitted to the
Commission.
(7) A copy of the Board resolution, permit or other documentation of
the approval or denial. If the application was approved, a copy of
any preliminary or final plan, plot or similar document that was
approved shall also be submitted.
A. Upon receipt of the notice of approval, the application shall be reviewed
by the Pinelands Commission in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.37 through 7:50-4.42. No approval shall take effect nor
shall development commence prior to notification of the action taken by
the Commission. Although the Pinelands Commission shall be notified
of all denials, no such denial actions are subject to further review and
action by the Pinelands Commission.
B. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.1(b) and until January 14, 1991, approvals
issued by the Pinelands Development Review Board or the Pinelands
Commission under the Interim Rules and Regulations shall serve as the
§ 425-209 VINELAND CODE § 425-211
1:662
§ 425-212. Condition on prior approvals of City.
Where a prior approval has been granted by the City, no subsequent
approval of an application for development approval shall be obtained until
one of the following is satisfied:
§ 425-213. Effect of Pinelands Commission's decision on previously
approved applications.
§ 425-214. Participation in hearings by Pinelands Commission.
In accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.36, the Pinelands Commission shall have
the right to participate in all hearings which involve land development in
the Pinelands.
§ 425-215. Compliance required.
All development within the Pinelands Area proposed by the City of Vineland
or any agency thereof shall comply with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.51
and the regulations set in this article.
§ 425-216. Compliance with amendments to statutes required.
Amendments to the City of Vineland Master Plan, this chapter or any other
ordinance which regulates land use shall comply with the provisions of
N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.45. (NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 to
13:18A-29.)
basis for Pinelands Commission review of local approval under this
section.
A. Notification is received from the Pinelands Commission that review of
the City's approval is not required.
B. Review of the City's approval has been completed pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.37 to 7:50-4.42 and a final order regarding the approval is
received by the City from the Pinelands Commission.
A. If the Pinelands Commission disapproves an application for
development previously approved by an approval agency, such approval
shall be revoked by the approval agency within 30 days, and the agency
shall thereafter deny approval of the application.
B. If the Commission approves the decision of an approval agency subject
to conditions, the approval agency which had previously approved the
application shall, within 30 days, modify its approval to include all
conditions imposed by the Commission and, if final approval of the
application is required, shall grant final approval only if the application
for approval demonstrates that the conditions specified by the
Commission have been met by the applicant.
§ 425-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:663
§ 425-217. Stormwater control. [Added 5-22-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-40]
A. Scope and purpose.
(1) Purpose.
(a) It is hereby determined that:
[1] Land development projects and associated disturbance of
vegetation and soil and changes in land cover, including
increases in impervious cover, alter the hydrologic
response of local watersheds and increase stormwater
runoff rates and volumes. If inadequately or improperly
managed, this stormwater runoff can deplete groundwater
resources and increase flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition.
[2] This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities
of waterborne pollutants.
[3] Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpointsource
pollutants have occurred in the past as a result of
land development, and contribute to the degradation of
the water resources of the City of Vineland.
[4] Certain lands of the City of Vineland lie within the
Pinelands Area, and therefore, development in this portion
of the City of Vineland is subject to the requirements of the
Pinelands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.) and
the implementing regulations and minimum standards
contained in the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan (CMP) (N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.) . The purpose and
intent of these regulations and standards is to promote
orderly development of the Pinelands so as to preserve and
protect the significant and unique natural, ecological,
agricultural, archaeological, historical, scenic, cultural
and recreational resources of the Pinelands.
[5] Pinelands Area resources are to be protected in
accordance with Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan at N.J.A.C. 7:50 et seq., New Jersey's Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq., and New
Jersey's surface water quality antidegradation policies
contained in the New Jersey Surface Water Quality
Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1 et seq. Permitted uses shall
maintain the ecological character and quality of the
Pinelands, including good water quality and natural rates
and volumes of flow.
[6] Increased stormwater rates and volumes and the
sediments and pollutants associated with stormwater
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:664
runoff from future development projects within the
Pinelands Area have the potential to adversely affect the
City of Vineland's streams and water resources and the
streams and water resources of downstream
municipalities.
[7] Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint-source
pollution can be controlled and minimized through the
regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites.
[8] It is in the public interest to regulate the discharge of
stormwater runoff from major development projects, as
defined in § 425-217G of this section, conducted within the
Pinelands Area, as provided in this section, in order to
control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates
and volumes, to maintain groundwater recharge, and to
control and minimize soil erosion, stream channel erosion
and nonpoint-source pollution associated with stormwater
runoff.
(b) Therefore, it is the purpose of this section to establish
minimum stormwater management requirements and controls
for major development, consistent with the statewide
stormwater requirements at N.J.A.C. 7:8 et seq., the
regulations and standards contained in the Pinelands CMP, and
the provisions of the adopted Master Plan and land use
ordinances of the City of Vineland.
(2) Goals and techniques.
(a) Through this section, the City of Vineland has established the
following goals for stormwater control:
[1] To reduce flood damage, including damage to life and
property;
[2] To minimize any increase in stormwater runoff from new
development;
[3] To reduce soil erosion from any development or
construction project;
[4] To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts
and bridges and other in-stream structures;
[5] To maintain groundwater recharge;
[6] To minimize any increase in nonpoint pollution;
[7] To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their
biological functions, as well as for drainage;
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:665
[8] To restore, protect, maintain and enhance the quality of
the streams and water resources of the City of Vineland
and the ecological character and quality of the Pinelands
Area;
[9] To minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff from new and
existing development in order to restore, protect, enhance
and maintain the chemical, physical and biological
integrity of the surface waters and groundwaters of the
City of Vineland, to protect public health and to enhance
the domestic, municipal, recreational, industrial and other
uses of water; and
[10] To protect public safety through the proper design and
operation of stormwater management basins.
(b) In order to achieve the goals for stormwater control set forth in
this section, the City of Vineland has identified the following
management techniques:
[1] Implementation of multiple stormwater management best
management practices (BMPs) may be necessary to
achieve the performance standards for stormwater runoff
quantity and rate, groundwater recharge, erosion control,
and stormwater runoff quality established through this
section.
[2] Compliance with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate,
groundwater recharge, erosion control, and stormwater
runoff quality standards established through N.J.A.C.
7:8-1.1 et seq., and this section shall be accomplished to
the maximum extent practicable through the use of
nonstructural BMPs before relying on structural BMPs.
Nonstructural BMPs are also known as low-impact
development (LID) techniques.
[3] Nonstructural BMPs shall include both environmentally
sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being
exposed to stormwater.
[4] Source control plans shall be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature and the
anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
[5] Structural BMPs, where necessary, shall be integrated
with nonstructural stormwater management strategies
and proper maintenance plans.
[6] When using structural BMPs, multiple stormwater
management measures, smaller in size and distributed
spatially throughout the land development site, shall be
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:666
used wherever possible to achieve the performance
standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater
recharge established through this section before relying
on a single, larger stormwater management measure to
achieve these performance standards.
(3) Applicability. This section shall apply to:
(a) All site plans and subdivisions for major developments
occurring within the Pinelands Area that require preliminary
or final site plan or subdivision review; and
(b) All major development projects undertaken by the City of
Vineland.
(4) Procedures. In addition to other development review procedures
set forth in the Code of the City of Vineland, major developments
located within the Pinelands Area shall comply with the stormwater
management requirements and specifications set forth in this
section. New agricultural development that meets the definition of
major development in § 425-217G of this section shall be submitted
to the appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.4(b).
(5) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
(a) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan
review process and do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other applicable ordinance, code,
rule, regulation, statute, act or other provision of law.
(b) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other
provision of law, except that, where any provision of this
section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by
any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, the more restrictive or stringent provisions or higher
standards shall control.
(c) In the event that a regional stormwater management plan(s) is
prepared and formally adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et
seq., for any drainage area(s) or watershed(s) of which the City
of Vineland is a part, the stormwater provisions of such a
plan(s) shall be adopted by the City of Vineland within one year
of the adoption of a regional stormwater management plan
(RSWMP) as an amendment to an areawide water quality
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:667
management plan. Local ordinances proposed to implement
the RSWMP shall be submitted to the Commission for
certification within six months of the adoption of the RSWMP
per N.J.A.C. 7:8 and the Pinelands CMP (N.J.A.C. 7:50.).
B. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a site
development that is subject to this section, the applicant shall
submit all of the required components of the checklist for the
site development stormwater plan at § 425-217B(3) below as
part of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan
approval. These required components are in addition to any
other information required under any provisions of the City of
Vineland's Land Use Ordinance or by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the site development
project meets the standards set forth in this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with § 425-217C(3) of this section.
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development stormwater plan shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or
official from whom municipal approval is sought. That municipal
board or official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning
and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the
checklist requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the
project meets the standards set forth in this section.
(3) Checklist requirements. Any application for approval of a major
development shall include at least the following information. All
required engineering plans shall be submitted to the City of
Vineland and the Pinelands Commission in CAD Format 15 or
higher, registered and rectified to NJ State Plane Feet NAD83 or
Shape Format NJ State Plane Feet NAD83, and all other documents
shall be submitted in both paper and commonly used electronic file
formats such as pdf, word processing, database or spreadsheet
files. Ten copies of each item shall be submitted.
(a) Topographic base map. The applicant shall submit a
topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of
300 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a
scale of one inch equals 200 feet or greater, showing one-foot
contour intervals. The map shall indicate the following:
existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils,
highly erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams that
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:668
drain into or upstream of any Category One or Pinelands
waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing surface and subsurface humanmade
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property
lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown. The City of Vineland or the Pinelands
Commission may require upstream tributary drainage system
information as necessary.
(b) Environmental site analysis. The applicant shall submit a
written description along with the drawings of the natural and
human-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include:
[1] A discussion of environmentally critical areas, soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on
the site. Particular attention should be given to unique,
unusual or environmentally sensitive features and to those
that provide particular opportunities for or constraints on
development; and
[2] Detailed soil and other environmental conditions on the
portion of the site proposed for installation of any
stormwater BMPs, including, at a minimum: soils report
based on on-site soil tests; locations and spot elevations in
plan view of test pits and permeability tests; permeability
test data and calculations; and any other required soil data
(e.g., mounding analyses results) correlated with location
and elevation of each test site; cross section of proposed
stormwater BMP with side-by-side depiction of soil profile
drawn to scale and seasonal high-water table elevation
identified; and any other information necessary to
demonstrate the suitability of the specific proposed
structural and nonstructural stormwater management
measures relative to the environmental conditions on the
portion(s) of the site proposed for implementation of those
measures.
(c) Project description and site plan(s). The applicant shall submit
a map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map,
indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings,
roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for
stormwater management and sediment control, and other
permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas
where alterations will occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan
and justification for proposed changes in natural conditions
shall also be provided.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:669
(d) Land use planning and source control plan.
[1] The applicant shall submit a detailed land use planning
and source control plan which provides a description of
how the site will be developed to meet the erosion control,
groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff quantity and
quality standards at § 425-217D through use of
nonstructural or low-impact development techniques and
source controls to the maximum extent practicable before
relying on structural BMPs. The land use planning and
source control plan shall include a detailed narrative and
associated illustrative maps and/or plans that specifically
address how each of the following nine nonstructural
strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the NJDEP
Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5) and set
forth below, Subsections B(3)(d)[1][a] through [i], will be
implemented to the maximum extent practicable to meet
the standards at § 425-217D of this section on the site. If
one or more of the nine nonstructural strategies will not be
implemented on the site, the applicant shall provide a
detailed rationale establishing a basis for the contention
that use of the strategy is not practicable on the site.
[a] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or
areas particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment
loss;
[b] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or
disconnect the flow of runoff over impervious
surfaces;
[c] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features
and vegetation;
[d] Minimize the decrease in the predevelopment time of
concentration;
[e] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and
grading;
[f] Minimize soil compaction and all other soil
disturbance;
[g] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that provides
for the retention and planting of native plants and
minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides,
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24;
[h] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
and
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:670
[i] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize
the use or exposure of pollutants at the site in order to
prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants
into stormwater runoff. These source controls shall
include, but are not limited to:
[i] Site design features that help to prevent
accumulation of trash and debris in drainage
systems;
[ii] Site design features that help to prevent
discharge of trash and debris from drainage
systems;
[iii] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial
developments; and
[iv] Applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., and implementing rules, when establishing
vegetation after land disturbance.
[2] For sites where stormwater will be generated from high
pollutant loading areas or where stormwater will be
exposed to source material, as defined in § 425-217G of
this section, the applicant shall also demonstrate in the
land use planning and source control plan that the
requirements of § 425-217D have been met.
[3] The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the
performance standards in § 425-217D of this section is not
required for development sites creating less than one acre
of disturbance. However, each application for major
development and any other application where the City of
Vineland otherwise requires a landscaping plan shall
contain a landscaping or revegetation plan in accordance
with the CMP standards at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c). In
addition, the applicant shall demonstrate that, at a
minimum, existing trees and vegetation on the
development site will be preserved and protected
according to the minimum standards established by
provisions of the City of Vineland Land Use Ordinance,
Zoning Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance
approval.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The applicant shall
submit a map, at the same scale as the topographic base map,
depicting the following information:
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:671
[1] The total area to be disturbed, paved and/or built upon,
proposed surface contours, land area to be occupied by the
stormwater management facilities and the type of
vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed plan to
manage and dispose of stormwater; and
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention (if applicable) and emergency spillway
provisions with maximum discharge capacity of each
spillway.
(f) Calculations (groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff
rate, volume and quality). The applicant shall submit
comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 425-217C. The standards for
groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff rate, volume and
quality required by § 425-217D shall be met using the methods,
calculations and assumptions provided in § 425-217C.
(g) Inspection, maintenance and repair plan. The applicant shall
submit a detailed plan describing how the proposed
stormwater management measure(s) shall meet the
maintenance and repair requirements of § 425-217F of this
section. Said plan shall include, at a minimum, the following
elements:
[1] The frequency with which inspections will be made;
[2] The specific maintenance tasks and requirements for each
proposed structural and nonstructural BMP;
[3] The name, address and telephone number for the entity
responsible for implementation of the maintenance plan;
[4] The reporting requirements; and
[5] Copies of the inspection and maintenance reporting
sheets.
(h) Exception from submission requirements. An exception may be
granted from submission of any of these required components
[except Subsection B(3)(g) above, Inspection, maintenance and
repair plan] if its absence will not materially affect the review
process. However, items required pursuant to the application
requirements in the Pinelands CMP [N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.2(b)] shall
be submitted to the New Jersey Pinelands Commission unless
the Executive Director waives or modifies the application
requirements.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:672
C. Methodologies for the calculation of stormwater runoff rate and
volume, stormwater runoff quality, and groundwater recharge.
(1) Method of calculating stormwater runoff rate and volume.
(a) In complying with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate
standards in § 425-217D(2), the design engineer shall calculate
the stormwater runoff rate and volume using the USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff
Equation, Runoff Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit
Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and Technical Release 55 -
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, incorporated herein
by reference, as amended and supplemented. Alternative
methods of calculation may be utilized, provided such
alternative methods are at least as protective as the NRCS
methodology when considered on a regional stormwater
management basis.
(b) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology,
the design engineer shall separately calculate and then
combine the runoff volumes from pervious and directly
connected impervious surfaces within each drainage area
within the parcel.
(c) Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the Two-Step
Method described in the current New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual or the NRCS methodology.
(d) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology,
the design engineer shall use appropriate twenty-four-hour
rainfall depths as developed for the project site by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(e) When calculating stormwater runoff for predeveloped site
conditions, the design engineer shall use the following criteria:
[1] When selecting or calculating runoff curve numbers (CNs)
for predeveloped project site conditions, the project site's
land cover shall be assumed to be woods in good condition.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate
runoff coefficients, if:
[a] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion
thereof without interruption for at least five years
immediately prior to the time of application; and
[b] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:673
photographs, affidavits, and/or other acceptable land
use records.
[2] If more than one land cover have existed on the site during
the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be
used for the computations.
[3] All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in
good hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be
assumed to have conservation treatment.
[4] In calculating predeveloped site stormwater runoff, the
design engineer shall include the effects of all land
features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands,
depressions, hedgerows, and culverts, that affect
predeveloped site stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes.
[5] Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer
shall include such effects in the measure's design.
(2) Method of calculating stormwater runoff quality.
(a) In complying with the stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 425-217D(6)(a), the design engineer shall calculate the
stormwater runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff Equation,
Runoff Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph,
as described in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part
630 - Hydrology and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds, as amended and supplemented.
(b) The design engineer shall also use the NJDEP Water Quality
Design Storm, which is 1.25 inches of rainfall falling in a
nonlinear pattern in two hours. Details of the water quality
design storm are shown in Table 1.
(c) Calculation of runoff volumes, peak rates, and hydrographs for
the water quality design storm may take into account the
implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution1
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:674
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution1
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
NOTES:
1 Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(a).
(d) Total suspended solids (TSS) reduction calculations.
[1] If more than one stormwater BMP in series is necessary to
achieve the required eighty-percent TSS reduction for a
site, the applicant shall utilize the following formula to
calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:675
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application
of both BMPs
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
first BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP
[2] If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eightypercent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage
area, unless the runoff from the subareas coverage on site,
in which case the removal rate can be demonstrated
through a calculation using a weighted average.
(e) TSS removal rates for stormwater BMPs.
[1] For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual.
The BMP Manual may be obtained from the address
identified in § 425-217K(1) or found on the NJDEP's
website at www.njstormwater.org. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in
Table 2.
[2] Alternative stormwater management measures, removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the City of Vineland. Any alternative
stormwater management measure, removal rate or
method of calculating the removal rate shall be subject to
approval by the City of Vineland, and a copy shall be
provided to the following:
[a] The Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box
418, Trenton, NJ 08625-0418; and
[b] The New Jersey Pinelands Commission, P.O. Box 7,
New Lisbon, NJ 08064.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:676
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs2
Best
Management
Practice
TSS
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Nitrogen
Percent
Removal
Rate
Bioretention
systems
90 60 30
Constructed
stormwater
wetland
90 50 30
Extended
detention
basin
40 to 60
(final rate
based upon
detention
time; see
New Jersey
BMP
Manual,
Chap. 9)
20 20
Infiltration
basin
80 60 50
Manufactured
treatment
device
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 425-217C
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 425-217C
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 425-217C
80 (porous
paving)
80
(permeable
pavers with
storage
bed)
60 50
Pervious
paving
systems 0; volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage
bed)
0; volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage
bed)
0; volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage
bed)
Sand filter 80 50 35
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:677
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs2
Best
Management
Practice
TSS
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Nitrogen
Percent
Removal
Rate
60 (turf
grass)
70 (native
grasses,
meadow
and planted
woods)
Vegetative
filter strip
(For filter
strips with
multiple
vegetated
covers, the
final TSS
removal rate
should be
based upon a
weighted
average of
the adopted
rates shown
in Table 2,
based upon
the relative
flow lengths
through each
cover type.)
80
(indigenous
woods) 30 30
Wet pond/
retention
basin
50 to 90
(final rate
based upon
pool
volume and
detention
time; see
NJ BMP
Manual)
50 30
NOTES:
2 Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(c) and New Jersey BMP
Manual Chapter 4.
(f) Nutrient removal rates for stormwater BMPs. For purposes of
post-development nutrient load reduction calculations, Table 2
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual. If
alternative stormwater BMPs are proposed, the applicant shall
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:678
demonstrate that the selected BMPs will achieve the nutrient
removal standard required in § 425-217D(6).
(3) Methods of calculating groundwater recharge.
(a) In complying with the groundwater recharge requirements in
§ 425-217D(3)(a)[1], the design engineer may be calculate
groundwater recharge in accordance with the New Jersey
Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS) computer
program incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is
available in § 425-217J(1) or from the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(b) Alternative groundwater recharge calculation methods to meet
these requirements may be used upon approval by the
Municipal Engineer.
(c) In complying with the groundwater recharge requirements in
§ 425-217D(3)(a)[2], the design engineer shall:
[1] Calculate stormwater runoff volumes in accordance with
the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Runoff Curve Numbers, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, as amended and supplemented; and
[2] Use appropriate two-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall depths
as developed for the project site by the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(d) When calculating groundwater recharge or stormwater runoff
for predeveloped site conditions, the design engineer shall use
the following criteria:
[1] When selecting land covers or calculating runoff curve
numbers (CNs) for predeveloped project site conditions,
the project site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate
runoff coefficients, if:
[a] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion
thereof without interruption for at least five years
immediately prior to the time of application; and
[b] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of
photographs, affidavits, and/or other acceptable land
use records.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:679
[2] If more than one land cover, other than woods, have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior
to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest
runoff potential (including woods) shall be used for the
computations.
[3] All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in
good hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be
assumed to have conservation treatment.
D. Stormwater management performance standards for major
development.
(1) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the performance
standards in § 425-217D for major development shall be met by
incorporating the nine nonstructural strategies identified in
Subchapter 5 of the NJ Stormwater Management Rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:8-5) and set forth in § 425-217B(3)(d)[1] into the
design. The applicant shall identify within the land use
planning and source control plan required by § 425-217B(3)(d)
of this section how each of the nine nonstructural measures
will be incorporated into the design of the project to the
maximum extent practicable.
(b) If the applicant contends that it is not practical for
engineering, environmental or safety reasons to incorporate
any of the nine nonstructural strategies into the design of a
particular project, the applicant shall provide a detailed
rationale establishing a basis for the contention that use of the
strategy is not practical on the site. This rationale shall be
submitted in accordance with the checklist requirements
established by § 425-217B to the City of Vineland. A
determination by the City of Vineland that this rationale is
inadequate or without merit shall result in a denial of the
application unless one of the following conditions are met:
[1] The land use planning and source control plan is amended
to include a description of how all nine nonstructural
measures will be implemented on the development site,
and the amended plan is approved by the City of Vineland;
[2] The land use planning and source control plan is amended
to provide an alternative nonstructural strategy or
measure that is not included in the list of nine
nonstructural measures but still meets the performance
standards in § 425-217D, and the amended plan is
approved by the City of Vineland; or
[3] The land use planning and source control plan is amended
to provide an adequate rationale for the contention that
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:680
use of the particular strategy is not practical on the site,
and the amended plan is approved by the City of Vineland.
(c) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each
applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing trees
and vegetation on the development site will be preserved,
protected and maintained according to the minimum standards
established by provisions of the City of Vineland Land Use
Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or
variance approval. Existing trees and vegetation shall be
protected during construction activities in accordance with the
Standard for Tree Protection During Construction provided in
the NJ State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented.
(d) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each
application for major development, and any other application
where the City of Vineland otherwise requires a landscaping
plan, shall contain a landscaping or revegetation plan in
accordance with the Pinelands CMP standards at N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.24(c).
(e) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in
§ 425-217D shall be dedicated to a government entity; shall be
subjected to a conservation easement filed with the
appropriate county clerk's office; or shall be subjected to an
equivalent form of restriction approved by the City of Vineland
that ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater
management measure is maintained in perpetuity, as detailed
in § 425-217F of this section.
(f) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, which
may be obtained from the address identified in § 425-217K(1)
or found on the NJDEP's website at www.njstormwater.org.
(g) Exception for major development sites creating less than one
acre of disturbance. The use of nonstructural strategies to
meet the performance standards in § 425-217D of this section
is not required for major development creating less than one
acre of disturbance. However, the following requirements shall
be met:
[1] Each application for major development and any other
application where the City of Vineland otherwise requires
a landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or
revegetation plan prepared in accordance with the
Pinelands CMP standards [N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c)];
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:681
[2] Each applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum,
existing trees and vegetation on the development site will
be preserved and protected according to the minimum
standards established by provisions of the City of Vineland
Land Use Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or by conditions of
zoning or variance approval; and
[3] Existing trees and vegetation shall be protected during
construction activities in accordance with the Standard for
Tree Protection During Construction provided in the NJ
State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented.
(2) Stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards.
(a) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from
any point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetlands
transition area or surface water body. In addition, stormwater
runoff shall not be directed in such a way as to increase the
volume and/or rate of discharge into any surface water body
from that which existed prior to development of the site.
(b) To the maximum extent practical, there shall be no direct
discharge of stormwater runoff onto farm fields so as to protect
farm crops from damage due to flooding, erosion and long-term
saturation of cultivated crops and cropland.
(c) For all major developments, the total runoff volume generated
from the net increase in impervious surfaces by a ten-year,
twenty-four-hour storm shall be retained and infiltrated on site.
(d) In addition, the design engineer, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations contained in § 425-217C, shall either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the post-developed stormwater runoff hydrographs
from the project site for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storms do not exceed, at any point in time, the site's
predeveloped runoff hydrographs for the same storms.
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that under post-developed site conditions:
[a] There is no increase in predeveloped stormwater
runoff rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storms; and
[b] Any increased stormwater runoff volume or change in
stormwater runoff timing for the two-, ten-, and one-
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:682
hundred-year storms will not increase flood damage at
or downstream of the project site. When performing
this analysis for predeveloped site conditions, all offsite
development levels shall reflect existing
conditions. When performing this analysis for postdeveloped
site conditions, all off-site development
levels shall reflect full development in accordance
with current zoning and land use ordinances.
[3] Demonstrate that the peak post-developed stormwater
runoff rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storms are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the site's peak predeveloped stormwater
runoff rates for the same storms. Peak outflow rates from
on-site stormwater measures for these storms shall be
adjusted where necessary to account for the discharge of
increased stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes from
project site areas not controlled by the on-site measures.
These percentages do not have to be applied to those
portions of the project site that are not proposed for
development at the time of application, provided that such
areas are:
[a] Protected from future development by imposition of a
conservation easement, deed restriction or other
acceptable legal measures; or
[b] Would be subject to review under these standards if
they are proposed for any degree of development in
the future.
(e) In tidal flood hazard areas, a stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection D(2)(d)[1], [2] and [3]
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(f) The standards for stormwater runoff quantity and rate
required by this section shall be met using the methods,
calculations and assumptions provided in § 425-217C.
(3) Groundwater recharge standards.
(a) For all major developments, with the exception of those
described in § 425-217D(3)(d) below, the design engineer,
using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff and
groundwater recharge calculations contained in § 425-217C,
shall either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the post-developed project site maintains 100% of the
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:683
site's predeveloped average annual groundwater recharge
volume; or
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that any increase in the project site's stormwater runoff
volume for the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm from
predeveloped to post-developed conditions is infiltrated on
site.
(b) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all site
groundwater recharge measures so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are
not limited to, raising the groundwater table so as to cause
surface ponding, flooding of basements and other subsurface
structures and areas, preventing a stormwater infiltration
basin from completely draining via infiltration within 72 hours
of a design storm event, and interference with the proper
operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
surface and subsurface facilities in the vicinity of the
groundwater recharge measure.
(c) The standards for groundwater recharge required by this
section shall be met using the methods, calculations and
assumptions provided in § 425-217C.
(d) Exceptions. The preceding groundwater recharge standards
shall not apply to sites that create less than one acre of
disturbance.
(4) Erosion control standards. The minimum design and performance
standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and its
implementing regulations, N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.1 through 2:90-1.4.
(5) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from
any point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetlands
transition area or surface water body.
(b) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the total suspended solids (TSS) load in the stormwater
runoff from the post-developed site by 80%, expressed as an
annual average.
(c) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce the nutrient load in the stormwater runoff from the
post-developed site by the maximum extent practicable. In
achieving this reduction, the design of the development site
shall include nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures that optimize nutrient removal while
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:684
still achieving the groundwater recharge, runoff quantity and
rate, and TSS removal standards in this section.
(d) The standards for stormwater runoff quality required by this
section shall be met using the methods, calculations,
assumptions and pollutant removal rates provided in
§ 425-217C.
(e) Exceptions.
[1] The preceding stormwater runoff quality standards shall
not apply to the following major development sites:
[a] Major development sites where less than 0.25 acre of
additional impervious surface is proposed; or
[b] Major residential development sites that create less
than one acre of disturbance.
[2] The TSS reduction requirement in § 425-217D(6)(b) shall
not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge
regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS
imposed under the NJPDES rules (N.J.A.C. 7:14A) or in a
discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement.
[3] The stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards in
§ 425-217D(2) shall still be met for all major development
sites.
(6) Additional stormwater quality standards for high pollutant loading
areas and areas where stormwater runoff is exposed to source
material.
(a) This subsection applies to the following areas of a major
development as defined in § 425-217G of this section:
[1] High pollutant loading areas (HPLAs); and
[2] Areas where stormwater is exposed to source material.
(b) For a major development in areas described in Subsection
D(6)(a)[1] or [2] above, in addition to the infiltration
requirements specified in § 425-217D(2)(b) and the
groundwater recharge requirements specified in
§ 425-217D(3), the applicant shall demonstrate in the land use
planning and source control plan required in § 425-217B(3)(d)
that the following requirements have been met:
[1] The extent of the areas described in Subsection D(6)(a)[1]
and [2] above have been minimized on the development
site to the maximum extent practicable;
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:685
[2] The stormwater runoff from the areas described in
Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above is segregated to the
maximum extent practicable from the stormwater runoff
generated from the remainder of the site such that comingling
of the stormwater runoff from the areas
described in Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above and the
remainder of the site will be minimized;
[3] The amount of precipitation falling directly on the areas
described in Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above is
minimized to the maximum extent practicable by means of
a canopy, roof or other similar structure that reduces the
generation of stormwater runoff; and
[4] The stormwater runoff from or co-mingled with the areas
described in Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above for the
water quality design storm defined in § 425-217C(2), Table
1, shall be subject to pretreatment by one or more of the
following stormwater BMPs, designed in accordance with
the New Jersey BMP Manual to provide ninety-percent
TSS removal:
[a] Bioretention system;
[b] Sand filter;
[c] Wet ponds which shall be hydraulically disconnected
by a minimum of two feet of vertical separation from
the seasonal high-water table and shall be designed to
achieve a minimum eighty-percent TSS removal rate;
[d] Constructed stormwater wetlands; and/or
[e] Media filtration system manufactured treatment
device with a minimum eighty-percent TSS removal as
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and as certified by NJDEP.
[5] If the potential for contamination of stormwater runoff by
petroleum products exists on site, prior to being conveyed
to the pretreatment BMP required in § 425-217D(4)(b)[4]
above, the stormwater runoff from the areas described in
Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above shall be conveyed
through an oil/grease separator or other equivalent
manufactured filtering device to remove the petroleum
hydrocarbons. The applicant shall provide the reviewing
agency with sufficient data to demonstrate acceptable
performance of the device.
(7) Threatened and endangered species and associated habitat
standards. Stormwater management measures shall address the
impacts of the development on habitat for threatened and
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:686
endangered species, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(c) and
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27, 7:50-6.33 and 7:50-6.34.
(8) Exceptions and mitigation requirements.
(a) Exceptions from strict compliance from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality requirements established by this section may be
granted, at the discretion of the City of Vineland and subject to
approval by the Pinelands Commission, provided that all of the
following conditions are met:
[1] The exception is consistent with that allowed by the City of
Vineland;
[2] The City of Vineland has an adopted and effective
municipal stormwater management plan in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.4, which includes a mitigation plan in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.2(c)11 and is also certified
by the Pinelands Commission. The mitigation plan shall
identify what measures are necessary to offset the deficit
created by granting the exception, and the municipality
shall submit a written report to the county review agency
and the NJDEP describing the exception and the required
mitigation. Guidance for developing municipal stormwater
management plans, including mitigation plans, is available
from the NJDEP Division of Watershed Management and
the New Jersey BMP Manual.
[3] The applicant demonstrates that mitigation, in addition to
the requirements of mitigation plan discussed in
Subsection D(8)(a)[2] above, will be provided, consistent
with one of the following options:
[a] Mitigation may be provided off site, but within the
Pinelands Area and within the same drainage area as
the development site, and shall meet or exceed the
equivalent recharge, quality or quantity performance
standard which is lacking on the development site due
to the exception; or
[b] In lieu of the required mitigation, a monetary in lieu
contribution may be provided by the applicant to the
City of Vineland in accordance with the following:
[i] The amount of the in lieu contribution shall be
determined by the City of Vineland, but the
maximum in lieu contribution required shall be
equivalent to the cost of implementing and
maintaining the stormwater management
measure(s) for which the exception is granted;
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:687
[ii] The in lieu contribution shall be used to fund an
off-site stormwater control mitigation project(s)
located within the Pinelands Area, within the
same drainage area as the development site, and
shall meet or exceed the equivalent recharge,
quality or quantity performance standard which is
lacking on the development site. Such mitigation
project shall be identified by the City of Vineland
in the City of Vineland's adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. The stormwater
control project to which the monetary
contribution will be applied shall be identified by
the City of Vineland at the time the exception is
granted. The applicant shall amend the project
description and site plan required in
§ 425-217B(3)(c) to incorporate a description of
both the standards for which an on-site exception
is being granted and of the selected off-site
mitigation project.
[iii] The City of Vineland shall expend the in lieu
contribution to implement the selected off-site
mitigation project within five years from the date
that payment is received. Should the City of
Vineland fail to expend the in lieu contribution
within the required time frame, the mitigation
option provided in § 425-217D(8)(a)[3][b][ii] of
this section shall be void and the City of Vineland
shall be prohibited from collecting in lieu
contributions.
(b) An exception from strict compliance granted in accordance
with Subsection D(8)(a) above shall not constitute a waiver of
strict compliance from the requirements of the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan at N.J.A.C. 7:50. An
applicant should contact the Pinelands Commission to
determine whether a waiver of strict compliance is also
required in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50, Subchapter 4, Part
V.
E. Design, construction and safety standards for structural stormwater
management measures.
(1) General design and construction standards.
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to meet the standards established in this section.
These standards have been developed to protect public safety,
conserve natural features, create an aesthetically pleasing site
and promote proper on-site stormwater management.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:688
(b) The following structural stormwater management measures
may be utilized as part of a stormwater management system at
a major land development in the Pinelands, provided that the
applicant demonstrates that they are designed, constructed
and maintained so as to meet the standards and requirements
established by this section. If alternative stormwater
management measures are proposed, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the selected measures will achieve the
standards established by this section.
[1] Bioretention systems;
[2] Constructed stormwater wetlands;
[3] Extended detention basins;
[4] Infiltration basins;
[5] Vegetated filter strips;
[6] Infiltration basins and trenches;
[7] Wet ponds with suitable liners;
[8] Pervious paving systems; and
[9] Manufactured treatment devices, provided their pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation
for Advanced Technology and certified by the NJDEP.
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including environmentally critical areas, wetlands, flood-prone
areas, slopes, depth to seasonal high-water table, soil type,
permeability and texture, and drainage area and drainage
patterns.
(d) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed and constructed to be strong, durable and corrosionresistant
(measures that are consistent with the relevant
portions of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.8 shall be deemed to
meet this requirement); to minimize and facilitate maintenance
and repairs; and to ensure proper functioning.
(e) For all stormwater management measures at a development
site, each applicant shall submit a detailed inspection,
maintenance and repair plan consistent with the requirements
of § 425-217E of this section.
(f) To the maximum extent practicable, the design engineer shall
design structural stormwater management measures on the
development site in a manner that:
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:689
[1] Limits site disturbance, maximizes stormwater
management efficiencies, and maintains or improves
aesthetic conditions.
[2] Utilizes multiple stormwater management measures,
smaller in size and distributed spatially throughout the
land development site, instead of a single larger structural
stormwater management measure
[3] Incorporates pretreatment measures. Pretreatment can
extend the functional life and increase the pollutant
removal capability of a structural stormwater management
measure. Pretreatment measures may be designed in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual or other
sources approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(g) Stormwater management basins shall be designed in a manner
that complements and mimics the existing natural landscape,
including but not limited to the following design strategies:
[1] Use of natural, nonwetland wooded depressions for
stormwater runoff storage; and
[2] Establishment of attractive landscaping in and around the
basin that mimics the existing vegetation and incorporates
native Pinelands plants, including, but not limited to, the
species listed in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 and 7:50-6.26.
(h) Stormwater management basins shall be designed with gently
sloping sides. The maximum allowable basin side slope shall be
three horizontal to one vertical (3:1).
(i) Guidance on the design and construction of structural
stormwater management measures may be found in the New
Jersey BMP Manual. Other guidance sources may also be used
upon approval by the Municipal Engineer.
(j) After all construction activities and required field testing have
been completed on the development site, as-built plans
depicting design and as-built elevations of all stormwater
management measures shall be prepared by a licensed land
surveyor and submitted to the Municipal Engineer. Based upon
the Municipal Engineer's review of the as-built plans, all
corrections or remedial actions deemed by the Municipal
Engineer to be necessary due to the failure to comply with the
standards established by this section and/or any reasons of
public health or safety shall be completed by the applicant. In
lieu of review by the Municipal Engineer, the City of Vineland
reserves the right to engage a professional engineer to review
the as-built plans. The applicant shall pay all costs associated
with such review.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:690
(2) Design and construction standards for stormwater infiltration
BMPs.
(a) Stormwater infiltration BMPs, such as bioretention systems
with infiltration, dry wells, infiltration basins, pervious paving
systems with storage beds, and sand filters with infiltration,
shall be designed, constructed and maintained to completely
drain the total runoff volume generated by the basin's
maximum design storm within 72 hours after a storm event.
Runoff storage for greater times can render the BMP
ineffective and may result in anaerobic conditions, odor and
both water quality and mosquito breeding problems.
(b) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be designed, constructed
and maintained to provide a minimum separation of at least
two feet between the elevation of the lowest point of the
bottom of the infiltration BMP and the seasonal high-water
table.
(c) A stormwater infiltration BMP shall be sited in suitable soils
verified by field testing to have permeability rates between one
inch and 20 inches per hour. If such site soils do not exist or if
the design engineer demonstrates that it is not practical for
engineering, environmental or safety reasons to site the
stormwater infiltration BMP(s) in such soils, then the
stormwater infiltration BMP(s) may be sited in soils verified by
field testing to have permeability rates in excess of 20 inches
per hour, provided that a bioretention system, designed,
installed and maintained in accordance with the New Jersey
BMP Manual, is installed to meet one of the following
conditions:
[1] The bioretention system is constructed as a separate
measure designed to provide pretreatment of stormwater
and to convey the pretreated stormwater into the
infiltration BMP; or
[2] The bioretention system is integrated into and made part
of the infiltration BMP and, as such, does not require an
underdrain system. If this option is selected, the
infiltration BMP shall be designed and constructed so that
the maximum water depth in the bioretention system
portion of the BMP during treatment of the stormwater
quality design storm is 12 inches in accordance with the
New Jersey BMP Manual.
(d) The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within a
BMP that relies on infiltration shall be 0.5 inch per hour. A
factor of safety of two shall be applied to the soil's field-tested
permeability rate to determine the soil's design permeability
rate. For example, if the field-tested permeability rate of the
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:691
soil is four inches per hour, its design permeability rate would
be two inches per hour. The minimum design permeability rate
for the soil within a stormwater infiltration basin shall also be
sufficient to achieve the minimum seventy-two-hour drain time
described in Subsection E(2)(a) above. The maximum design
permeability shall be 10 inches per hour.
(e) A soil's field-tested permeability rate shall be determined in
accordance with the following:
[1] The predevelopment field test permeability rate shall be
determined according to the methodologies provided in
§ 425-217J(3)(c) of this section;
[2] The results of the required field permeability tests shall
demonstrate a minimum tested infiltration rate of one inch
per hour;
[3] After all construction activities have been completed on
the site and the finished grade has been established in the
infiltration BMP, post-development field permeability tests
shall also be conducted according to the methodologies
provided in § 425-217J(3)(c) of this section;
[4] If the results of the post-development field permeability
tests fail to achieve the minimum required design
permeability rates in Subsection E(2)(d) above utilizing a
factor of safety of two, the stormwater infiltration BMP
shall be renovated and retested until such minimum
required design permeability rates are achieved; and
[5] The results of all field permeability tests shall be certified
by a professional engineer and transmitted to the
Municipal Engineer.
(f) To help ensure maintenance of the design permeability rate
over time, a six-inch layer of K5 soil shall be placed on the
bottom of a stormwater infiltration BMP. This soil layer shall
meet the textural and permeability specifications of a K5 soil as
provided at N.J.A.C. 7:9A, Appendix A, Figure 6, and be
certified to meet these specifications by a professional
engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey. The depth to the
seasonal high-water table shall be measured from the bottom
of the K5 sand layer.
(g) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all
stormwater infiltration basins so as to avoid adverse hydraulic
impacts. Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited
to, raising the groundwater table so as to cause surface
ponding, flooding of basements and other subsurface
structures and areas; preventing a stormwater infiltration
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:692
basin from completely draining via infiltration within 72 hours
of a design storm event; and interference with the proper
operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
surface and subsurface structures in the vicinity of the
stormwater infiltration basin.
(h) The design engineer shall conduct a mounding analysis, as
defined in § 425-217G, of all stormwater infiltration BMPs. The
mounding analysis shall be conducted in accordance with the
requirements in § 425-217J(3)(c)[1]. Where the mounding
analysis identifies adverse impacts, the stormwater infiltration
BMP shall be redesigned or relocated, as appropriate.
(i) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be constructed in
accordance with the following.
[1] To avoid sedimentation that may result in clogging and
reduce the basin's permeability rate, stormwater
infiltration basins shall be constructed according to the
following:
[a] Unless the conditions in Subsection E(2)(i)[1][b]
below are met, a stormwater infiltration basin shall
not be placed into operation until its drainage area is
completely stabilized. Instead, upstream runoff shall
be diverted around the basin and into separate,
temporary stormwater management facilities and
sediment basins. Such temporary facilities and basins
shall be installed and utilized for stormwater
management and sediment control until stabilization
is achieved in accordance with the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented.
[b] If the design engineer determines that for
engineering, environmental or safety reasons
temporary stormwater management facilities and
sediment basins cannot be constructed on the site, the
stormwater infiltration basin may be placed into
operation prior to the complete stabilization of its
drainage area, provided that the basin's bottom
during this period is constructed at a depth at least
two feet higher than its final design elevation. All
other infiltration BMP construction requirements in
this section shall be followed. When the drainage area
is completely stabilized, all accumulated sediment
shall be removed from the infiltration BMP, which
shall then be excavated to its final design elevation in
accordance with the construction requirements of this
section and the performance standards in § 425-217D.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:693
[2] To avoid compaction of subgrade soils of BMPs that rely on
infiltration, no heavy equipment such as backhoes, dump
trucks or bulldozers shall be permitted to operate within
the footprint of the BMP. All excavation required to
construct a stormwater infiltration BMP shall be
performed by equipment placed outside the BMP. If this is
not possible, the soils within the excavated area shall be
renovated and tilled after construction is completed to
reverse the effects of compaction. In addition, postdevelopment
soil permeability testing shall be performed
in accordance with Subsection E(2)(e) of this section.
[3] Earthwork associated with stormwater infiltration BMP
construction, including excavation, grading, cutting or
filling, shall not be performed when soil moisture content
is above the lower plastic limit.
(3) Safety standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(a) If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. Escape provisions means the permanent installation
of ladders, steps, rungs or other features that provide readily
accessible means of ingress and egress from the outlet
structure.
(b) A trash rack is a device intended to intercept runoff-borne
trash and debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic
openings in an outlet structure of a structural stormwater
management measure. Trash racks shall be installed upstream
of such outlet structure openings as necessary to ensure
proper functioning of the structural stormwater management
measure in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack should be constructed primarily of bars
aligned in the direction of flow with one-inch spacing
between the bars to the elevation of the water quality
design storm. For elevations higher than the water quality
design storm, the bars shall be spaced no greater than 1/3
the width of the hydraulic opening it is protecting or six
inches, whichever is less. Transverse bars aligned
perpendicular to flow should be sized and spaced as
necessary for rack stability and strength.
[2] The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
performance of either the outlet structure opening it is
protecting or the overall outlet structure.
[3] The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under
clean conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity
through it to a maximum of 2.5 feet per second.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:694
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(c) An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the opening in
the top of a stormwater management measure outlet structure.
If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall
meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance;
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two
inches across the smallest dimension; and
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(d) The maximum side slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or
berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical
(3:1).
(e) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
structural stormwater management measures having a
permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four
to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately
2 1/2 feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent
water surface. See below for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:695
Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-6, Appendix A.
F. Inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater management
measures.
(1) Applicability. Projects subject to review pursuant to § 425-217A(3)
of this section shall comply with the requirements of Subection F(2)
and (3) below.
(2) General inspection, maintenance and repair plan.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare an Inspection, Maintenance
and Repair plan for the stormwater management measures,
including both structural and nonstructural measures,
incorporated into the design of a major development. This plan
shall be submitted as part of the checklist requirements
established in § 425-217B(3). Inspection and maintenance
guidelines for stormwater management measures are available
in the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(b) The inspection, maintenance and repair plan shall contain the
following:
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:696
[1] Accurate and comprehensive drawings of the site's
stormwater management measures;
[2] Specific locations of each stormwater management
measure identified by means of longitude and latitude as
well as block and lot number;
[3] Specific preventative and corrective maintenance tasks
and schedules for such tasks for each stormwater BMP;
[4] Cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment,
debris or trash removal; and
[5] The name, address and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for regular inspections and
preventative and corrective maintenance (including repair
and replacement). If the responsible person or persons is a
corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
municipality or political subdivision of this state, the name
and telephone number of an appropriate contact person
shall also be included.
(c) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under § 425-217F(2)(b) above shall maintain a
detailed log of all preventative and corrective maintenance
performed for the site's stormwater management measures,
including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders in the inspection,
maintenance and repair plan. Said records and inspection
reports shall be retained for a minimum of five years.
(d) If the inspection, maintenance and repair plan identifies a
person other than the developer (for example, a public agency
or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
inspection and maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management measure to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(e) If the person responsible for inspection, maintenance and
repair identified under § 425-217F(2)(c) above is not a public
agency, the maintenance plan and any future revisions based
on § 425-217F(2)(f) below shall be recorded upon the deed of
record for each property on which the maintenance described
in the maintenance plan shall be undertaken.
(f) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under § 425-217F(2)(b) above shall evaluate the
effectiveness of the inspection, maintenance and repair plan at
least once per year and update the plan and the deed as
needed.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:697
(g) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under § 425-217F(2)(b) above shall submit the
updated inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the
documentation required by Subection F(2)(b) and (c) above to
the City of Vineland once per year.
(h) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under § 425-217F(2)(b) above shall retain and make
available, upon request by any public entity with
administrative, health, environmental or safety authority over
the site, the inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the
documentation required by Subsection F(2)(b) and (c) above.
(3) Responsibility for inspection, repair and maintenance shall not be
assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual
property in a residential development or project, unless such owner
or tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
(4) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including, but not limited to, repairs or replacement to any
associated appurtenance of the measure; removal of sediment,
debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal;
fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; repair or
replacement of linings; and restoration of infiltration function.
(5) Stormwater management measure easements shall be provided by
the property owner as necessary for facility inspections and
maintenance and preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance,
infiltration and detention areas and facilities. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in the maintenance agreement.
(6) In the event that the stormwater management measure becomes a
public health nuisance or danger to public safety or public health,
or if it is in need of maintenance or repair, the City of Vineland shall
so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that
notice, the responsible person shall have 14 days to effect
maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved
by the Municipal Engineer or the Municipal Engineer's designee.
The City of Vineland, at its discretion, may extend the time allowed
for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the
responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance
and repair within the allowable time, the City of Vineland may
immediately proceed to do so with its own forces and equipment
and/or through contractors. The costs and expenses of such
maintenance and repair by the City of Vineland shall be entered on
the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected
with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the
maintenance and repair was performed.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:698
(7) Requirements for inspection, maintenance and repair of
stormwater BMPs that rely on infiltration.
(a) If a stormwater infiltration BMP is incorporated into the design
of a major development, the applicant shall include the
following requirements in its inspection, maintenance and
repair plan:
[1] Once per month (if needed): mow side slopes, remove litter
and debris, stabilize eroded banks, repair erosion at inflow
structure(s).
[2] After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall: ensure
that infiltration BMPs drain completely within 72 hours
after the storm event. If stored water fails to infiltrate 72
hours after the end of the storm, corrective measures shall
be taken. Raking or tilling by light equipment can assist in
maintaining infiltration capacity and break up clogged
surfaces.
[3] Four times per year (quarterly): inspect stormwater
infiltration BMPs for clogging and excessive debris and
sediment accumulation within the BMP, remove sediment
(if needed) when completely dry.
[4] Two times per year: inspect for signs of damage to
structures, repair eroded areas, check for signs of
petroleum contamination and remediate.
[5] Once per year: inspect BMPs for unwanted tree growth
and remove if necessary, disc or otherwise aerate bottom
of infiltration basin to a minimum depth of six inches.
[6] After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall: inspect
and, if necessary, remove and replace K5 sand layer and
accumulated sediment to restore original infiltration rate.
(b) Additional guidance for the inspection, maintenance and repair
of stormwater infiltration BMPs can be found in the New Jersey
BMP Manual.
(8) Financing of inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater
BMPs. An adequate means of ensuring permanent financing of the
inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater BMPs shall be
implemented and detailed in the inspection, maintenance and
repair plan. Permanent financing of the inspection, maintenance
and repair of stormwater BMPs shall be accomplished by the
assumption of the inspection and maintenance program by a
homeowners' association.
G. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:699
have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application. When used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them.
AQUACULTURE — The propagation, rearing and subsequent
harvesting of aquatic organisms in controlled or selected environments,
and their subsequent processing, packaging and marketing, including,
but not limited to, activities to intervene in the rearing process to
increase production, such as stocking, feeding, transplanting and
providing for protection from predators.
CERTIFICATION — Either a written statement signed and sealed by a
licensed New Jersey professional engineer attesting that a BMP design
or stormwater management system conforms to or meets a particular
set of standards or to action taken by the Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-3, Part II or Part IV. Depending upon the context in which
the term is used, the terms "certify" and "certified" shall be construed
accordingly.
CITY OF VINELAND — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment or other board, agency or official of the City of Vineland
with authority to approve or disapprove subdivisions, site plans,
construction permits, building permits or other applications for
development approval. For the purposes of reviewing development
applications and ensuring compliance with the requirements of this
section, the City of Vineland may designate the Municipal Engineer or
other qualified designee to act on behalf of the City of Vineland.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting
soil to greater-than-normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil
infiltration and permeability rates.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, erection, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, demolition, removal or equipping of buildings,
structures or components of a stormwater management system,
including but not limited to collection inlets, stormwater piping, swales
and all other conveyance systems, and stormwater BMPs.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:700
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DESIGN PERMEABILITY — The tested permeability rate with a factor
of safety of two applied to it (e.g., if the tested permeability rate of the
soils is four inches per hour, the design rate would be two inches per
hour).
DEVELOPMENT —
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five or
The change of or enlargement of any use or disturbance of any
land, the performance of any building or mining operation, the
division of land into two or more parcels, and the creation or
termination of rights of access or riparian rights, including, but not
limited to:
(a) A change in type of use of a structure or land;
A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in
the external appearance of a structure or land;
(b)
A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as
an increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing
establishments, offices or dwelling units in a structure or on
land;
(c)
Commencement of resource extraction or drilling or
excavation on a parcel of land;
(d)
(e) Demolition of a structure or removal of trees;
(f) Commencement of forestry activities;
Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of
land;
(g)
In connection with the use of land, the making of any material
change in noise levels, thermal conditions, or emissions of
waste material; and
(h)
Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore, bank,
or floodplain, seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or
artificial body of water.
(i)
(1)
In the case of development on agricultural land, i.e., lands used
for an agricultural use or purpose as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:50-2.11,
development means: any activity that requires a state permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Boards (CAB) and the
State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal
review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
(2)
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:701
more dwelling units; any construction or expansion of any commercial
or industrial use or structure on a site of more than three acres; or any
development, grading, clearing or disturbance of an area in excess of
5,000 square feet. Disturbance for the purpose of this section is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil
or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — All development other than major
development.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments or dissolved materials drain to a BMP, a stormwater
management system, a particular receiving water body or a particular
point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which
is of significant environmental value, including, but not limited to,
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened animal species; threatened or endangered plants of the
Pinelands pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:5-6.27(a); large areas of contiguous
open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection
and groundwater recharge areas. T & E habitat constitutes habitat
that is critical for the survival of a local population of threatened and
endangered species or habitat that is identified using the Department's
Landscape Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and
Nongame Species Program, whichever is more inclusive. Threatened
and endangered wildlife shall be protected in conformance with N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.33.
EXCEPTION — The approval by the approving authority of a variance or
other material departure from strict compliance with any section, part,
phrase or provision of this section. An exception may be granted only
under certain specific, narrowly defined conditions described herein
and does not constitute a waiver of strict compliance with any section,
part, phrase or provision of the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.).
EXTENDED DETENTION BASIN — A facility constructed through
filling and/or excavation that provides temporary storage of stormwater
runoff. It has an outlet structure that detains and attenuates runoff
inflows and promotes the settlement of pollutants. An extended
detention basin is normally designed as a multistage facility that
provides runoff storage and attenuation for both stormwater quality
and quantity management. The term "stormwater detention basin" shall
have the same meaning as "extended detention basin."
FINISHED GRADE — The elevation of the surface of the ground after
completion of final grading, either via cutting, filling or a combination
thereof.
GRADING — Modification of a land slope by cutting and filling with the
native soil or redistribution of the native soil which is present at the
site.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:702
GROUNDWATER — Water below the land surface in a zone of
saturation.
GROUNDWATER MOUNDING ANALYSIS — A test performed to
demonstrate that the groundwater below a stormwater infiltration
basin will not mound up, encroach on the unsaturated zone, break the
surface of the ground at the infiltration area or downslope, and create
an overland flow situation.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Equipment, machinery or vehicles that exert
ground pressure in excess of eight pounds per square inch.
HIGH POLLUTANT LOADING AREA — An area in an industrial or
commercial development site where solvents and/or petroleum
products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied; where pesticides are
loaded/unloaded or stored; where hazardous materials are expected to
be present in greater than "reportable quantities," as defined by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4;
where recharge would be inconsistent with NJDEP-approved remedial
action work plan or landfill closure plan; and/or where a high risk
exists for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and vehicle
maintenance facilities. The term "HPLA" shall have the same meaning
as "high pollutant loading area."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which precipitation enters the soil
through its surface.
IN LIEU CONTRIBUTION — A monetary fee collected by the City
of Vineland in lieu of requiring strict on-site compliance with the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and/or stormwater
runoff quality standards established in this section.
INSTALL — To assemble, construct, put in place or connect components
of a stormwater management system.
MITIGATION — Acts necessary to prevent, limit, remedy or compensate
for conditions that may result from those cases where an applicant
has demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict compliance
with the stormwater management requirements set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:8, in an adopted regional stormwater management plan, or in a local
ordinance which is as protective as N.J.A.C. 7:8, and an exception from
strict compliance is granted by the City of Vineland and the Pinelands
Commission.
NEW JERSEY STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
MANUAL — Guidance developed by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, in coordination with the New Jersey
Department of Agriculture, the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs, the New Jersey Department of Transportation, municipal
engineers, county engineers, consulting firms, contractors, and
environmental organizations to address the standards in the New
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:703
Jersey Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8. The BMP Manual
provides examples of ways to meet the standards contained in the
rule. An applicant may demonstrate that other proposed management
practices will also achieve the standards established in the rules. The
manual, and notices regarding future versions of the manual, are
available from the Division of Watershed Management, NJDEP, P.O.
Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; and on the NJDEP's website,
www.njstormwater.org. The term "New Jersey BMP Manual" shall have
the same meaning as "New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual."
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJPDES — The New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., and in N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the NJDEP pursuant to the
authority of the Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.,
and N.J.A.C. 7:14A for a discharge of pollutants.
NONPOINT SOURCE —
NONSTRUCTURAL BMP — A stormwater management measure,
strategy or combination of strategies that reduces adverse stormwater
runoff impacts through sound site planning and design. Nonstructural
BMPs include such practices as minimizing site disturbance, preserving
important site features, reducing and disconnecting impervious cover,
flattening slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing turf grass
lawns, maintaining natural drainage features and characteristics and
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants closer to the source. The
term "low-impact development technique" shall have the same meaning
as "nonstructural BMP."
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor or condition,
other than a point source, from which pollutants are or may be
discharged;
(1)
Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor or condition,
other than a point source, that may temporarily or permanently
change any chemical, physical, biological or radiological
characteristic of waters of the state from what was or is the
natural, pristine condition of such waters, or that may increase the
degree of such change; or
(2)
Any activity, factor or condition, other than a point source, that
contributes or may contribute to water pollution.
(3)
(4) The term "NPS" shall have the same meaning as "nonpoint source."
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:704
PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a saturated
unit area of soil or rock material at hydraulic gradient of one,
determined as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (tube permeameter test),
N.J.A.C. 6.5 (pit bailing test) or N.J.A.C. 6.6 (Piezometer test).
Alternative permeability test procedures may be accepted by the
approving authority, provided the test procedure attains saturation of
surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic head effects on infiltration
rates, provides a permeability rate with units expressed in inches per
hour and is accompanied by a published source reference. Examples
of suitable sources include hydrogeology, geotechnical, or engineering
text and design manuals, proceedings of American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peer-review journals. Neither a soil
permeability class rating test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a
percolation test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests
for establishing permeability values for the purpose of complying with
this section.
PERMEABLE — Having a permeability of one inch per hour or faster.
The terms "permeable soil," "permeable rock" and "permeable fill" shall
be construed accordingly.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, municipality or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
PINELANDS COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The Commission
created pursuant to Section 5 of the Pinelands Protection Act, N.J.S.A.
13:18A-5.
PINELANDS CMP — The New Jersey Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50 1.1 et seq.).
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal
feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other
floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This
term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substances (except those regulated under the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.), thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, suspended solids,
cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural and construction waste or
runoff, or other residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land,
groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment
works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous
pollutants.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:705
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice
professional engineering in the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:8-27 et seq.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REPLICATE — One of two or more soil samples or tests taken at the
same location (within five feet of each other) and depth, within the
same soil horizon or substratum. In the case of fill material, replicate
tests are tests performed on subsamples of the same bulk sample
packed to the same bulk density.
SAND — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which
are between 0.05 and 2.0 millimeters in equivalent spherical diameter.
Also, a soil textural class having 85% or more of sand and a content
of silt and clay such that the percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the
percentage of clay does not exceed 15, as shown in § 425-217J(3)(a)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SEASONALLY HIGH-WATER TABLE — The upper limit of the shallowest
zone of saturation which occurs in the soil, identified as prescribed in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.8.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin
which is not a rock substratum, including sediments below the
biologically active and/or weathered zones.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source
of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials,
intermediate products, final products, waste materials, by-products,
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities
that are exposed to stormwater.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER INFILTRATION BMP — A basin or other facility
constructed within permeable soils that provides temporary storage
of stormwater runoff. An infiltration BMP does not normally have a
structural outlet to discharge runoff from the stormwater quality design
storm. Instead, outflow from an infiltration BMP is through the
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:706
surrounding soil. The terms "infiltration measure" and "infiltration
practice" shall have the same meaning as "stormwater infiltration
basin."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances. This includes, but is not
limited to, structural and nonstructural stormwater best management
practices described in the New Jersey BMP Manual and designed to
meet the standards for stormwater control contained within this
section. The terms "stormwater best management practice" and
"stormwater BMP" shall have the same meaning as "stormwater
management measure."
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
SUITABLE SOIL — Unsaturated soil, above the seasonally high-water
table, which contains less than 50% by volume of coarse fragments and
which has a tested permeability rate of between one and 20 inches per
hour.
SURFACE WATER — Any waters of the state which are not
groundwater.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the drainage area to the
point of interest within a watershed.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The insoluble solid matter suspended
in water and stormwater that is separable by laboratory filtration in
accordance with the procedure contained in the "Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published
jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water
Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. The
term "TSS" shall have the same meaning as "total suspended solids."
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water and groundwater, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of a zone of saturation.
WELL — A bored, drilled or driven shaft, or a dug hole which extends
below the seasonally high-water table and which has a depth which is
greater than its largest surface dimension.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:707
WETLANDS — Those lands which are inundated or saturated by water
at a magnitude, duration and frequency sufficient to support the growth
of hydrophytes. Wetlands include lands with poorly drained or very
poorly drained soils as designated by the National Cooperative Soils
Survey of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture. Wetlands include coastal wetlands and
inland wetlands, including submerged lands. The "New Jersey
Pinelands Commission Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Pinelands Area Wetlands: A Pinelands Supplement to the Federal
Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands," dated
January 1991, as amended, may be utilized in delineating the extent
of wetlands based on the definitions of wetlands and wetlands soils
contained in this section, N.J.A.C. 7:50-2.11, 7:50-6.4 and 7:50-6.5. The
term "wetland" shall have the same meaning as "wetlands."
WET POND — A stormwater facility constructed through filling and/
or excavation that provides both permanent and temporary storage of
stormwater runoff. It has an outlet structure that creates a permanent
pool and detains and attenuates runoff inflows and promotes the
settling of pollutants. A stormwater retention basin can also be
designed as a multistage facility that also provides extended detention
for enhanced stormwater quality design storm treatment and runoff
storage and attenuation for stormwater quantity management. The
term "stormwater retention basin" shall have the same meaning as "wet
pond."
H. Penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts,
maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this
section shall be subject to the penalties outlined in § 425-312.
I. Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon the
following:
(1) Certification by the Pinelands Commission in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:50 Subchapter 3; and
(2) Approval by the county review agency, or 60 days from the receipt
of the ordinance by the county review agency if the county review
agency should fail to act.
J. Appendixes.
(1) Methods for calculating groundwater recharge.
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32: A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey.
Available at http://www.njgeology.org/geodata/dgs99-2.htm.
(b) The New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS).
Available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, Chapter 6, at
http://www.njstormwater.org/bmp_manual2.htm.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:708
(2) NJDEP Nonstructural Strategies Point System. The New Jersey
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(a) and
§ 425-217D(1) of this section require nonstructural stormwater
management strategies to be incorporated into the site design of a
major development. A total of nine strategies are to be used to the
maximum extent practical to meet the groundwater recharge,
stormwater quality and stormwater quantity requirements of the
rules prior to utilizing structural stormwater management
measures. The New Jersey Nonstructural Stormwater Management
Strategies Point System (NSPS) provides a tool to assist planners,
designers and regulators in determining that the strategies have
been used to the "maximum extent practical" at a major
development as required by the rules. Refer online to
http://www.njstormwater.org for information on the NSPS.
(3) Soils.
(a) USDA Soil Textural Triangle.
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:709
(b) Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the following
terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
A-HORIZON — The uppermost mineral horizon in a normal soil
profile. The upper part of the A-horizon is characterized by
maximum accumulation of finely divided, dark-colored organic
residues, known as humus, which are intimately mixed with the
mineral particles of the soil.
ARTESIAN ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation
which exists immediately below a hydraulically restrictive
horizon, and which has an upper surface that is at a pressure
greater than atmospheric, either seasonally or throughout the
year.
CHROMA — The relative purity or strength of a color, a
quantity which decreases with increasing grayness. Chroma is
one of the three variables of soil color as defined in the Munsell
system of classification.
CLAY — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are smaller than 0.002 millimeters in equivalent
spherical diameter. Also, a soil textural class having more than
40% clay, less than 45% sand, and less than 40% silt, as shown
in § 425-217K(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having 27% to 40% clay
and 20% to 45% sand, as shown in § 425-217K(3)(a) (USDA Soil
Textural Triangle).
COARSE FRAGMENT — A rock fragment contained within
the soil which is greater than two millimeters in equivalent
spherical diameter or which is retained on a two-millimeter
sieve.
COUNTY SOIL SURVEY REPORT — A report prepared by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, which includes maps showing the
distribution of soil mapping units throughout a particular
county together with narrative descriptions of the soil series
shown and other information relating to the uses and
properties of the various soil series.
DIRECT SUPERVISION — Control over and direction of work
carried out by others with full knowledge of and responsibility
for such work.
EQUIVALENT SPHERICAL DIAMETER OF A PARTICLE — The
diameter of a sphere which has a volume equal to the volume
of the particle.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE HORIZON — A horizon of limited
thickness within the soil profile which provides inadequate
removal of pollutants from stormwater due to a high coarse
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:710
fragment content, excessively coarse texture and/or
excessively rapid permeability.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum below
the soil profile which extends beyond the depth of soil profile
pits and borings and which provides inadequate removal of
pollutants from stormwater due to a high coarse fragment
content, excessively coarse texture and/or excessively rapid
permeability.
EXTREMELY FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material
whose moist aggregated mass crushes only under very strong
pressure; cannot be crushed between the thumb and forefinger
and shall be broken apart bit by bit.
FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose moist
aggregated mass crushes under moderate pressure between
the thumb and forefinger, but resistance is distinctly
noticeable.
HARD CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose dry
aggregated mass is moderately resistant to pressure; can be
broken in the hands without difficulty, but is barely breakable
between the thumb and forefinger.
HUE — The dominant spectral color, one of the three variables
of soil color defined within the Munsell system of classification.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE HORIZON — A horizon
within the soil profile which slows or prevents the downward
or lateral movement of water and which is underlain by
permeable soil horizons or substrata. Any soil horizon which
has a saturated permeability less than one inch per hour is
hydraulically restrictive.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE SUBSTRATUM — A
substratum below the soil profile which slows or prevents the
downward or lateral movement of water and which extends
beyond the depth of profile pits or borings or to a massive
substratum. A substratum which has a saturated permeability
less than one inch per hour is hydraulically restrictive.
LOAMY SAND — A soil textural class, as shown in
§ 425-217K(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle), that has a
maximum of 85% to 90% sand with a percentage of silt plus 1.5
times the percentage of clay not in excess of 15; or a minimum
of 70% to 85% sand with a percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the
percentage of clay not in excess of 30.
LOWER PLASTIC LIMIT — The moisture content
corresponding to the transition between the plastic and
semisolid states of soil consistency. This corresponds to the
lowest soil moisture content at which the soil can be molded in
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:711
the fingers to form a rod or wire 1/8 inch in thickness without
crumbling.
MOTTLING — A color pattern observed in soil consisting of
blotches or spots of contrasting color. The term "mottle" refers
to an individual blotch or spot. The terms "color variegation,"
"iron depletion" and "iron concentration" are equivalent to the
term "mottling." Mottling due to redoximorphic reactions is an
indication of seasonal or periodic and recurrent saturation.
MUNSELL SYSTEM — A system of classifying soil color
consisting of an alphanumeric designation for hue, value and
chroma, such as "7.5 YR 6/2," together with a descriptive color
name, such as "strong brown."
O-HORIZON — A surface horizon, occurring above the Ahorizon
in some soils, which is composed primarily of
undecomposed or partially decomposed plant remains which
have not been incorporated into the mineral soil.
PERCHED ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation
which occurs immediately above a hydraulically restrictive
horizon and which is underlain by permeable horizons or
substrata which are not permanently or seasonally saturated.
PIEZOMETER — A device consisting of a length of metal or
plastic pipe, open at the bottom or perforated within a
specified interval, and used for the determination of depth to
water, permeability or hydraulic head within a specific soil
horizon or substratum.
PLATY STRUCTURE — Characterized by a soil aggregate
which has one axis distinctly shorter than the other two and
oriented with the short axis vertical.
REGIONAL ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation
which extends vertically without interruption below the depth
of soil borings and profile pits.
SANDY CLAY — A soil textural class having 35% or more of
clay and 45% or more of sand, as shown in § 425-217K(3)(a)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SANDY LOAM — A soil textural class, as shown in
§ 425-217K(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle), that has a
maximum of 20% clay, and the percentage of silt plus twice
the percentage of clay exceeds 30% and contains 52% or more
sand; or less than 7% clay, less than 50% silt and between 43%
and 52% sand.
SILT — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are between 0.002 and 0.05 millimeters in equivalent
spherical diameter. It also means a soil textural class having
80% or more of silt and 12% or less of clay, as shown in
§ 425-217K(3)(a). (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:712
SILT LOAM — A soil textural class having 50% or more of silt
and 12% to 27% of clay, or 50% to 80% of silt and less than
12% of clay, as shown in § 425-217K(3)(a). (USDA Soil Textural
Triangle).
SILTY CLAY — A soil textural class having 40% or more of clay
and 40% or more of silt, as shown in § 425-217K(3)(a) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle).
SILTY CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having 27 to 40% of
clay and less than 20% of sand, as shown in § 425-217K(3)(a)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SOIL AGGREGATE — A naturally occurring unit of soil
structure consisting of particles of sand, silt, clay, organic
matter, and coarse fragments held together by the natural
cohesion of the soil.
SOIL COLOR — The soil color name and Munsell color
designation determined by comparison of the moist soil with
color chips contained in a Munsell soil color book.
SOIL CONSISTENCE — The resistance of a soil aggregate or
clod to being crushed between the fingers or broken by the
hands. Terms for describing soil consistence described are in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(h).
SOIL HORIZON — A layer within a soil profile differing from
layers of soil above and below it in one or more of the soil
morphological characteristics, including color, texture, coarse
fragment content, structure, consistence and mottling.
SOIL LOG — A description of the soil profile which includes
the depth, thickness, color, texture, coarse fragment content,
mottling, structure and consistence of each soil horizon or
substratum.
SOIL MAPPING UNIT — An area outlined on a map in a county
soil survey report and marked with a letter symbol designating
a soil phase, a complex of two or more soil phases, or some
other descriptive term where no soil type has been identified.
SOIL PHASE — A specific type of soil which is mapped by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service and which belongs to
a soil series described within the County Soil Survey Report.
SOIL PROFILE — A vertical cross section of undisturbed soil
showing the characteristic horizontal layers or horizons of the
soil which have formed as a result of the combined effects
of parent material, topography, climate, biological activity and
time.
SOIL SERIES — A grouping of soil types possessing a specific
range of soil profile characteristics which are described within
the County Soil Survey Report. Each soil series may consist of
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:713
several "soil phases" which may differ in slope, texture of the
surface horizon or stoniness.
SOIL STRUCTURAL CLASS — One of the shape classes of soil
structure described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(g).
SOIL STRUCTURE — The naturally occurring arrangement
within a soil horizon of sand, silt and clay particles, coarse
fragments and organic matter, which are held together in
clusters or aggregates of similar shape and size.
SOIL TEST PIT — An excavation made for the purpose of
exposing a soil profile which is to be described.
SOIL TEXTURAL CLASS — One of the classes of soil texture
defined within the USDA system of classification. (Soil Survey
Manual, Agricultural Handbook No. 18, USDA Soil
Conservation Service, 1962.)
SOIL TEXTURE — The relative proportions of sand, silt and
clay in that portion of the soil which passes through a sieve
with two-millimeter openings.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The depth below the ground surface
or the elevation with respect to some reference level of the
water level observed within a soil profile pit or boring, or
within a piezometer, after this level has stabilized or become
relatively constant with the passage of time.
SUBSTRATUM — A layer of soil or rock material present below
the soil profile and extending beyond the depth of soil borings
or profile pits.
UNSUITABLE SOIL — All soil other than suitable soil.
USDA SYSTEM OF CLASSIFICATION — The system of
classifying soil texture used by the United States Department
of Agriculture which defines 12 soil textural classes based
upon the weight percentages of sand, silt and clay in that
portion of the soil which passes through a sieve with twomillimeter
openings. The soil textural classes are shown
graphically on the USDA Soil Textural Triangle, as shown in
§ 425-217K(3)(a).
VALUE — The relative lightness or intensity of a color, one
of the three variables of soil color defined within the Munsell
system of classification.
VERY FIRM CONSISTENCE — Is characterized by a moist
soil which crushes under strong pressure; barely crushable
between thumb and forefinger.
VERY HARD CONSISTENCE — Is characterized by a dry soil
which is resistant to pressure, can be broken in the hands
only with difficulty; not breakable between the thumb and
forefinger.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:714
ZONE OF SATURATION — A layer within or below the soil
profile which is saturated with groundwater either seasonally
or throughout the year. This includes both regional and
perched zones.
(c) Methods for assessing soil suitability for infiltration
stormwater management BMPs. The results of a subsurface
investigation shall serve as the basis for the site selection and
design of stormwater infiltration BMPs. The subsurface
investigation shall include, but not be limited to, a series of soil
test pits and soil permeability tests conducted in accordance
with the following:
[1] All soil test pits and soil permeability results shall be
performed under the direct supervision of a professional
engineer. All soil logs and permeability test data shall be
accompanied by a certification by a professional engineer.
The results and location (horizontal and vertical) of all soil
test pits and soil permeability tests, both passing and
failing, shall be reported to the City of Vineland.
[2] During all subsurface investigations and soil test
procedures, adequate safety measures shall be taken to
prohibit unauthorized access to the excavations at all
times. It is the responsibility of persons performing or
witnessing subsurface investigations and soil permeability
tests to comply with all applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations governing occupational safety.
[3] A minimum of two soil test pits shall be excavated within
the footprint of any proposed infiltration BMP to
determine the suitability and distribution of soil types
present at the site. Placement of the test pits shall be
within 20 feet of the basin perimeter, located along the
longest axis bisecting the BMP. For BMPs larger than
10,000 square feet in area, a minimum of one additional
soil test pit shall be conducted within each additional area
of 10,000 square feet. The additional test pit(s) shall be
placed approximately equidistant to other test pits, so as
to provide adequate characterization of the subsurface
material. In all cases, where soil and/or groundwater
properties vary significantly, additional test pits shall be
excavated in order to accurately characterize the
subsurface conditions below the proposed infiltration BMP.
Soil test pits shall extend to a minimum depth of eight feet
below the lowest elevation of the basin bottom or to a
depth that is at least two times the maximum potential
water depth in the proposed infiltration BMP, whichever is
greater.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:715
[4] A soil test pit log shall be prepared for each soil test pit.
The test pit log shall, at a minimum, provide the elevation
of the existing ground surface; the depth and thickness (in
inches) of each soil horizon or substratum; the dominant
matrix or background and mottle colors using the Munsell
system of classification for hue, value and chroma; the
appropriate textural class as shown on the USDA textural
triangle; the volume percentage of coarse fragments
(larger than two millimeters in diameter); the abundance,
size, and contrast of mottles; the soil structure, soil
consistence, and soil moisture condition, using standard
USDA classification terminology for each of these soil
properties. Soil test pit logs shall identify the presence of
any soil horizon, substratum or other feature that exhibits
an in-place permeability rate less than one inch per hour.
[5] Each soil test pit log shall report the depth to seasonally
high water level, either perched or regional, and the static
water level, based upon the presence of soil mottles or
other redoximorphic features and observed seepage or
saturation. Where redoxomorphic features including soil
mottles resulting from soil saturation are present, they
shall be interpreted to represent the depth to the seasonal
high-water table unless soil saturation or seepage is
observed at a higher level. When the determination of the
seasonally high-water table shall be made in ground
previously disturbed by excavation, direct observation of
the static water table during the months of January
through April shall be the only method permitted.
[6] Any soil horizon or substratum which exists immediately
below a perched zone of saturation shall be deemed by
rule to exhibit unacceptable permeability (less than one
inch per hour). The perched zone of saturation may be
observed directly, inferred based upon soil morphology, or
confirmed by performance of a hydraulic head test as
defined at N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.9.
[7] Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be installed in soils
that exhibit artesian groundwater conditions. A
permeability test shall be conducted in all soils that
immediately underlie a perched zone of saturation. Any
zone of saturation which is present below a soil horizon
which exhibits an in-place permeability of less than 0.2
inches per hour shall be considered an artesian zone of
saturation unless a minimum one-foot-thick zone of
unsaturated soil, free of mottling or other redoximorphic
features and possessing a chroma of four or higher, exists
immediately below the unsuitable soil.
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:716
[8] A minimum of one permeability test shall be performed at
each soil test pit location. The soil permeability rate shall
be determined using test methodology as prescribed in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (tube permeameter test), 6.5 (pit bailing
test) or 6.6 (Piezometer test). When the tube permeameter
test is used, a minimum of two replicate samples shall be
taken and tested. Alternative permeability test procedures
may be accepted by the approving authority, provided the
test procedure attains saturation of surrounding soils,
accounts for hydraulic head effects on infiltration rates,
provides a permeability rate with units expressed in inches
per hour and is accompanied by a published source
reference. Examples of suitable sources include
hydrogeology, geotechnical or engineering text and design
manuals, proceedings of American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peer-review journals.
Neither a soil permeability class rating test, as described
in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a percolation test, as described in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests for establishing
permeability values for the purpose of complying with this
section.
[9] Soil permeability tests shall be conducted on the most
hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum to be left in
place below the basin, as follows: Where no soil
replacement is proposed, the permeability tests shall be
conducted on the most hydraulically restrictive horizon or
substratum within four feet of the lowest elevation of the
basin bottom or to a depth equal to two times the
maximum potential water depth within the basin,
whichever is greater. Where soil replacement is proposed,
the permeability tests shall be conducted within the soil
immediately below the depth of proposed soil replacement
or within the most hydraulically restrictive horizon or
substratum to a depth equal to two times the maximum
potential water depth within the basin, whichever is
greater. Permeability tests may be performed on the most
hydraulically restrictive soil horizons or substrata at
depths greater than those identified above, based upon the
discretion of the design or testing engineer. The tested
infiltration rate should then be divided by two to establish
the soil's design permeability rate. Such division will
provide a one-hundred-percent safety factor to the tested
rate.
[10] The minimum acceptable tested permeability rate of any
soil horizon or substratum shall be one inch per hour. Soil
materials that exhibit tested permeability rates slower
than one inch per hour shall be considered unsuitable for
stormwater infiltration. The maximum reportable tested
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:717
permeability rate of any soil horizon or substratum shall
be no greater than 20 inches per hour, regardless of the
rate attained in the test procedure.
[11] After all construction activities have been completed on
the development site and the finished grade has been
established in the infiltration BMP, a minimum of one
permeability test shall be conducted within the most
hydraulically restrictive soil horizon or substratum below
the as-built BMP to ensure the performance of the
infiltration BMP is as designed. Hand tools and manual
permeability test procedures shall be used for the purpose
of confirming BMP performance. In addition, the
infiltration BMP shall be flooded with water sufficient to
demonstrate the performance of the BMP. Test results
shall be certified to the Municipal Engineer.
[12] A groundwater mounding analysis shall be provided for
each stormwater infiltration BMP. The groundwater
mounding analysis shall calculate the maximum height of
the groundwater mound based upon the volume of the
maximum design storm. The professional engineer
conducting the analysis shall provide the Municipal
Engineer with the methodology and supporting
documentation for the mounding analysis used and shall
certify to the City of Vineland, based upon the analysis,
that the groundwater mound will not cause stormwater or
groundwater to break out to the land surface or cause
adverse impact to adjacent surface water bodies, wetlands
or subsurface structures, including but not limited to
basements and septic systems. If there is more than one
infiltration BMP proposed, the model shall indicate if and
how the mounds will interact. The mounding analysis shall
be calculated using the most restrictive soil horizon that
will remain in place within the explored aquifer thickness
unless alternative analyses is authorized by the Municipal
Engineer. The mounding analysis shall be accompanied by
a cross section of the infiltration BMP and surrounding
topography, and the mound analysis shall extend out to the
point(s) at which the mound intersects with the
preexisting maximum water table elevation.
[13] The applicant shall demonstrate that stormwater
infiltration BMPs meet the seventy-two-hour drain time
requirement established in § 425-217E(2)(a) of this
section.
(4) Pretreatment measures for infiltration BMPs. By reducing
incoming velocities and capturing coarser sediments, pretreatment
can extend the functional life and increase the pollutant removal
capability of infiltration measures. Therefore, the installation of
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:718
pretreatment measures is recommended for all development sites.
Pretreatment measures may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(a) Vegetative filter strips;
(b) Bioretention systems. Used in conjunction with a bioretention
system, the infiltration basin takes the place of the standard
underdrain;
(c) Sand filters;
(d) Grassed swales; and
(e) Detention basins.
(5) Collection and conveyance.
(a) Bicycle-safe inlet grates. Site development plans that
incorporate site design features that help to prevent discharge
of trash and debris from drainage systems shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended or settleable
solids.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches
or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest
dimension. Examples of grates subject to this
standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate
portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces
of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:719
space if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches
or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 425-217C are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is
designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass
through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in § 425-217C of this section; or
[d] Where the NJDEP determines, pursuant to the New
Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will
damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed
historic property.
(b) Catch basins. Catch basins are storm drain inlets with or
without sumps. Catch basins may provide pretreatment for
other stormwater BMPs by capturing large sediments. The
sediment and pollutant removal efficiency of catch basins
depends on the size of the sump and the performance of
routine maintenance to retain the available sediment storage
space in the sump. Where catch basins with sumps are
proposed, the minimum two-foot separation between the
bottom of the sump and seasonally high-water table shall be
provided.
(c) Open or perforated conveyance piping. Where adequate
separation to the seasonal high-water table exists, stormwater
§ 425-217 VINELAND CODE § 425-217
1:720
from the development site may be conveyed to a stormwater
basin via a system of perforated pipes. These pipes may be
made of PVC or corrugated metal and are available with
perforations of varying size and spacing. Perforated pipe
specifications shall be certified by a professional engineer. A
professional engineer shall certify that perforated conveyance
piping will not act to intercept the seasonal high-water table
and convey groundwater to the stormwater basin. All open or
perforated stormwater conveyance systems shall be installed
with a minimum separation of two feet from the seasonal highwater
table.
K. Additional sources for technical guidance.
(1) NJDEP technical guidance sources.
(a) New Jersey BMP Manual. Available from the Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey
08625, or online at http://www.njstormwater.org.
(b) NJDEP Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance
Manual. Available from the Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625, or online
at http://njedl.rutgers.edu/ftp/PDFs/1188.pdf.
(2) Additional guidance sources.
(a) New Jersey Pinelands Commission, P.O. Box 7, 15 Springfield
Road, New Lisbon, New Jersey 08064; phone: 609 894-7300;
website: http://www.state.nj.us/pinelands.
(b) State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, available from all state
soil conservation districts (including Cumberland-Salem
Conservation District, 1516 Route 77, P.O. Box 68, Deerfield,
NJ 08313; phone: 856 451-2422; fax: 856 451-1358; website:
http://cumberland-soil.deeweb.com).
(c) State soil conservation districts. Cumberland-Salem
Conservation District, 1516 Route 77, P.O. Box 68, Deerfield,
NJ 08313; phone: 856 451-2422; fax: 856 451-1358; website:
http://cumberland-soil.deeweb.com.
(d) New Jersey Department of Transportation, P.O. Box 600,
Trenton, NJ 08625-0600; phone: 609 530-3536; website:
http://www.state.nj.us/transportation.
§ 425-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-217
1:721

ARTICLE XII
Recycling Operations and Junkyards
§ 425-218. Definitions.
The following definitions pertain to licensed recycling or junkyard
operations. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
JUNK — Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or
not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage,
storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition.
JUNKYARD — Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or
abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded
goods, materials or machinery, or three or more unregistered/uninspected,
inoperable vehicles or other type of junk.
RECYCLING — The process by which waste products are reduced to raw
materials and transformed into new and often different products.
§ 425-219. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide standards for the regulation and
licensing of junkyards and recycling operations.
§ 425-220. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted by authority of N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 et seq., governing
licenses, and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., more specifically N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
§ 425-221. Administration.
The licensing provisions of this article shall be under the jurisdiction of
the City Council and the Department of Licenses and Inspections; the
development reviews and approval shall be under Planning Board authority.
§ 425-222. Number of licenses limited. [Amended 9-9-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-51; 6-25-1996 by Ord. No. 96-49; 12-23-1997 by Ord. No.
97-91]
The number of licenses to operate junkyards and recycling facilities within
the City of Vineland is hereby limited to eight.
§ 425-223. Zone restriction. [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
Junkyards and recycling facilities are prohibited in all zones of the City of
Vineland except the I-3 and I-4 Zones.
§ 425-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-224
1:723
§ 425-224. Inspections.
Junkyards and recycling facilities shall be subject to inspection at any time
by authorized state, county and municipal representatives.
§ 425-225. Standards.
A. Land.
(1) The minimum area shall be three acres.
(2) The minimum frontage shall be 165 feet.
B. Fencing. The entire tract shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence at
least 10 feet in height, including inward projected barbed wire or
screen extension, to prevent windblown debris from escaping over the
wall or fence. Construction along the base line of the fence shall be fully
enclosed to prevent debris from escaping below the fence or at grade
level. No fence shall be placed closer than 15 feet to the front property
line, and no signs or pennants shall be affixed to the fence.
C. Front buffer. A front buffer at least 15 feet wide shall be maintained
along the street frontage. Said buffer area shall be provided with
natural ground cover and shall not be paved except where driveways
cross it for access to the property.
D. Storage prohibition. No scrap or waste of any kind or reclaimable
material or debris shall be stored in the front yard nor shall any
recycling operation take place therein.
E. Parking prohibition. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the sidewalk
or elsewhere within the street right-of-way nor shall any vehicle be
parked within the front buffer area.
F. Burning of materials. It shall be unlawful to burn any scrap, waste,
debris, material or parts without first making application to the City of
Vineland Fire Department. The Director shall approve or disapprove
the application in writing and, if approved, shall designate the time for
such burning and the person authorized to supervise it.
G. Fire and health hazard. No motor vehicle or part thereof or any material
to be junked or processed shall be stocked or piled in such manner as to
create a fire hazard or a place to harbor rats or other pests. The
maintenance of high standards of safety and sanitation shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
H. Removal of flammables. Gasoline shall be removed from any vehicle to
be junked within one hour, and all flammables shall be safely secured
and stored.
I. Rainwater collection. No vehicle or part thereof shall be kept in such
manner that rainwater collects and remains therein or on the premises
for longer than 48 hours.
§ 425-224 VINELAND CODE § 425-225
1:724
§ 425-226. Conceptual presentations.
See Article VI, § 425-58, Concept plans.
§ 425-227. Site plan details.
§ 425-228. Improvements.
§ 425-229. Submission of preliminary plan.
J. Noise control. It shall be unlawful to hammer or pound any metals
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or at any
time on Sundays.
K. Construction standards. The provisions of Article VII, as they affect the
particular site, shall apply regarding drainage, side and rear buffer
areas, shade trees, parking and access standards, street improvements
and easements, signs, paving and, where required, sidewalks and offtract
improvements.
L. Prohibited in flood hazard areas. No recycling operations or junkyards
shall be permitted in the floodplain areas delineated by the Federal
Insurance Administration.
M. Pollution and erosion controls. Recycling operations and junkyards
shall be subject to pollution and erosion control regulations and shall
operate within environmentally sound practices.
A. The site plan data specified under Article VI, § 425-61B, shall apply.
B. In addition, a report of soils analyses and percolation tests shall be
submitted.
A. On-site improvements listed under Article VI, § 425-62B, C and D, shall
apply.
B. Off-tract improvements, if required, shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 425-47 of Article VI.
A. A complete site plan application for a recycling or junkyard operation
shall consist of the following:
(1) A copy of the license approved by the City Council.
(2) Six copies of the plan showing data required, plus four if the
application must go to the County Planning Board.
(3) A description of restrictions and easements, if any.
(4) A soils analysis and percolation test report.
(5) A completed application form signed by the owner.
§ 425-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-229
1:725
§ 425-230. Exceptions, variances and public hearings.
§ 425-231. Effect of preliminary site plan approval.
See Article VI, § 425-68.
§ 425-232. Submission of final site plan.
See Article VI, § 425-69.
§ 425-233. Performance guaranties; surety for improvements.
See Article VI, § 425-52.
§ 425-234. Effect of final site plan approval.
§ 425-235. License required; contents of application.
(6) The development review fee. For the specified fee, see § 425-5 of
Article I.
B. The procedure cited under §§ 425-65 and 425-66 of Article VI shall
apply.
A. For provisions regarding exceptions, see Article VI, Subdivision and
Site Plan Review and Approval, § 425-50.
B. For provisions regarding variances, see specific standards for recycling
operations or junkyards, Sheet 2, Conditional Use Specific Standards
(§ 425-308 of Article XV, Zoning).169 [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-4]
C. For provisions regarding public hearings, see Article I, General
Provisions, § 425-9 et seq.
A. See Article VI, § 425-70.
B. NOTE: Final approval grants the applicant the right to make application
to the construction officials for the necessary permits.
A. No person, partnership or corporation shall establish, operate,
maintain or expand a recycling business or junkyard of any kind unless
a license has been granted therefor by the City Council.
B. Applications shall be filed with the Department of Licenses and
Inspections by signed, written request and shall give the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant or corporation officers and
partners or registered agents.
169. Editor's Note: Sheet 2, Conditional Use Specific Standards, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 425-229 VINELAND CODE § 425-235
1:726
§ 425-236. License fees; refunds.
§ 425-237. Display of license.
The holder of an authorized license shall keep the license posted on the
premises in a conspicuous place at all times.
§ 425-238. Compliance agreement.
By accepting a license under the provisions of this article, the licensee
agrees to comply with all said provisions and other regulations which may
be established by the City Council.
§ 425-239. Transfer of license restricted; operational premises
limited.
§ 425-240. Renewals. [Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-84;
7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-49]
Only the eight licenses currently issued may be renewed each year. This
limitation does not prevent renewals of person-to-person transfers of the
authorized licenses.
(2) The length of time the applicant has resided within the City of
Vineland, his place of employment and details of criminal record, if
any.
(3) All details pertaining to the business proposed to be conducted.
(4) The block and lot numbers, as carried by the Assessor, of the land
on which the business is proposed.
(5) The metes and bounds description of the land as it appears in the
deed.
(6) A copy of the site plan, showing existing and proposed conditions of
the development.
(7) The names and addresses of all property owners located within
1,000 feet of the boundaries of the land on which the business is or
will be conducted.
A. The license fee shall be $200, paid annually, and shall run from January
1 through December 31 of each year.
B. No refunds shall be made to licensee upon surrender or revocation of a
license.
A. No license shall be reassigned or transferred without the approval of
the City Council.
B. No license shall entitle the licensee to operate in any building or
premises other than those specified by the authorized license.
§ 425-235 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-241
1:727
§ 425-241. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. The Zoning Officer shall cite any violations of any provisions of this
article and notify the licensee in writing. He shall order that the
violations be corrected within 30 days of the date of the written notice.
B. If after such notice corrections have not been made within the given
time, the licensee shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each
offense, and each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
C. The Municipal Court shall also have the power to suspend the license of
a violator pending the elimination of the violation.
D. The penalties herein are in addition to any other lawful penalties which
may be imposed.
§ 425-241 VINELAND CODE § 425-241
1:728
ARTICLE XIII
Heliports, Helistops and Helipads
§ 425-242. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Any construction, demolition or modification to the surface
design or operational areas of an aeronautical facility which affects,
increases or diminishes its operational capabilities.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the New Jersey Division of Aeronautics.
HELICOPTER — A rotary-wing aircraft that depends principally upon the lift
generated by engine-driven rotors rotating on a substantially vertical axis
for its primary means of propulsion.
HELIPAD — An area of defined dimensions designated for the occasional
landing and takeoff of helicopters but not used solely for that purpose. Such
areas may be designated in parking lots, on golf courses, within parks,
athletic fields or on properly constructed and approved rooftops.
HELIPORT — An area of defined dimensions designated for the landing and
takeoff of helicopters and used solely for that purpose. Such areas may
include passenger and cargo facilities, fueling service, storage space, tiedown
spaces, hangars and other accessory facilities.
HELISTOP, PRIVATE — An area of defined dimensions designated for the
occasional landing and takeoff of helicopters but not used solely for that
purpose. Such area shall be limited to the operation of helicopters which
are owned and controlled by the owner or the occupant of the premises or
by guests or patrons of such owner or occupant. Such area may include
refueling but no maintenance, repair or hangar facilities, except that a tiedown
area may be provided for and limited to the accommodation of a single
helicopter.
HELISTOP, PUBLIC — An area of defined dimensions designated for the
landing and takeoff of helicopters and used solely for that purpose. Such
area shall be open to use by any helicopter regardless of ownership and
control. Such area shall not include any refueling, maintenance, repair or
hangar facilities, except that a tie-down may be provided for and limited to
a single helicopter.
LANDING AND TAKEOFF AREA — A specific area of defined dimensions to
which the helicopter approaches for landing or from which it departs and
includes the touchdown area.
OBSTRUCTION, OBSTACLE AND/OR HAZARD — Any natural or man-made
objects or uses of land or water which obstructs or is hazardous to the
airspace specified by the state or Federal Aviation Administration for
§ 425-242 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-242
1:729
maneuvering of aircraft or accessibility of airspace to the public
participating in aeronautical activities.
PERIPHERAL AREA — A safety zone that provides an additional
obstruction-free surface on all sides of a prescribed helicopter landing and
takeoff area.
REFERENCE POINT — A point on the earth's surface, identified in terms
of latitude and longitude to the nearest second, from which all linear
measurements originate when applying the specific criteria to helicopter
facilities. The "facility reference point" shall always be the exact center of
the helicopter touchdown area.
SHELTER — An enclosed structure to provide for the comfort of persons
against rain, wind, sun and adverse weather.
TAXIING — A powered movement of an aircraft on the ground or on water
from one area to another, usually just before takeoff or after landing.
Helicopters may hover-taxi as well as ground-taxi, depending upon the type
of landing gear and the surface area being used.
TAXIWAY — A pathway for movement of an aircraft on the surface usually
connecting the landing and takeoff area with support facilities.
TOUCHDOWN AREA — A defined part of the heliport/helistop to which a
helicopter will approach and actually alight (or come to a zero-forwardground-
speed hover from the approach prior to touchdown or taxiing to
another area) and from which helicopter departures shall originate.
TOUCHDOWN PAD — A designated area of the facility on which a helicopter
will actually alight.
§ 425-243. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
§ 425-244. License application procedure and requirements.
A. Provide regulations and standards for the operation of helicopter
facilities.
B. Provide for their location in the interest of public health, safety and
convenience.
C. Ensure the safe and orderly development of such facilities and other
uses surrounding them.
A. Applicants proposing to operate a new aeronautical facility or demolish
or modify an existing facility shall:
(1) Submit an Application for New Aeronautical Facility License or
Alteration form to the New Jersey Division of Aeronautics at least
30 calendar days prior to the anticipated commencement of site
development. No construction, demolition or modification shall
§ 425-242 VINELAND CODE § 425-244
1:730
commence prior to the receipt of the signed, approved application
from the Director and site plan approval by the municipal board.
(2) Submit a plan certified by a land surveyor or professional engineer
licensed in New Jersey, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet,
showing the following;
(a) True North arrow.
(b) Dimensions of the landing area.
(c) The location, in height above grade, of obstructions in all
directions from the center of the land area to the distance
prescribed by the Division of Aeronautics.
(d) The location of approach/departure paths.
(e) All property lines.
(f) The location of the municipal boundaries.
B. NOTE: The Division reserves the right to specify methods, standards,
techniques and sites appropriate for aeronautical facilities. Any
changes to an approved application must be submitted to the Director.
No changes will be approved if the impact on contiguous land areas or
airspace is substantially changed.
C. Other requirements to be submitted for licensing shall be as follows:
(1) In the case of a rooftop facility, a certification by a professional
engineer or architect that the structural limits of the structure are
sufficient for the type of operations proposed.
(2) A legal description of the premises certified by a professional land
surveyor or civil engineer. If the premises are not owned by the
applicant, the applicant must identify on the license application the
owner and any other party holding an interest in the facility area,
by lease or otherwise. Prior to licensing, approval for the facility
must be secured in writing from the owner.
(3) A certification from the Municipal Planning or Zoning Board that
the proposed facility, as submitted in the application to the
Division, has been reviewed and conforms to the current zoning
regulations and the land development ordinances. If the proposed
facility or any change to an existing facility does not so conform,
the applicant shall submit a statement detailing the conflict and
explaining the need for the proposed facility, together with copies
of all relevant provisions of the zoning regulations and applications
which have been made for local approval.
(4) A completed copy of the Notice of Proposed Construction or
Alteration (FAA Form 7480-1, as amended or superseded) at the
same time it is forwarded to the federal authorities.
§ 425-244 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-244
1:731
§ 425-245. Renewal of licenses.
§ 425-246. Temporary licenses.
(5) Any other relevant information which may be required for a public
hearing or proceeding requested by the Division.
D. NOTE: Any license issued does not waive any federal rule or regulation
or burden of compliance with federal advisory circulars relating to
aeronautics. Further, any license issued may be modified, suspended or
revoked in the interest of public safety or as a result of established
violation of the governing statutes.
A. Since public safety and the safety of all those using the aeronautical
facilities is paramount, the renewal of a license shall be made only
after:
(1) The receipt of the proper renewal application and fee at least 30
days prior to the expiration of the current license.
(2) The completion of satisfactory inspections by the Division which
indicate compliance with applicable criteria.
B. Any license issued other than for temporary facilities shall expire one
year from date of issue but shall be renewed upon satisfactory renewal
application and reinspection.
A. The Division may issue temporary licenses to permit the operation of an
aeronautical facility for a period of less than one year for a special
purpose and from a designated area which normally requires no facility
preparation. The application for a temporary license shall be submitted
to the Division and provide the following (16:54-1.8B)170:
(1) A letter of approval from the municipality.
(2) A sketch of the proposed facility showing all required detail.
(3) Certification that the applicant controls the area or that the area is
to be used with permission of the owner.
(4) A description of the provisions for public safety within the
operational area.
(5) The name, address and phone number of the person(s) responsible
for the conduct of the proposed operations.
(6) Aircraft specifications indicating that the proposed operations can
be safely conducted.
(7) A list of persons intending to utilize the facility and their
qualifications.
170. Editor's Note: This citation should apparently refer to the New Jersey Administrative Code
(N.J.A.C.).
§ 425-244 VINELAND CODE § 425-246
1:732
§ 425-247. Facility layout and other standards.
§ 425-248. Specific dimensions.
§ 425-249. Helicopter parking; taxiways.
B. Temporary licenses shall specify an expiration date, shall delineate the
area of approved operations and may carry other applicable privileges
or limitations specified by the Division.
C. Temporary licenses are not automatically renewed upon request.
A. Size and shape. Size and shape are to be determined by the operations
proposed, the site available, the size and performance of helicopter and
the objects affecting the surrounding airspace.
B. Surface. Any part or all surface areas of a heliport/helistop may be in its
natural state or may be improved depending on the needs and site
conditions. All surfaces, whether turf, paved, portable pad or
combinations of materials, shall be constructed and stabilized so as to
be maintained free of any objects that could be a hazard by being blown
about by rotor downwash.
C. Load bearings. All surface areas to be used to accept the full static
weight of a helicopter shall have load-bearing capabilities consistent
with the size and shape of the helicopter authorized to use the facility.
D. Applicability. The minimum operational safety requirements shall apply,
regardless of the facility configuration and/or attendant features,
unless specific exemptions have been granted by the Division of
Aeronautics.
A. The minimum dimensions of a facility shall be determined by the size of
the largest helicopter authorized to use it.
B. The touchdown pad shall not be less than 1.5 times the tread by 1.5
times the wheelbase of the helicopter. Load-bearing capabilities of the
pad shall be sufficient to accommodate the dynamic load expected.
C. The touchdown area shall be symmetrical about the facility reference
point and equal in size to the diameter of the helicopter.
D. The landing and takeoff area shall be not less than 1.5 times the overall
length of the largest helicopter to use the facility and shall be
symmetrical about the touchdown area.
E. Peripheral area, or additional obstruction-free safety zone, shall
surround the landing and takeoff area and shall be a minimum width of
1/4 of the overall length of the largest helicopter being considered, but
not less than 10 feet. A wind-direction indicator may be installed in this
area.
§ 425-246 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-249
1:733
§ 425-250. Safety barriers and signs; exemptions.
§ 425-251. Approach/departure paths.
§ 425-252. Obstruction clearance.
A. At least one remote parking position to accommodate the largest
helicopter shall be provided within public use facilities. Frequency of
operations may require additions. No helicopter shall remain parked
within a landing and takeoff area during multiple operations.
B. Taxiways shall provide a lateral clearance of not less than 10 feet
between the main rotor tip of the taxiing helicopter and any object or
hazard.
A. A fence or barrier, not less than three feet in height above the ground,
shall be installed along the outer edge of the peripheral area. When
limited to three feet, such a barrier shall not be considered an
obstruction for determining the approach/departure slope clearance.
B. Where deemed necessary, a higher barrier may be installed. For such
higher barrier, the rule set under N.J.S.A. 16:54-1.6(A)6171 shall apply.
C. Warning and identification signs shall be placed outside of the fenced
area.
D. Exemptions to the requirements for safety barriers and signs shall be
based on N.J.S.A. 16:54-1.10, Petitions for exemption.172
A. Approach/departure paths must be specified for each facility.
B. Each facility shall have at least two approach/departure paths
separated by an arc of not less than 90° measured at the edge of the
landing and takeoff area. Curved paths may be necessary. The radius of
the curve shall depend on the performance capabilities of the using
helicopter and the limiting factors which affect the approach/departure
path.
A. Obstruction clearance planes, aligned with the direction of the
approach/departure paths, shall extend outward and upward from the
edge of the landing and takeoff area to a safe altitude. The width of
these planes shall coincide with the width of the landing and takeoff
area and flare uniformly to a width equal to said landing and takeoff
area, plus 100 feet at 1,000 feet from the landing area boundary.
B. The slope angle of the planes shall not be less than 8:1 (eight feet
horizontally to one foot vertically) for all public use heliports. The slope
angle of the planes for private use heliports/helistops shall be not less
171. Editor's Note: This citation should apparently refer to the New Jersey Administrative Code
(N.J.A.C.).
172. Editor's Note: This citation should apparently refer to the New Jersey Administrative Code
(N.J.A.C.).
§ 425-249 VINELAND CODE § 425-252
1:734
§ 425-253. Elevated facilities.
§ 425-254. Visual aids.
§ 425-255. Zoning and location restrictions.
than 5:1 when certified climb performance data for the using helicopter
indicates that capacity under normal conditions. Where adequate
performance data is not available, the slope angle shall be 8:1.
C. Slide slope transitional surfaces for all facilities shall extend outward
and upward from the lateral edges of the landing/takeoff area on a line
perpendicular to the approach/departure center line at a ratio of 1:1 to
a distance of 50 feet from the outermost edge of the landing/takeoff
area, then along a line from the transitional surface to a point
intersecting the outer edge of the approach/departure path where the
slope rises to a height of 50 feet above the facility.
D. These surfaces are established to provide an obstruction-free approach/
departure route and should not be penetrated by an object or obstacle.
A. The touchdown area for an elevated or rooftop facility shall be 40 feet
by 40 feet or equal to 1.5 times the rotor diameter of the using
helicopter, whichever is larger.
B. The criteria established for a comparable ground-level facility shall
apply to determine pad size, obstacle-free landing/takeoff areas and
approach/departure paths for an elevated facility, even though the
imaginary planes may extend beyond the physical edges of the
structure.
C. The touchdown area shall be protected by a parapet fence or barrier
not less than three feet in height. Where this is impractical or where
interference with the safe operation of the helicopter is a factor, a
safety net shall be installed in accordance with N.J.S.A.
16:54-1.6(A)7c,173 or as amended.
D. The structural design load-bearing capability shall be certified prior to
the issuance of a license.
A. Heliport/helistop marking and lighting patterns outlined in the current
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Advisory Circular 150/5390-1
shall apply. Additional lighting may be required for night operations.
B. A wind indicator shall be installed close to the facility but not so as to be
an obstacle or hazard to helicopter operations. Special treatment may
be required for night operations.
173. Editor's Note: This citation should apparently refer to the New Jersey Administrative Code
(N.J.A.C.).
§ 425-252 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-255
1:735
§ 425-256. Typical layout and imaginary surfaces.
Diagrams of the typical heliport layout and imaginary surfaces for a
heliport/helistop facility are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 425-257. Application for approval; contents of application.
The applicant seeking approval for a helicopter facility shall submit the
following to the Planning Board at least two weeks prior to the date of a Site
Plan Review Advisory Board meeting for approval of the site improvements
and conditional use permit:
§ 425-258. Site plan details.
The pertinent data set forth under Article VI, § 425-61, for the particular
existing and proposed site conditions shall apply.
§ 425-259. Notice of hearing before Planning Board.
The provisions of Article I, § 425-12, shall apply, except that notice shall
be given to all property owners located within 1,000 feet of the proposed
touchdown area.
A. Public use facilities shall be limited to existing operational public use
airports or areas zoned R-P, I-1, I-B, I-2, I-3 and B-4 Zones. [Amended
1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
B. Private use facilities may be located in R-P, I-1, I-B, I-2, I-3, B-4 and IN-1
Zones with the following limitations: [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-4; 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-49]
(1) When located in areas abutting residential zones, the approach/
departure paths shall remain outside of the residential zone.
(2) If the facility is proposed in or within 400 feet of a residential zone,
the applicant shall submit proof that such location has been
approved by the Zoning and Planning Boards.
C. NOTE: Land areas zoned for multiple uses, such as residential/
professional uses, shall not be considered solely residential for the
purpose of this regulation.
A. Six copies of the site plan, plus four copies if the plan must go to the
County Planning Board.
B. An illustration showing the proposed aeronautic operation. (See
§ 425-256.)
C. A copy of the completed application form.
D. The review fee as set under Article I, § 425-5.
§ 425-255 VINELAND CODE § 425-260
1:736
§ 425-260. Improvements.
The provisions of Article VI, § 425-62B, pertaining to on-site improvements
shall apply with consideration of the specific requirements of the use, the
location and condition of the site and the adjacent lands.
§ 425-261. Surety.
Where surety is required, the provisions of § 425-52 of Article VI shall apply.
§ 425-262. Enforcement.
A. The Division of Aeronautics shall enforce the provisions of the license
and the aeronautical operations.
B. The Zoning Officer shall enforce the zoning and other related provisions
of this article.
§ 425-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-262
1:737

ARTICLE XIV
Ancillary Powers of Planning Board174
§ 425-263. Review of applications for approval.
§ 425-264. Time period.
A. The Planning Board, when reviewing applications for approval of
subdivision plats, site plans or conditional uses, shall have the power to
grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Board of Adjustment, the following:
(1) Variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c, pertaining to bulk
standards as set under the zoning regulations of this chapter.
(2) Direction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, for issuance of a permit
to build in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood
control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map.
(3) Direction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, for issuance of a permit
to build a structure not related to a street.
B. Whenever relief is requested under this section, notice of the hearing
shall include reference to the request for a variance or for direction for
issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
A. Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan or
conditional use includes a request for relief pursuant to § 425-263
above, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the
application within 120 days after the submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Board to act within this time period shall
constitute approval, and the Secretary shall issue a certificate upon
request. [Amended 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-49]
B. Where County Planning Board review or approval is required, approval
shall be conditioned upon the timely receipt of a favorable report from
the County Board.
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 to 40:55D-61.)
174. Editor's Note: Former Art XIV, Country Estate Development, added 12-23-1986 by Ord. No.
86-84, was repealed 8-28-1990 by Ord. No. 90-77.
§ 425-263 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-264
1:739

ARTICLE XIVA
Resource Extraction175
175. Editor's Note: The text for Art. XIVA, Resource Extraction, will be included here when
drafted.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-264
1:741

ARTICLE XV
Zoning176
[Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
§ 425-265. Power to zone.
A. The governing body may adopt or amend a zoning ordinance relating to
the nature and extent of the uses of land and of buildings and structures
thereon. Such ordinance shall be adopted after the Planning Board has
adopted the land use plan element and the housing plan element of the
Master Plan, and all of the provisions of such zoning ordinance or any
amendment or revision thereto shall either be substantially consistent
with the land use plan element and the housing plan element of the
Master Plan or designed to effectuate such plan elements, provided that
the governing body may adopt a zoning ordinance or any amendment or
revision thereto which in whole or in part is inconsistent with or is not
designed to effectuate the land use plan element and the housing plan
element of the Master Plan, but only by affirmative vote of a majority of
the full authorized membership of the governing body, with the reasons
of the governing body for so acting set forth in a resolution and
recorded in the minutes of the governing body when adopting such a
zoning ordinance, and provided further that, notwithstanding anything
aforesaid, the governing body may adopt an interim zoning ordinance
pursuant to § 425-359.
B. A zoning ordinance shall be drawn with reasonable consideration to the
character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses
so as to encourage the most appropriate uses of land. The regulations in
a zoning ordinance shall be uniform throughout each district for each
use of land or class or kind of building or structure thereon, including
planned unit development, planned unit residential development and
residential cluster, but the regulations in one district may differ from
those in other districts.
C. No zoning ordinance or any amendment or revision thereto shall be
submitted to or adopted by initiative or referendum.
D. A zoning ordinance shall provide for the regulation of all airport safety
zones, delineated under the Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983, N.J.S.A.
6:1-80 et seq., in conformity with standards promulgated by the
Commissioner of Transportation.
E. A zoning ordinance shall provide for the regulation of land adjacent to
state highways in conformity with the State Highway Access
Management Code, adopted by the Commissioner of Transportation in
accordance with the State Highway Access Management Act of 1989,
N.J.S.A. 27:7-89 et seq., for the regulation of land with access to county
176. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2009-72, adopted 11-24-2009, readopted in their entirety
without change the following ordinances that amend this article: Ord. Nos. 2008-39,
2008-88, 2009-12 and 2009-62.
§ 425-265 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-265
1:743
§ 425-266. Protest.
A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of a zoning
ordinance may be filed with the City Clerk, signed by the owners of 20%
roads and highways in conformity with any access management code
adopted by the county in accordance with N.J.S.A. 27:161 et seq., and
for the regulation of land with access to municipal streets and highways
in conformity with any municipal access management code adopted
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et seq. This subsection shall not
be construed as requiring a zoning ordinance to establish minimum
lot sizes or minimum frontage requirements for lots adjacent to but
restricted from access to a state highway.
F. A zoning ordinance may include districts for planned developments,
provided that an ordinance providing for approval of subdivisions and
site plans by the Planning Board has been adopted which incorporates
therein the provisions for such planned developments in a manner
consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq. The zoning ordinance shall
establish standards governing the type and density or intensity of land
use in a planned development. Said standards shall take into account
that the density or intensity of land use otherwise allowable may not be
appropriate for a planned development. The standards may vary the
type and density or intensity of land use otherwise applicable to the
land within a planned development in consideration of the amount,
location and proposed use of common open space, the location and
physical characteristics of the site of the proposed planned
development and the location, design and type of dwelling units and
other uses. Such standards may, in order to encourage flexibility of
housing density, design and type, authorize a deviation in various
residential clusters from the density or intensity of land use established
for an entire planned development. The standards and criteria by which
the design, bulk and location of buildings are to be evaluated shall be
set forth in the zoning ordinance, and all standards and criteria for any
feature of a planned development shall be set forth in such ordinance
with sufficient certainty to provide reasonable criteria by which specific
proposals for planned development can be evaluated.
G. A zoning ordinance may designate and regulate historic sites or historic
districts and provide design criteria and guidelines therefor. Said
designation and regulation shall be in addition to such designation and
regulation as the zoning ordinance may otherwise require. All historic
sites and historic districts designated in the zoning ordinance shall be
based on identifications in the historic preservation plan element of the
Master Plan. The governing body may, at any time, adopt by affirmative
vote of a majority of its authorized membership, a zoning ordinance
designating one or more historic sites or historic districts that are not
based on identifications in the historic preservation plan element of the
Master Plan with the reasons of the governing body for so acting set
forth in a resolution and recorded in the minutes of the governing body.
§ 425-265 VINELAND CODE § 425-266
1:744
or more of the area either of the lots or land included in such proposed
change or of the lots or land extending 200 feet in all directions therefrom,
inclusive of street space, whether within or without the municipality. Such
amendment or revision shall not become effective following the filing of
such protest except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of all the members of the
governing body of the municipality.
§ 425-267. Referral to Planning Board.
Prior to the hearing on adoption of a zoning ordinance or any amendment
or revision thereto, the governing body shall refer any such proposed
ordinance or amendment or revision thereto to the Planning Board pursuant
to § 425-25.
§ 425-268. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate the nature and extent of the uses
of land and of buildings and structures thereon to promote and protect the
public health, safety and welfare. More specifically, it is the purpose of this
article to:
A. Limit and restrict buildings and structures to specified districts,
regulate buildings and structures according to their type and the nature
and extent of their use and regulate the nature and extent of the use of
land for trade, industry, residence, open space or other purposes.
B. Regulate the bulk, height, number of stories, orientation and size of
buildings and structures; the percentage of a lot or development area
that may be occupied by structures; lot sizes and dimensions; and for
these purposes, specify floor area ratios and other ratios and regulatory
techniques governing the intensity of land use and the provision of
adequate light and air, including, but not limited to, the potential for
utilization of renewable energy sources.
C. Establish, for particular uses or classes of uses, reasonable standards of
performance and standards for the provision of adequate physical
improvements, including but not limited to off-street parking and
loading areas, marginal access roads and roadways, other circulation
facilities and water, sewerage and drainage facilities, which shall be
subject to the provisions of § 425-52.
D. Designate and regulate areas subject to flooding pursuant to N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55 et seq., or as otherwise necessary in the absence of
appropriate flood hazard area designations pursuant to N.J.S.A.
58:16A-50 et seq., or floodway regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55 et seq., or minimum standards for local fringe area
regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55 et seq.
E. Provide for conditional uses pursuant to § 425-304 of this article.
F. Provide for senior citizen community housing.
§ 425-266 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-268
1:745
§ 425-269. Applicability.
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, moved, structurally
altered, rebuilt or enlarged except as provided herein nor shall any land be
used for any purpose other than those allowable in each zoning district as
designated herein (i.e., any use not enumerated in the applicable zone as
a permitted use, a conditional use in which all specific standards are met
or as an allowable accessory use associated with a permitted use shall be
prohibited); nor shall open space contiguous to any building be reduced in
any way except to conform to the provisions of this article and this chapter.
§ 425-270. Word usage; definitions.
G. Require, as a condition for any approval which is required pursuant to
this chapter and the provisions of this article, that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which any application is made.
H. Preserve the integrity of Pinelands areas, historic sites and districts.
I. Uphold and implement the purpose established by § 425-2 of this
chapter pertaining to land development.
A. Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth
in this article. Words and phrases not defined in this article, but defined
elsewhere in this chapter, shall be given the meanings set forth in said
chapter. Words and phrases not defined in this chapter, but defined in
the New Jersey Annotated Code or the New Jersey Statutes Annotated,
shall be given the meanings set forth in said code or statutes. For words
and phrases for which no definition is available in this chapter or in the
New Jersey Annotated Code or the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, the
Illustrated Book of Development Definitions, authored by Harvey S.
Moskowitz and Carl G. Lindbloom, published by Rutgers University in
1981, may be used as a guide. All other words and phrases shall be
given their common, ordinary meanings, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
B. The following definitions shall be applicable to this article:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — Any separate and complete dwelling unit
that is contained within a single-family dwelling which is generally, but
not always, intended for occupancy by extended family members. For
purposes of this chapter, an accessory apartment shall be characterized
by all of the following:
The accessory apartment shall be serviced by the single-family
dwelling's utilities.
(1)
The accessory apartment shall have the same mailing address as
the single-family dwelling.
(2)
§ 425-268 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:746
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any subordinate building
or structure located on the same lot as the principal building or
structure, which is detached from and customarily incidental to the
principal building or structure.
ACCESSORY USE — Any subordinate use located on the same lot as the
principal use, which is customarily incidental to the principal use.
ACTIVE RECREATIONAL USE — Any leisure-time activity, usually of
a more formal nature and performed with others, often requiring
equipment, which takes place at prescribed places, sites or fields.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer for purposes of this
article, unless a different municipal official is designated by ordinance
or statute.
ADULT BOOK STORE — Any retail store selling publications and other
material of a sexual nature.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing with a sales price or rent within
the means of a low- and moderate-income household, as defined in
N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING — Housing designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population where the head of the household is a minimum age of either
62 years or 55 years and meets the provisions of 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et
seq.[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-39]
AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYEE HOUSING — Any residential structure
located upon a farm to house agricultural employees working on said
farm.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL OPERATION — The production
of plants, animals, poultry, bees, forest products, fruit or flowers with
all related pursuits.
AIRPORT — Any place where aircraft can land and take off, usually
equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair and various
accommodations for passengers.
AMUSEMENT FACILITY — Any establishment which maintains
amusement devices, including but not limited to billiard tables (more
than two), pool tables (more than two) and coin-operated pinball
machines (more than three).
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Any place where animals or pets are given
medical or surgical treatment by a veterinarian. For purposes of this
There shall be free access between the accessory apartment and
other portions of the single-family dwelling.
(3)
The resident or residents of the accessory apartment shall not pay
rent.
(4)
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:747
chapter, boarding of animals shall be limited to short-term care
incidental to the hospital use.
ANIMAL OR POULTRY PROCESSING (SLAUGHTERING) — Any
establishment where animals or poultry are killed for market.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, poles, rods, towers, reflecting discs
or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of
electromagnetic waves.
AREA-NET — The total area of a lot, excluding any public right-of-way.
ARTICULATED VEHICLE — Any truck with a short chassis and no body
used in combination with a trailer for the hauling of freight, commonly
referred to as a "tractor-trailer."
ASSISTED LIVING or ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — Residences for
the frail elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal care, and
supervision of self-administered medication. They may provide other
services such as recreational activities, financial services and
transportation.[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
ASTROLOGERS, CARDREADERS, PSYCHICS — Persons that profess to
foretell future events.
AUTO BODY SHOP — Any public garage where motor vehicle bodies
are painted and/or repaired. No motor vehicle shall remain at an auto
body shop for longer than six months, for purposes of this chapter.
AUTO WRECKING YARD — Any property or part thereof where
unregistered, inoperative motor vehicles are collected, stored,
salvaged, processed or sold.
AVERAGE FINISHED GRADE — The average final elevation of the
ground surface surrounding a building or structure following
development. For purposes of this chapter, average finished grade shall
be calculated by determining the mean of the exterior final elevations
at the corners of a building or structure.
BANK — Any establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of
money; for the extension of credit; and for facilitating the transmission
of funds.
BAR — Any establishment serving alcoholic beverages in which the
principal business is the sale of such beverages at retail for
consumption on the premises. For purposes of this chapter, outdoor
entertainment or recreation shall not be considered an accessory use
for a bar.
BASEMENT — Any space having 1/2 or more of its floor-to-ceiling
height above the average finished grade of a building.
BELFRY — Any bell tower.
BILLBOARD — Any sign which directs attention to a business, product,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:748
than the property on which the sign is located. A billboard may also
be a sign with no commercial message. Except in the Pinelands area
of the City, "billboard," for purposes of this chapter, shall not include
signage placed upon New Jersey Transit weather shelters within the
public right-of-way, if approved by City Council.
BITUMIN PRODUCT — Any product which is derived from various
mixtures of hydrocarbons and other substances, occurring naturally or
obtained by distillation from coal or petroleum, found in asphalt and tar,
and used for surfacing roads and for waterproofing, whether refined,
blended, processed or manufactured.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-62]
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any building, together with any related
structure, accessory building, any land appurtenant thereto, and any
part thereof, which contains two or more units of dwelling space
arranged or intended for single room occupancy, exclusive of any such
unit occupied by an owner or operator, and wherein personal or
financial services are provided to the residents, including any
residential hotel or congregate living arrangement, but excluding any
hotel, motel or established guest house wherein a minimum of 85%
of the units of dwelling space are offered for limited tenure only (no
more than 90 days); any foster home as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4C-26.1;
any community residence for the developmentally disabled and any
community residence for the mentally ill as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2;
any dormitory owned or operated on behalf of any nonprofit institution
of primary, secondary or higher education for the use of its students;
any building arranged for single room occupancy wherein the units of
dwelling space are occupied exclusively by students enrolled in a fulltime
course of study at an institution of higher education approved by
the Department of Higher Education; any facility or living arrangement
operated by, or under contract with, any state department or agency,
upon written authorization of the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs; and any owner-occupied single-family residential
dwelling made available for occupancy by not more than six guests,
where the primary purpose of the occupancy is to provide charitable
assistance to the guests and where the owner derives no income from
the occupancy. A dwelling shall be deemed "owner-occupied," within
the meaning of this definition, if it is owned or operated by a nonprofit
religious or charitable association or corporation and is used as the
principal residence of a minister or employee of that corporation or
association. For purposes of this article, "personal services" means any
services permitted or required to be furnished by an owner or operator
to a resident, other than shelter, including but not limited to meals or
other food services and assistance in dressing, bathing or attending
to other personal needs, and "financial services" means any assistance
permitted or required by the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs to be furnished by an owner or operator to a
resident in the management of personal financial matters, including
but not limited to the cashing of checks, holding of personal funds for
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:749
safekeeping in any manner, or assistance in the purchase of goods or
services with a resident's personal funds.
BOWLING ALLEY — Any facility which by design and construction is
intended to be utilized for bowling.
BUFFER — Any strip of land intended to visibly and physically separate
adjacent properties.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having
a roof.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension measured between the
average finished grade of the building or structure to the mid-point
between deckline and parapet in the case of a flat roof, to the deck of a
mansard roof, and to the average height between the plate and ridge of
a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
BUILDING LINE — The line formed by the intersection of a horizontal
plane at the average finished grade of a building or structure and
a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior of said building or
structure on any side. In the case of a cantilevered section of a building,
the vertical plane shall coincide with the most projected surface. In the
case of rooflines which project beyond the outside walls of the building,
the vertical plane shall coincide with the most projected point of the
roof. NOTE: All yard standards are measured from the building line.
BULK VARIANCE — Any variance as described by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
BUSINESS OFFICE — Any office, other than a professional office,
rendering services on a fee or contract basis.
BUSINESS OR INDUSTRIAL ZONE — I-1, I-B, I-2, I-3, I-4, B-1, B-2, B-3
and B-4 Zones, for purposes of this chapter.
CAFETERIA — Any restaurant in which the customers serve themselves
or are served at a counter and take the food to tables to eat.
CAMPGROUND — Any property upon which two or more campsites
are located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units
(e.g., tents, cabins, trailers, motor homes) of the general public as
temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation
purposes.
CAR WASH — Any public garage where motor vehicles are cleaned,
washed or waxed, whether self-serve or mechanical.
CATTERY — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding, breeding or selling cats is carried on, except a pet shop. For
purposes of this chapter, pet grooming may be considered an accessory
use for a cattery.
CELLAR — Any space having less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average finished grade of a building.
CEMETERY — Any property used for interring the dead.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:750
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Any document issued by the
Department of Licenses and Inspections allowing the occupancy or use
of a building or structure and certifying that the building or structure
has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all the
applicable City codes and ordinances.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE — Any document signed by
the Zoning Officer and supplied to a prospective purchaser, prospective
mortgagee or any other person interested in any land upon which a
use, building or structure exists, which acknowledges that such use,
building or structure complies with the provisions of this chapter or
authorized variance therefrom.
CERTIFICATION OF NONCONFORMING USE, BUILDING OR
STRUCTURE — Any document signed by the Zoning Officer and
supplied to a prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any
other person interested in any land upon which a use, building or
structure exists, certifying that the use, building or structure existed
before the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the use, building
or structure nonconforming.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any private establishment, as licensed in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq., enrolling four or more
children between two and five years of age, where tuition, fees or other
forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged.
CHIMNEY — Any structure containing one or more flues for drawing
off emissions from stationary sources of combustion.
CHURCH, CONGREGATION — Any place, a building or structure, or a
group of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are
primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services
and accessory uses associated therewith. Accessory uses shall be
limited to a kitchen, a meeting hall, a child-care area for utilization
during services and residential units for clergy, for purposes of this
chapter.
COFFEE SHOP — Any establishment that primarily sells coffee and
other refreshments.
COMMENCEMENT OF USE — The establishment of a use when all
governmental regulatory controls are met.
COMMERCIAL INCINERATION OR REDUCTION OF WASTE
PRODUCTS — Incineration or reduction of waste products not
generated on site, for purposes of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL PRODUCTION GREENHOUSE — Any building whose
roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or
translucent material in which temperature and humidity can be
regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season plants for
subsequent sale for a farm.
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:751
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL OPERATION — Farm machinery or
earthmoving equipment rental, sales and service, or a like use, for
purposes of this chapter.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to
a site designated as a development, and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
Common open space may contain such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.[Added
6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-52]
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:11B-1 et seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under
such supervision as required, to not more than 15 persons with head
injuries, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order
to live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited to, group
homes, halfway houses, supervised apartment living arrangements, and
hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered a health-care facility
within the meaning of the Health Care Facilities Planning Act, N.J.S.A.
26:2H-1 et seq.[Added 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3]
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
— Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:11B-1 et seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under
such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons who require assistance, temporarily
or permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include,
but not be limited to, group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care
facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such
a residence shall not be considered a health-care facility within the
meaning of the Health Care Facilities Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1
et seq. In the case of such community residence housing mentally
ill persons, such residence shall have been approved for a purchase
of service contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such
procedures as shall be established by regulation of the Division of
Mental Health and Hospitals of the Department of Human
Services.[Added 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3177]
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Any
community residential facility operated as a hospice program providing
food, shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 terminally ill
persons.[Added 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3]
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE —
Any shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified
pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of
177. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "community residence
for the developmentally disabled persons with head injuries."
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:752
the Department of Human Services, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et
seq., providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal
guidance and other services to not more than 15 persons who have
been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such
victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to
protect their physical or psychological welfare.
COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER — Any shopping center serving a
regional market. For purposes of this chapter, a community shopping
center shall not have a gross floor area of less than 250,000 square feet.
COMPOSTING FACILITY — Any disposal facility where vegetative
waste is degraded by microorganisms in a controlled process.
CONCRETE MIXING PLANT — Any facility which mixes a cementing
material, such as portland cement, and a mineral aggregate, such as
sand and gravel, to form a strong building material.
CONDITIONAL USE — Any use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in this Zoning Ordinance and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — Any condominium formed under the Condominium
Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq. More explicitly, "condominium" means a
building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually
while the structures, common areas and facilities are owned by all the
owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
CONSERVATION ACTIVITY — The utilization of land by public or
nonprofit entities for the intended purpose of protection and
enhancement of resource values. Such activities shall include, but not
be limited to, fish and wildlife areas, bird sanctuaries, nature areas and
historic sites.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — Any facility which by design and construction
is primarily intended for the storage and maintenance of equipment
and the storage of construction materials for a contractor involved in a
building trade.
CONVALESCENT CENTER — A facility that provides short-term,
primarily inpatient care, treatment, and/or rehabilitation services for
persons recovering from illness or injury who do not require continued
hospitalization.[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
CONVALESCENT HOME — Any facility or institution, whether public or
private, providing therein nursing care to sick, invalid, infirm, disabled
or convalescent persons in addition to lodging and board or healthrelated
service, or any combination of the foregoing.
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail establishment offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items and other goods
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:753
commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of
less than 5,000 square feet.
CONVERSION — Any change in the use of land or of a building or
structure.
COOPERATIVE — Any cooperative, as defined under The Cooperative
Recording Act of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 46:8D-1 et seq.
CORNER LOT — Any lot or parcel of land abutting two or more streets
at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an
interior angle of less than 135°.
CORPORATE OFFICE — Any administrative headquarters of a business
or industry which, for purposes of this chapter, is characterized as
a single employer with over 50 employees working on site and as a
facility primarily serving a regional, national or international client
base not a local, walk-in clientele.
CREMATORIUM — Any establishment containing a furnace for
cremating (reducing to ashes) the dead.
CUPOLA, DOME — Any small structure built on top of a roof.
DENSITY — The intensity of land use or the permitted number of
dwelling units per area of land to be developed. "Gross density" means
the number of dwelling units per lot area-gross, while "net density"
means the number of dwelling units per lot area-net, for purposes of
this chapter.
DEPTH-NET — The depth of a lot, exclusive of public right-of-way,
measured in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
DEVELOPABLE LAND or DEVELOPABLE LAND AREA — Land that is
free of constraints to development and that has access to an improved
roadway. Constraints to development include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the following: wetlands and wetland transition areas; stream
corridors; flood hazard areas; steep slopes of 15% or greater;
easements; and legal impediments.[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — Any person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2.
DISTRICT — Zone. For purpose of this chapter, "district," "zone" and
"zoning district" are synonymous terms.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any building or portion thereof where food
and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where
all or a significant portion of said consumption takes place or is
designed to take place outside the confines of the building, often in a
motor vehicle on the site.
DRIVE-IN THEATER — Any open lot with its appurtenant facilities
devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical
productions on a paid-admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:754
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms physically arranged so as to
create an independent housekeeping unit for occupancy by one family.
Kitchen, bathroom and sleeping facilities shall not be shared with any
other unit for purposes of this chapter.
EMISSION — Any discharge of pollutants into the air.
ENVIRONMENTAL EQUIPMENT — Equipment which may be required
by the Environmental Protection Agency or by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL BUSINESS — Any retail establishment, other
than a commercial/industrial operation, which rents equipment.
EQUIPMENT STORAGE BUILDING — Any building or structure used
by the associated permitted use for general storage.[Amended
9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-67]
ESTABLISHMENT WHICH DOES TATTOOING, MASSAGE, BODY
PIERCING — Any personal service shop which does tattooing, massage
and/or body piercing.
ESTABLISHMENT WHICH TRADES OR SELLS USED MERCHANDISE
— Any retail store which trades or sells used merchandise, including
but not limited to a flea market, pawn shop, used furniture store,
antique shop or thrift store.
FABRICATION — The process of constructing or assembling a product
from diverse and usually standardized parts.
FACADE-FRONT — The exterior wall of a building or structure
generally, but not always, oriented toward a public right-of-way, which
is intended to be the front of the building or structure.
FAMILY — One or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living
as a single housekeeping unit.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence in which child-care
services are provided for a fee to no less than three and no more
than five children at any one time for no less than 15 hours per week
and which is registered pursuant to the Family Day Care Provider
Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 30:5B-16 et seq. A child being cared for under
the following circumstances is not included in the total number of
children receiving child-care services:
FARM — Any parcel of land used for agricultural activities. More
explicitly, "farm" means a parcel of land used for the production,
keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or personal use, of plants
and animals useful to man, including but not limited to forages and
sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products;
(1) The child being cared for is legally related to the provider.
Care is being provided as part of an employment agreement
between the family day-care provider and an assistant or substitute
provider where no payment for the care is being provided.
(2)
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:755
poultry and poultry products, livestock, including beef cattle, sheep,
pigs, horses, ponies, mules and goats; bees and apiary products, fur
animals; fruits of all kinds, including nuts and berries; vegetables; and
nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products. An agricultural or
horticultural operation shall be considered a farm for purposes of this
chapter.
FARM BUILDING — Any building or structure used for livestock,
equipment, storage of supplies or harvested crops, or for preparation of
crops for market.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of preprepared or rapidly prepared food directly to
the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within
the restaurant building or off the premises.
FENCING — Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FLEA MARKET — Any occasional or periodic sales activity held within a
building, structure or open area where groups of individual sellers offer
goods, new and/or used, for sale to the public. A private garage sale
shall not be considered a flea market for purposes of this chapter.
FOOD PROCESSING — Any industrial use whereby food is processed
or otherwise prepared for consumption.
FORESTRY — The growing and harvesting of trees for commercial
purposes.
FOSTER CHILDREN — Children who are placed with families in a
dwelling unit by the Division of Youth and Family Services in the
Department of Institutions and Agencies or a duly incorporated childcare
agency.
FRONTAGE — The side or sides of a lot abutting any constructed
public right-of-way. For a lot having discontinuous segments abutting
a constructed public right-of-way, each segment shall be considered
a separate frontage having to meet ordinance standards. For a lot
abutting more than one constructed public right-of-way, such as a
corner lot, each side abutting a constructed public right-of-way shall
be considered a separate frontage having to meet ordinance standards.
The portion of a lot abutting a stub street or a stub end of a temporary
cul-de-sac shall not be considered frontage, and any part of a stub
street or stub end of a temporary cul-de-sac shall not be used for
access for purposes of this chapter.[Amended 7-23-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-49; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-83]
FUEL STORAGE YARD — Any commercial facility where fuel is stored.
A gasoline station shall not be considered a fuel storage yard for
purposes of this chapter.
FUNERAL HOME — Any building used for the preparation of the
deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:756
GARDEN APARTMENT BUILDING — Any building containing between
three and 15 dwelling units, inclusive, where access is provided by a
common hall. Dwelling units can be located on top of each other, side
by side or back to back for purposes of this chapter.
GARDEN EQUIPMENT SALES — Any indoor and/or outdoor retail
establishment where lawn and garden equipment is sold. Said
equipment shall include, but not be limited to, lawnmowers, lawn
tractors, rotary cultivators and leaf mulchers.
GARDEN SUPPLY STORE — Any indoor and/or outdoor retail
establishment where garden and landscaping materials are sold. Said
materials shall include, but not be limited to, trees, shrubs, bedding
plants, fertilizer, wood chips, mulch and decorative stone.
GASOLINE STATION — Any facility where gasoline, diesel fuel and
motor oil are sold. A portion of the facility, not to exceed 2% of the
lot area-net up to a maximum gross floor area of 1,000 square feet,
may be devoted to the erection of a building for an office, shelter or
convenience outlet to allow for the retail sale of items as would typically
be available in a convenience store for purposes of this chapter.
GENERAL REPAIR GARAGE — Any commercial establishment primarily
engaged in furnishing general automotive repairs to the public. For
purposes of this chapter, no unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles
shall be maintained at a general repair garage.
GOLF COURSE — Any facility used for playing golf with tees, greens,
fairways and hazards. A golf course may contain a clubhouse or shelter
which is clearly incidental to the golf course use of the property for
purposes of this chapter.
GOVERNING BODY — The chief legislative body of the municipality.
GOVERNMENTAL FACILITY — Any facility of a governmental body,
other than a governmental office or a governmental yard (i.e., federal,
state, county, municipal, authority or school board facility). Said
facilities shall include, but not be limited to, water supply wells or
tanks, sewerage pumping stations, fire stations, police stations,
stormwater basins and parks.
GOVERNMENTAL OFFICE — Any office of a governmental body (i.e.,
federal, state, county, municipal, authority or school board office).
GOVERNMENTAL YARD — Any facility which by design and
construction is primarily intended for the storage and maintenance of
equipment and the storage of construction materials of a governmental
body (i.e., federal, state, county, municipal, authority or school board
yard).
GROSS BUILDING AREA — The area a building or structure occupies
upon a lot, as dimensioned from vertical planes dropped from the
outermost points of said building or structure not from the exterior face
or exterior walls (i.e., gross building area includes roof overhangs).
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:757
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building or structure measured from the exterior face
of exterior walls, or from the center line of a common wall separating
two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space
for motor vehicles or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is
less than six feet. The gross horizontal area of a basement or cellar
is included in the calculation of gross floor area if used for anything
other than heating, mechanical or similar equipment, for purposes of
this chapter.
GROUNDWATER REMEDIAL ACTION — The removal or abatement
of pollutants in groundwater, and includes dewatering activities
performed in connection with the removal or replacement of
underground storage tanks, as defined in N.J.S.A. 58:10A-22, except
that, as used herein, underground storage tanks shall include:
GROUP HOME — Any single-family dwelling, recognized as a group
home by the Department of Institutions and Agencies, which is used for
the placement of children; provided, however, that no such home shall
contain more than 12 children.
HALFWAY HOUSE — Any profit or nonprofit boardinghome, rest home
or other home for the sheltered care of adult persons which, in addition
to providing food and shelter to four or more persons unrelated to
the proprietor, also provides any personal care or service beyond food,
shelter and laundry.
HEALTH-CARE FACILITY — Any facility or institution, whether public
or private, principally engaged in providing services for health
maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury,
deformity or physical condition, including but not limited to a general
hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center,
diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extendedcare
facility, skilled nursing home, nursing home, intermediate care
facility, tuberculosis hospital, chronic disease hospital, maternity
hospital, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home-health-care agency,
boardinghome or other home for sheltered care, and bioanalytical
laboratory or central services facility serving one or more such
institutions, but excluding institutions that provide healing solely by
prayer.
HELIPAD — Any helistop.
Farm underground storage tanks of 1,100 gallons or less in
capacity used for storing motor fuel for noncommercial purposes.
(1)
Underground storage tanks used to store heating oil for on-site
consumption in a nonresidential building with a capacity of 2,000
gallons or less.
(2)
Underground storage tanks used to store heating oil for on-site
consumption in a residential building.
(3)
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:758
HELIPORT — Any area, either at ground level or elevated on a
structure, licensed or approved for the loading and takeoff of
helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting
room, fueling and maintenance equipment.
HELISTOP — Any area, either at ground level or elevated on a
structure, licensed or approved for the loading and takeoff of
helicopters, with no auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room,
fueling and maintenance equipment.
HIGHWAY — Any street.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality
and character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural
object or configuration, or any portion or group of the foregoing of
historical, archeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any professional office or vocational activity
carried out for gain by a resident, conducted as a permitted use in the
resident's single-family dwelling.
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — Any horizontal property regime
formed under the Horizontal Property Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.
HOSPITAL — Any institution providing primary health services and
medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from
illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental
conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related
facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
HOSTEL — Any supervised lodging facility, usually intended for young
travellers.
HOTEL — Any facility offering transient lodging accommodations to
the general public, which may provide additional services such as
restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities.
HOUSEHOLD PETS — Domestic animals generally kept for pleasure
rather than utility, such as dogs and cats.
INCINERATION OR REDUCTION OF WASTE PRODUCTS — Any
controlled process by which solid, liquid or gaseous combustible wastes
are burned and changed into gases and residue containing little or no
combustible material.
INDOOR RECYCLING OPERATION — Any recycling operation where all
activities are conducted indoors.
INDOOR THEATER — Any building or part of a building devoted to
showing motion pictures or for dramatic, musical or live performances.
IN-HOME OFFICE — Any office within a single-family dwelling which is
used only for making phone calls and doing paperwork for an enterprise
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:759
conducted off site. Such an office shall have no identification sign and
shall receive no business visitation.
INSIDE LOT — Any lot or parcel of land not abutting two or more
streets at their intersection or not upon two parts of the same street
forming an interior angle of less than 135°.
INTENDED ABANDONMENT — Any relinquishment of property or a
cessation of the use of the property by the owner, with the intention
neither of transferring the rights to the property to another owner nor
of resuming the use of the property.
INTERMEDIATE-CARE FACILITY — Any facility which provides, on a
regular basis, health-related care and services to individuals who do not
require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital or skilled
nursing facility is designated to provide, but who, because of their
mental or physical condition, require care and services above the level
of room and board which can be made available to them only through
institutional facilities such as these.
JUNKYARD — Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale
or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or
discarded goods, materials, machinery or two or more unregistered,
inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding, breeding, training or selling dogs is carried on, except a pet
shop. For purposes of this chapter, pet grooming may be considered an
accessory use for a kennel.
LAND — Ground, soil or earth, including the improvements and fixtures
on, above or below the surface.
LAUNDROMAT — Any establishment providing washing, drying or drycleaning
machines on the premises for rental use to the general public
for family laundering or dry-cleaning purposes.
LINEN AND/OR DIAPER SERVICE — Any establishment which accepts
linen and/or diapers for laundering.
LIVESTOCK — Domestic animals, with the exception of household pets,
kept or raised for use or pleasure on a farm.
LOT — Any designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a
plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA-GROSS — The total area within the lot lines of a lot,
including any street rights-of-way.
LOT AREA-NET — The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding
any street rights-of-way.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:760
LOT COVERAGE-BUILDING — The portion of a lot that is covered by
buildings and structures. More explicitly, lot coverage-building is the
percentage of lot area-net covered by gross building area.
LOT COVERAGE-IMPERVIOUS — The portion of a lot that is covered by
man-made improvements which are more impervious than the natural
surface, such as parking and driveways, whether paved or stoned. Lot
coverage-impervious shall include lot coverage-building for purposes of
this chapter.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot,
measured at right angles to its depth for the entire required minimum
lot depth-net.[Added 1-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-99]
MAIN WORK SHIFT — Any scheduled period of work which results in
the greatest number of employees being on site.
MAJOR APPLIANCE STORE — Any establishment engaged primarily
in selling large-scale goods or merchandise to the general public for
personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental
to the sale of such goods. For purposes of this chapter, large-scale
goods shall include, but not be limited to, washers, dryers, stoves,
refrigerators and air conditioners.[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
MANUFACTURE — The process of making a product from raw
materials using mechanical power and machinery.
MASS PRODUCTION POTTERY OR CERAMICS — The manufacture of
pottery or ceramics in quantity by machinery.
MEDICAL CENTER — Any facility or institution, whether public or
private, principally engaged in providing services for health
maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury,
deformity or physical condition, including but not limited to a public
health center, diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center,
outpatient clinic, dispensary, home-health-care agency and
bioanalytical laboratory or central services facility serving one or more
health-care facilities, but excluding institutions that provide healing
solely by prayer. For purposes of this chapter, a professional building
with one or more physicians in private practice shall not be considered
a medical center.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER (ATC) —
An organization approved by the Department of Health to perform
activities necessary to provide registered qualifying patients with
usable marijuana (medical cannabis) and related paraphernalia in
accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey Compassionate Use
Medical Marijuana Act (N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq.). A medical marijuana
alternative treatment center may have cultivation facility and
dispensary facility functions.[Added 3-26-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-20]
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:761
MEDICAL OFFICE — Any office of a recognized medical profession
maintained for the conduct of that profession. For purposes of this
chapter, a dentist's or chiropractor's office shall be considered a
medical office, while a veterinarian's office shall not be considered a
medical office.[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
MEDICAL RESEARCH or MEDICAL RESEARCH FACILITY — A facility
for investigation into the medical or health sciences.[Added
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39]
MENTALLY ILL PERSON — Any person who is afflicted with a mental
illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23,178 but shall not include a person
who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a
criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be
tried on a criminal charge.
MID-RISE APARTMENT BUILDING — Any apartment building of more
than three stories.
MINOR ARTERIAL STREET — Any roadway which interconnects with
and augments the principal arterial system. A list of minor arterial
streets within the City is provided in § 425-75D(2).
MOBILE HOME PARK — [Amended 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69]:
A parcel of land or two or more parcels of land containing no fewer
than 10 sites equipped for the installation of manufactured homes
or mobile homes installed prior to the enactment of this article,
where these sites are under common ownership and control for the
purpose of leasing each site to the owner of a manufactured home
for the installation thereof, and where the owner or owners provide
services which are provided by the municipality in which the park
is located for property owners outside the park, which services may
include but shall not be limited to:
(a) The construction and maintenance of streets;
(b) Lighting of streets and other common areas;
(c) Garbage removal;
(d) Snow removal; and
Provisions for the drainage of surface water from home sites
and common areas.
(e)
(1)
While more appropriately called a "manufactured home
community" today, for purposes of this chapter, "mobile home park"
will continue to be used to maintain consistency with state statute.
(2)
178. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 30:4-23 was repealed by the Laws of 1987, c. 116, § 30, effective
6-7-1989.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:762
MODEL HOME — Any home constructed within a subdivision as a
sample.
MOTEL — Any establishment providing transient accommodations,
containing six or more rooms, each with bath, with at least 25% of
all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity
of passing through the main lobby of the building. For purposes of
this chapter, an auto and tourist court, motor lodge, autel and similar
accommodation shall be considered a motel.
MOTOR VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT STORAGE/REPAIR GARAGE —
Any building or structure accessory to an industrial use which is
intended for the storage and/or repair of motor vehicles and equipment
utilized by the business on site.
NEW AND USED CAR SALES — Any property utilized for the sale,
whether retail or wholesale, of new and/or used cars, trucks or other
highway vehicles. For purposes of this chapter, a business which rents
or leases cars, trucks or other highway vehicles shall be considered a
new and used car sales.
NONCONFORMING LOT — Any lot, the area, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption,
revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Any structure, the size, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use or activity which was lawful prior
to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONHAZARDOUS WASTE REDUCTION FACILITY — Any facility where
a nonhazardous waste material is separated into component parts,
those that can be and those that cannot be recycled. For purposes of
this chapter, a sewerage treatment plant, auto wrecking yard, junkyard,
recycling operation or composting facility shall not be considered a
nonhazardous waste reduction facility.
OFFICE — Any room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs
of a business, profession, service, industry or government.
ON-SITE WASTE DISPOSAL — Any utilization of property for the onsite
disposal of solid or hazardous waste.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:763
that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are
designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.[Added
6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-52]
ORNAMENTAL CORNICE — Any decorative, rather than structural, top
course that crowns a wall.
OTHER USE — Any permitted use allowable in a zoning district which
is explicitly enumerated under the heading of "other uses."
OUTDOOR AMUSEMENT — Any outdoor facility intended to provide
amusement or pleasurable diversion. Such facilities shall include, but
not be limited to, miniature golf courses and driving ranges.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — Maintaining materials or equipment outside of
a building or structure.
OUTDOOR TELEPHONE BOOTH — Any telephone made available to
the public in a booth, rather than in a building. For purposes of this
chapter, any outdoor telephone stand shall be considered an outdoor
telephone booth.
OVERDEVELOPMENT — To develop a property to an extent greater
than that allowed by the zone requirements and design standards
established by this chapter.
OVERLAY AREA — Any area established by this chapter in which more
stringent development standards than those required by the underlying
zoning district are applicable.
PARAPET WALL — Any extension of the main walls of a building above
the roof level.
PARKING — Any area designed and used for parking motor vehicles
which is intended to be accessory to a permitted use within a zoning
district.
PARKING LOT — Any public or private land designed and used for
parking motor vehicles which is intended to be a permitted use within
a zoning district.
PARTIAL DESTRUCTION — Any damage to a structure if the cost to
restore or repair is not greater than the tax assessed value of the
structure prior to the damage.
PASSENGER TERMINAL FACILITY — Any facility which by design and
construction is intended to provide accommodations for air, rail or bus
passengers.
PASSIVE RECREATIONAL USE — Any leisure-time activity not
considered active.
PERMITTED USE — Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to
the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:764
PERSON WITH HEAD INJURY — Any person who has sustained an
injury, illness or traumatic changes to the skull, the brain contents or its
coverings which results in a temporary or permanent physiobiological
decrease of mental, cognitive, behavioral, social or physical functioning
which causes partial or total disability.
PERSONAL RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any recreational facility
provided as an accessory use on the same lot as the principal permitted
use and designed to be used primarily by the occupants of the principal
use and their guests.
PERSONAL SERVICE SHOP — Any establishment primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel.
Personal service shops shall include, but not be limited to, laundries,
cleaning and garment services, garment pressing, linen and/or diaper
services, laundromats, dry-cleaning plants, clothing rentals, carpet and
upholstery cleaning, photographic studios, beauty shops, barbershops,
shoe repair, hat cleaning, steam baths, reducing salons and health
clubs.
PET SHOP — Any retail store where pets and/or pet products are sold
to the general public. For purposes of this chapter, a kennel or cattery
is not considered a pet shop.
PIGGERY — Any place where swine are kept, more specifically where
three or more pigs are kept or raised.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according
to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses,
or both, and any residential and other uses incidental to the
predominant use as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Any planned unit development, planned
unit residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according
to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any
other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by
ordinance.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — Any area with a specified minimum
contiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be developed as a single
entity according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters or
planned unit residential developments and one or more public, quasipublic,
commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of
nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall be specified in the
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:765
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any area with a
specified minimum contiguous acreage of five acres or more to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan containing one or
more residential clusters, which may include appropriate commercial
or public or quasi-public uses, all primarily for the benefit of the
residential development.
PLOT PLAN — Any rough sketch map of a proposed subdivision or site
plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion.
PRIME OR UNIQUE AGRICULTURAL SOILS — Any farmland classified
as "prime" or "unique" by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — Any building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
PRINTING AND PUBLISHING — The commercial production and
issuance of literature, information, musical scores or art.
PRIVATE AIRFIELD — Any noncommercial airport.
PRIVATE GARAGE — Any structure which is accessory to a residential
building and which is used for the parking and storage of vehicles
owned and operated by the residents thereof, and which is not a
separate commercial enterprise available to the general public. A
carport, open on two to four sides, shall be considered a private garage
for purposes of this chapter.[Amended 9-11-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-67]
PRODUCE MARKET — Any commercial retail establishment, other than
a roadside stand, which primarily sells produce.
PROFESSIONAL BUILDING — Any building which by design and
construction is intended for professional offices.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Any office of a member of a recognized
profession maintained for the conduct of that profession. For purposes
of this chapter, a veterinarian's office shall not be considered a
professional office.
PROHIBITED USE — Any use which is not permitted within a zoning
district.
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE NONPROFIT DAY SCHOOL — Any public or
private, nonprofit nonresidential school.
PUBLIC BUS SHELTER — For purposes of this chapter, any New Jersey
Transit weather shelter.
PUBLIC GARAGE — Any building, structure or property designed and
used for equipping, adjusting, greasing, washing, polishing, servicing
or storage of motor vehicles, operated for profit and for service to the
public.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:766
PUBLIC PURPOSE USE — Any school, child-care center, governmental
or public utility facility, governmental or public utility office or
governmental or public utility yard, for purposes of this chapter.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any utility, authority, commission, special district
or other corporate entity, whether regulated or not by the Board of
Regulatory Commissioners, that provides gas, electricity, water,
sewerage, telephone or cable television service.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY — Any facility of a public utility, other than
a public utility office or a public utility yard. Said facilities shall include,
but not be limited to, antennas and switching stations.
PUBLIC UTILITY OFFICE — Any office of a public utility.
PUBLIC UTILITY YARD — Any facility which by design and construction
is primarily intended for the storage and maintenance of equipment and
the storage of construction materials of a public utility.
QUADRUPLEX — Any structure containing four dwelling units, each of
which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall. Said units
may be side by side or one atop the other.
QUASI-PUBLIC — Any facility which is essentially public, although
under private ownership or control.
RADIO/TELEVISION STUDIO — Any building or portion thereof used
for radio or television broadcasting.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any public or nonprofit park or club,
whether an active recreational use or a passive recreational use,
designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure-time activities
and other customary and usual recreational activities. For purposes of
this chapter, a commercial recreational facility shall be considered a
personal service shop or an outdoor amusement, as is appropriate.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any vehicular-type portable structure
without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven
and which is primarily designed as temporary living accommodation
for recreational, camping and travel use, including but not limited
to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled
motor homes. For purposes of this chapter, such vehicles, which must
be registered, may be parked in any zoning district but may not be
occupied as a dwelling unit.
RECYCLED MATERIAL — Any waste product which is reduced to a raw
material for reuse.
RECYCLING OPERATION — Any facility where waste products are
reduced to raw materials for reuse.
RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCE — Any energy source which can be
utilized with no resultant depletion.
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:767
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — Any area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Any use of a property for residential purposes,
including but not limited to a single-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling, townhouse, garden apartment building and mid-rise
apartment building.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — R-1, R-B, R-2, R-P, R-3, R-4, A-5, A-6, W-5, W-6,
P-A, P-F or P-R Zones, for purposes of this chapter.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION — Any commercial operation which extracts
or remove naturally occurring materials from the ground for use off
site. Such materials include, but are not limited to soil, sand, gravel and
stone.
RESTAURANT — Any commercial establishment where food and drink
is prepared, served and consumed within the establishment. For
purposes of this chapter, outdoor entertainment or recreation shall not
be considered an accessory use for a restaurant.
RETAIL GREENHOUSE — Any building whose roof and sides are made
largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material in which
temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation or
display of delicate or out-of-season plants offered for sale to the general
public.
RETAIL OUTLET — Any retail sales area associated with an industrial
facility which is clearly incidental to the fabrication or manufacture
conducted on site.
RETAIL SALES — The sale of goods or merchandise to the general
public.
RETAIL STORE — Any establishment engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household
consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
goods.
RIDING ACADEMY — Any establishment where horses are boarded and
cared for and where instruction in riding, jumping and showing may
be offered and where the general public may, for a fee, hire horses for
riding.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
forced dedication, prescription or condemnation intended to be
occupied or occupied by a street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive or other roadway.
ROAD — Any street, for purposes of this chapter.
ROADSIDE STAND — Any booth or stall accessory to a single-family
dwelling or farm from which handicrafts, flowers, fruits or vegetables
produced on site are sold to the general public. Such booths or stalls
shall be a maximum of 300 square feet.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:768
ROOMING HOUSE — Any boardinghouse wherein no personal or
financial services are provided.
SALON — Any establishment primarily engaged in providing services
involving the care of a person. A beauty shop is an example of such an
establishment.
SCHOOL — Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed
or used for academic education or instruction. For purposes of this
chapter, a vocational training facility (industrial or nonindustrial) shall
not be considered a school.
SELF-STORAGE BUSINESS — Any facility which provides storage
space to the general public for a fee.
SENIOR DAY CARE — A facility which provides social and recreational
activities, meals, and entertainment for the elderly or other persons
in need of similar services on a daily basis without overnight
accommodations. No medical services, other than the supervision of
self-administered medication, are provided.[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
SEWERAGE INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT SYSTEM — Any
equipment installed on an industrial property which is intended to
pretreat effluent prior to discharge into a sewerage collection system
or on-site disposal system.
SEWERAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any facility which by design and
construction is intended to accept organic waste and wastewater
generated by residential, commercial and industrial properties for
treatment and disposal.
SIGN BUSINESS — Any establishment which fabricates and sells signs.
For purposes of this chapter, such an establishment may have a yard for
storage of materials, equipment and vehicles used by the business on
site.
SILO — Any tall wood or concrete cylindrical structure used for making
and storing silage.
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more individuals living
together in a dwelling unit, with common access to and common use of
all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation
and storage of food within the dwelling unit. For purposes of this
chapter, a single housekeeping unit shall function as a family.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Any dwelling occupied by a single
housekeeping unit which is not attached to any other dwelling. For
purposes of this chapter, a single-family dwelling may include an
accessory apartment, in-home office, family day-care home or a single
boarder.
SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY — Any arrangement of dwelling space
which does not provide a private, secure dwelling space arranged for
independent living (i.e., which does not contain both the sanitary and
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:769
cooking facilities required in dwelling spaces pursuant to the Hotel
and Multiple Dwelling Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.) and which is not
used for limited-tenure occupancy in a hotel, motel or established guest
house, regardless of the number of individuals occupying any room or
rooms.
SITE PLAN — Any development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways, the location of all existing and proposed
buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and
egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and
signs, lighting, screening devices and any other information that may
be reasonably required in order to make an informed determination,
pursuant to this chapter, requiring review and approval of site plans by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
SKATING RINK — Any facility which by design and construction is
intended to be utilized for roller skating or ice skating.
SKYLIGHT — Any opening in a structure's roof that is covered with
translucent or transparent material and that is designed to admit light.
SMALL CONTRACTOR'S YARD — Any facility which by design and
construction is primarily intended for the storage and maintenance of
equipment and the storage of construction materials for a contractor
involved in a building trade. For purposes of this chapter, a small
contractor's yard shall be characterized by all of the following:
SPECIALIZED REPAIR GARAGE — Any commercial establishment
primarily engaged in furnishing specialized automotive repairs to the
public. A muffler or transmission shop is an example of such an
establishment. For purposes of this chapter, no unregistered,
inoperable motor vehicles shall be maintained at a specialized repair
garage.
SPORTSMEN'S CLUB OR LODGE — Any facility which by design and
construction is intended to be utilized for hunting and fishing.
STEAM BATH — Any sauna or bathhouse.
The developed portion of the property devoted to the small
contractor's yard shall be a maximum of 5,000 square feet.
(1)
The maximum allowable size for a building or structure devoted to
the small contractor's yard shall be 1,500 square feet.
(2)
There shall be no more than four employees, including the owners
of the business.
(3)
Outdoor storage shall be screened from public view (from any
public street, road or sidewalk; from any adjoining property; or
from any portion of the site accessible to the public) by fencing and/
or landscaping.
(4)
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:770
STONE-CRUSHING OPERATION — Any facility which mechanically
pounds or grinds stone into smaller sizes.
STORAGE SHED — Any one-story structure which by design and
construction is intended to provide storage for a residential building.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it,
and including those basements used for the principal use.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
or which is approved by official action as provided by this chapter or
which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board
and the grant to such board of the power to review plats. A "street"
shall include the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within
the meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created:
SUBSTANCE ABUSE COUNSELING OR TREATMENT CENTER — Any
facility which provides counseling and/or therapeutic programs for
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or subdivision
committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size.
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
(3)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the Zoning Officer to conform to the
requirements of this chapter and are shown and designated as
separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Maps of the City. For
purposes of this chapter, a resubdivision shall be considered a
subdivision.
(5)
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:771
recovering alcoholics and drug addicts. For purposes of this chapter, a
substance abuse or treatment center shall not provide food or shelter.
SUPERMARKET — Any retail establishment which primarily sells food
as well as other convenience and household goods.
TAVERN — Any establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor
by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged liquors
may be served or sold only as an incidental to the primary use. For
purposes of this chapter, outdoor entertainment or recreation shall not
be considered an accessory use for a tavern.
TAXI OR BUS STOP — Any location established by the governing body
reserved for a taxi or bus to stop.
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT — Any permit issued in accordance with
§ 425-310.
TENANT — Any leaseholder of a defined portion of a building.
TOWING FACILITY — Any public garage which offers towing services.
No motor vehicle shall remain at a towing facility for longer than six
months, for purposes of this chapter.
TOWNHOUSE — Any structure containing five two-story dwelling units,
with interior units having two vertical party walls and end units having
one party wall.
TRASH ENCLOSURE — Any four-sided enclosure which by design and
construction is intended to contain and screen all trash receptacles,
including dumpsters and recycling containers, on a site.
TRIPLEX — Any structure containing three dwelling units, each of
which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall. Said units
may be side by side or one atop the other.
TRUCK TERMINAL — Any facility where a business, service or industry
involving the maintenance, servicing, storage or repair of commercial
vehicles is conducted or rendered.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — Any structure containing two dwelling
units, each of which has direct access to the outside or to a common
hall. Said units may be side by side or one atop the other.
UNIT OF DWELLING SPACE — Any room, rooms, suite or portion
thereof, whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or
intended, arranged or designed to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling
purposes by one or more persons.
USE VARIANCE — Any variance as described by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c
or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
VENTILATOR — Any mechanical device which introduces fresh air and/
or expels stagnant air from a building or structure.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-270
1:772
VIDEO ARCADE — Any establishment having coin-operated video
games (more than three).
VOCATIONAL ACTIVITY — Any trade requiring manual or mechanical
skill.
VOCATIONAL TRAINING FACILITY (INDUSTRIAL) — Any secondary or
higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare
students for jobs in an industrial trade which meets the state's
requirements for a vocational facility. A carpentry school is an example
of such a facility.
VOCATIONAL TRAINING FACILITY (NONINDUSTRIAL) — Any
secondary or higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills
that prepare students for jobs in a nonindustrial trade which meets
the state's requirements for a vocational facility. A beauty school is an
example of such a facility.
WAREHOUSING — Any terminal facility for handling freight, with or
without maintenance facilities.
WASTE ENCLOSURE — Any enclosure on a farm where waste
materials are temporarily stored prior to disposal.
WASTE STORAGE, DISPOSAL OR TRANSFER FACILITY — Any facility
which stores, either temporarily or permanently, disposes of or
transfers solid waste, hazardous waste, radioactive waste or sludge.
WATER TANK — Any elevated tank which by design and construction is
intended for storage of potable water.
WEATHER SHELTER — Any small, roofed structure, having from one
to three walls, located near a street, and designed primarily for the
protection and convenience of bus passengers.
WHOLESALE LUMBER YARD — Any facility where lumber and
associated products are sold to those primarily engaged in the
construction trade.
WHOLESALE OPERATION — Any establishment or place or business
primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
commercial, institutional or professional business users; or to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for
or selling merchandise to such individuals or companies.
YARD, FRONT — The space extending the full width of the lot between
any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the
building at the closest point to the front lot line. Such front yard shall be
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may
be permitted by this chapter.
YARD, REAR — The space extending the full width of the lot between
the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular
to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. Such rear yard
shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except
as may be permitted by this chapter.
§ 425-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-270
1:773
§ 425-271. Enumeration of zones and overlay areas; Zoning Map.
YARD, SIDE — The space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between the principal building and the side lot line and measured
perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal
building.
ZONE — Any area specifically delineated by this article, with the
exception of an overlay area, in which regulations and requirements
uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and
buildings. For purposes of this chapter, the term "zone" shall be
synonymous with "zoning district."
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer designated to
administer the Zoning Ordinance and issue zoning permits.
ZONING ORDINANCE — This article.
ZONING PERMIT — The document signed by the Zoning Officer as
required in the Zoning Ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a building or structure, which
acknowledges that such use, building or structure complies with the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance or duly authorized variance
therefrom.
A. The following zones are established in the City of Vineland: [Amended
5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69; 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-49;
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(1) R-1 Residential.
(2) R-B-1 Residential-Business.
(3) R-B-2 Residential-Business.
(4) R-2 Residential.
(5) R-P Residential Professional.
(6) R-3 Residential.
(7) R-4 Residential.
(8) R-5 Residential.
(9) R-6 Residential.
(10) A-5 Agricultural.
(11) A-6 Agricultural.
(12)W-5 Woodlands.
(13)W-6 Woodlands.
§ 425-270 VINELAND CODE § 425-271
1:774
(14) P-A Pinelands Agricultural Production.
(15) P-F Pinelands Forest.
(16) P-R Pinelands Rural Development.
(17) I-1 Industrial Park.
(18) I-B Industrial Business.
(19) I-2 Industrial.
(20) I-3 Industrial.
(21) I-4 Industrial.
(22)B-1 Business.
(23)B-2 Business.
(24)B-3 Business.
(25)B-4 Business.
(26) MHP Mobile Home Park.
(27) IN-1 Institutional.
(28) IN-2 Institutional Campus.
(29) CO Conservation.
(30) P Public.
(31) MF Multifamily.
B. The following overlay areas are established in the City of Vineland:
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39]
(1) Airport Hazard Area.
(2) Downtown Improvement District Area.
(3) River Conservation Area.
(4) Flood Hazard Area.
(5) Regional Mall.
C. The location and boundaries of all zones and overlay areas are shown
on the Zoning Map, which is a part of this chapter.179
D. Where the exact location of a boundary shown on the Zoning Map
cannot be precisely determined, the following shall apply:
179. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is located at the end of this volume.
§ 425-271 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-271
1:775
§ 425-272. R-1 Residential Zone standards.
(1) Zone and overlay area boundaries shall follow the center lines of
streets, railroads, streams and lot lines as they appear on the
Zoning Map, unless a boundary is fixed by dimensions shown on
said Map.
(2) Where a boundary is not fixed by dimensions but approximately
follows lot lines and does not scale more than 10 feet distance
therefrom, such lot lines shall be accepted as the boundary.
(3) Where a boundary divides a lot, the location of the boundary shall
be determined by scale with reference to the nearest known
distance on the Zoning Map.
E. For purposes of this chapter, multiple nonresidential permitted uses
may co-locate on a property. This provision is not applicable within the
Pinelands Area. [Added 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-58; amended
10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-84; 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-88]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of older, established residential neighborhoods within the
City. Because of the existing stock of well-maintained older homes,
because of the allowance for smaller lot areas and because of the
variety of housing types permitted, it is anticipated that these zones will
continue to provide an abundant supply of affordable units. It is
important that zone requirements and design standards not be
sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon the character and stability of these
neighborhoods. It is the intent that a single-family dwelling be the
preferred use of property, as none of the other permitted uses are to be
considered unless all other requirements of this chapter can be met.
For example, there is not an automatic or implied right to develop a
professional building. A professional building should only be considered
if all the requirements of this chapter, including design standards, can
be met.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the R-1 Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Townhouse.180
(4) Professional building.
180. Editor's Note: Former Subsections B(4), Garden apartment building, and B(5), Mid-rise
apartment building, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 4-10-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39.
§ 425-271 VINELAND CODE § 425-272
1:776
§ 425-273. R-B-1 Residential-Business Zone standards. [Amended
2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3; 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(5) Home occupation.
(6) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(d) Governmental or public utility office.
(7) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the R-1 Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Private garage, 600 square feet per dwelling unit maximum, for a
single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse.
(2) Personal recreational facilities for a residential property.
(3) One storage shed, 200 square feet maximum, for a residential
property with five or fewer dwelling units, and 300 square feet
maximum for a residential property with more than five dwelling
units or a professional building. [Amended 9-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-67]
(4) Trash enclosure.
(5) Fencing.
(6) Signage.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-1 Residential Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) Boardinghouse, rooming house.
(2) Hospital, medical center, convalescent home.181
(3) Church, congregation.
(4) Funeral home.
(5) Recreational facility.
181. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), regarding community residences and community
shelters, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-3.
§ 425-272 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-273
1:777
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of older, mixed-use areas within the City. These areas
generally provide a transitional buffer between established
neighborhoods and commercial/industrial uses. It is important that
zone requirements and design standards not be sacrificed to allow
overdevelopment of properties, as this would negatively impact upon
the residential properties within these zones and adjoining residential
zones. It is the intent that a single-family dwelling be the preferred use
of property, as none of the other permitted uses are to be considered
unless all other requirements of this chapter can be met. For example,
there is not an automatic or implied right to develop a business use. A
business use should only be considered if all the requirements of this
chapter, including design standards, can be met. It is the intent that
these zones continue to be mixed use, recognizing that all properties
are not suitable for conversion.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the R-B-1 Residential-Business Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the R-1 Zone, except that mid-rise apartment
buildings shall not be permitted.
(2) All uses permitted in the B-1 Zone, except for those enumerated as
prohibited uses below.
(3) Hotel, motel.
(4) Restaurant.
(5) Bar, tavern.
(6) Gasoline station.
(7) Amusement facility, video arcade.
(8) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(d) Governmental or public utility office.
(9) Community residence, community shelter.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the R-B-1 Residential-Business Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zone.
(2) All accessory uses permitted in the B-1 Zone.
§ 425-273 VINELAND CODE § 425-273
1:778
§ 425-274. R-B-2 Zone. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-B-1 Residential-Business
Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Hospital, medical center, convalescent home.182
(2) Church, congregation.
(3) Recreational facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the R-B-1 Residential-Business Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) Adult bookstore.
(2) Establishment which does tattooing, massage, body piercing.
(3) Steam bath.
(4) Astrologers, cardreaders, psychics.
(5) Substance abuse counseling or treatment center.
F. Special zone requirements. The following requirements apply to
development in the R-B-1 Zone:
(1) No parking (except for parking in an approved driveway to a singlefamily
dwelling or a two-family dwelling or a townhouse) shall be
located in the front yard.
(2) No outdoor storage or solid waste or recycling areas shall be
located in the required front yard nor between any part of the front
building facade and the street right-of-way line.
(3) No fire escapes shall be located on the front facade of any building
facing the street right-of-way line.
(4) Front porches facing the street right-of-way line shall be
maintained as open porches.
(5) For any development application for subdivision or variance,
conditional use or site plan approval, the building design shall be
suitable to the architectural character of a residential
neighborhood. Buildings shall provide a front entrance facing the
street right-of-way line. Parking lots shall be screened from public
view. Landscaping shall be provided as required by the City design
standards set forth in Article VII of this chapter (the City of
Vineland Land Use Ordinance).
182. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), regarding community residences and community
shelters, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-3.
§ 425-273 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-274
1:779
A. Purpose. The R-B-2 Zone on Chestnut Avenue provides for the adaptive
reuse of lands and buildings formerly occupied and used as the
Newcomb Hospital.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the R-B-2 Residential Business Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) Senior day care.
(2) Assisted living.
(3) Convalescent home.
(4) Corporate offices.
(5) Medical research facility.
(6) Professional offices.
(7) Public purpose uses.
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(d) Governmental or public utility office.
(e) Affordable age-restricted housing (maximum of 80 dwelling
units).
(f) Public parks and playgrounds.
(8) Community residence, community shelter.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the R-B-2 Residential Business Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) Parking.
(2) Public bus shelter.
(3) Trash enclosure.
(4) Fencing.
(5) Signage.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-B-2 Residential Business
Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Church, congregation.
(2) Funeral home.
(3) Recreational facility.
§ 425-274 VINELAND CODE § 425-274
1:780
§ 425-275. R-2 Residential Zone standards.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the R-B-2 Residential Business Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) Adult bookstore.
(2) Establishment which does tattooing, massage, body piercing.
(3) Steam bath.
(4) Astrologers, cardreaders, psychics.
(5) Substance abuse counseling or treatment center.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of established, predominantly residential neighborhoods
within the City. Because of the existing stock of well-maintained older
homes, because of the allowance for smaller lot areas and because of
the variety of housing types permitted, it is anticipated that these zones
will continue to provide an abundant supply of affordable units. It is
important that zone requirements and design standards not be
sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon the character of these neighborhoods. It is the
intent that a single-family dwelling be the preferred use of property, as
none of the other permitted uses are to be considered unless all other
requirements of this chapter can be met. For example, there is not an
automatic or implied right to develop a quadruplex. A quadruplex
should only be considered if all the requirements of this chapter,
including design standards, can be met.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the R-2 Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.183
(3) Home occupation.
(4) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(5) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
183. Editor's Note: Former Subsections B(3), Triplex, and B(4), Quadruplex, which immediately
followed this subsection, were repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-39.
§ 425-274 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-275
1:781
§ 425-276. R-P Residential-Professional Zone standards.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the R-2 Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zone.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-2 Residential Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) Hospital, medical center, convalescent home.184
(2) Church, congregation.
(3) Cemetery, crematorium.
(4) Recreational facility.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of residential areas located along selected arterials within
the City. Because of the existing stock of substantial, well-maintained
older homes in some areas, and because of the close proximity to
established neighborhoods in others, maintenance of the residential
character in conversions or new construction is paramount. It is not the
intent that these areas be considered in transition, meaning that they
are evolving from residential to commercial use. It is rather the intent
that these areas accommodate limited, mixed-use development, if
appropriate. It is important that zone requirements and design
standards not be sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of properties, as
this would negatively impact upon the residential properties within
these zones and adjoining residential zones. It is the intent that
maintenance or replication of Vineland's historic residential flavor,
which would include tree-lined streets and expansive, landscaped front
yards, be deemed essential to preserve the desired character. It is the
intent that a single-family dwelling be the preferred use of property, as
none of the other permitted uses are to be considered unless all other
requirements of this chapter can be met. For example, there is not an
automatic or implied right to develop a professional building. A
professional building should only be considered if all the requirements
of this chapter, including design standards, can be met. It is the intent
that these zones continue to be mixed use, recognizing that all
properties are not suitable for conversion.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the R-P Residential-Professional Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
184. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), regarding community residences and community
shelters, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-3.
§ 425-275 VINELAND CODE § 425-276
1:782
(3) Professional building.
(4) Home occupation.
(5) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(d) Governmental or public utility office.
(6) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the R-P Residential-Professional
Zone shall be as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zone.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-P Residential-Professional
Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Hospital, medical center, convalescent home.185
(2) Church, congregation.
(3) Funeral home.
(4) Recreational facility.
(5) Heliport, helistop, helipad.
E. Special zone standards. In addition to any other standards contained
within this chapter, the following special zone standards shall be
applicable to any use within the R-P Residential-Professional Zone, with
the exception of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling:
(1) No drive opening shall be permitted for vehicular access to
Chestnut Avenue or to Landis Avenue, except to serve properties
which have no other street frontage or to serve corner properties
where the secondary street is one-way. For properties which have
no other street frontage or for corner properties where the
secondary street is one-way, only one drive opening shall be
permitted for vehicular access to Chestnut Avenue or to Landis
Avenue.
(2) Parking facilities shall be located within side yards or rear yards
and shall be completely screened from neighboring properties and
any public street.
185. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), regarding community residences and community
shelters, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-3.
§ 425-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-276
1:783
§ 425-277. R-3 Residential Zone standards.
(NOTE: The locations of drive openings and parking facilities for
a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling are not viewed
as being significant for the purposes of this subsection because
of differences in physical character and usage. For example,
residential drive openings for a single-family dwelling or a twofamily
dwelling are typically not as large or as frequently used as
nonresidential drive openings. The same can be said of parking
facilities.)
F. Special zone requirements. The following requirements apply to
development in the R-P Zone: [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(1) No parking (except for parking in a driveway to a single-family
dwelling or a two-family dwelling) shall be located in the front yard.
(2) No outdoor storage or solid waste or recycling areas shall be
located in the required front yard nor between any part of the front
building facade and the street right-of-way line.
(3) No fire escapes shall be located on the front facade of any building
facing the street right-of-way line.
(4) Front porches facing the street right-of-way line shall be
maintained as open porches.
(5) For any development application for subdivision or variance or
conditional use or site plan approval, the building and site shall be
designed to be suitable to the architectural character of a
residential neighborhood. Buildings shall provide a front entrance
facing the street right-of-way line. Parking lots shall be screened
from public view. Landscaping shall be provided as required by the
design standards set forth in Article VII of this chapter (the City of
Vineland Land Use Ordinance).
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of established neighborhoods within the City. As there is
extensive acreage suitable for development available within these
zones, it is further the purpose of these zones to create predominantly
residential areas at lesser density than the R-1, R-B, R-2 and R-P Zones,
so as to provide varied housing opportunities within the City. It is
important that zone requirements and design standards not be
sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon the character of these neighborhoods. It is the
intent that a single-family dwelling be the preferred use of property, as
none of the other permitted uses are to be considered unless all other
requirements of this chapter can be met. For example, there is no
automatic or implied right to develop a two-family dwelling. A two-
§ 425-276 VINELAND CODE § 425-277
1:784
family dwelling should only be considered if all the requirements of this
chapter, including design standards, can be met.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the R-3 Residential Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling.186
(2) Farm, except for those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(3) Home occupation.
(4) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(d) Governmental or public utility yard. [Added 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39]
(5) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses within the R-3 Residential Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zone.
(2) Farm building for livestock, equipment, storage of supplies or
harvested crops, or for preparation of crops for market for a farm.
(3) Commercial production greenhouse for a farm.
(4) Roadside stand, 300 square feet maximum, for a single-family
dwelling or a farm.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-3 Residential Zone shall be
as follows: [Amended 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69]
(1) Hospital, medical center, convalescent home.187
(2) Church, congregation.
(3) Funeral home.
(4) Cemetery, crematorium.
186. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), Two-family dwelling, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39.
187. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), regarding community residences and community
shelters, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-3.
§ 425-277 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-277
1:785
§ 425-278. R-4 Residential Zone standards.
(5) Recreational facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the R-3 Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Piggery, unless the lot area-net is a minimum of 50 acres and the
requirements of Chapter 224, Article II, of the Code of the City of
Vineland are met.
(2) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of established neighborhoods within the City. As there is
extensive acreage suitable for development available within these
zones, it is further the purpose of these zones to create predominantly
residential areas at lesser density than the R-1, R-B, R-2, R-P and R-3
Zones, so as to provide varied housing opportunities within the City. It
is important that zone requirements and design standards not be
sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon the character of these neighborhoods. It is the
intent that a single-family dwelling be the preferred use of property.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the R-4 Residential Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Farm, except for those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(3) Home occupation.
(4) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(5) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses within the R-4 Residential Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zone.
(2) Farm building for livestock, equipment, storage of supplies or
harvested crops, or for preparation of crops for market for a farm.
(3) Commercial production greenhouse for a farm.
§ 425-277 VINELAND CODE § 425-278
1:786
§ 425-279. R-5 Residential Zone standards. [Added 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(4) Roadside stand, 300 square feet maximum, for a single-family
dwelling or a farm.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-4 Residential Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) Hospital, medical center, convalescent home.188
(2) Church, congregation.
(3) Recreational facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the R-4 Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Piggery, unless the lot area-net is a minimum of 50 acres and the
requirements of Chapter 224, Article II, of the Code of the City of
Vineland are met.
(2) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-5 Zone is to implement the Master Plan
recommendation for a low-density suburban/rural transition area from
the City center suburbs to the City greenbelt. The R-5 Zone provides an
area for development of low-density single-family detached housing.
Farms will continue to be permitted, and farmland preservation as part
of the low-density residential area is encouraged and supported by the
City. Residential cluster development and lot size averaging will be
permitted at the City's option, provided that the total number of
dwellings is equivalent to the number of dwellings allowed by a
conventional layout. Cluster development and lot size averaging will
only be allowed where the lots are served by sewer and public water
and the reduction in lot size is offset by open space preservation and
protection of the environment.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Residential cluster.
(3) Farm, except for those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(4) Home occupation.
(5) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
188. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), regarding community residences and community
shelters, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-3.
§ 425-278 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-279
1:787
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(6) Community residence, community shelter.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses within the R-5 Residential Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zone.
(2) Farm building for livestock, equipment, storage of supplies or
harvested crops, or for preparation of crops for market for a farm.
(3) Commercial production greenhouse for a farm.
(4) Roadside stand, 300 square feet maximum, for a single-family
dwelling or a farm.
D. Conditional uses in the R-5 Residential Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Church, congregation.
(2) Recreational facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the R-5 Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Piggery.
(2) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
F. Residential cluster in the R-5 Zone. Residential cluster design within
the R-5 Zone may better advance the intent and purpose of the City
Master Plan for the protection of the environment and the conservation
of open space, provided that the overall intensity of the cluster does not
exceed the intensity of a permitted conventional development.
Accordingly, a residential cluster of single-family dwellings may be
permitted as an alternative form of development in the R-5 Zone on a
contiguous land area that is to be developed as a single entity according
to a plan that preserves a significant area of open space. The Planning
Board may approve a residential cluster where it determines that the
intent and purpose of the City Master Plan is better served by the
cluster design and that the development meets the requisite standards
and criteria for the residential cluster option.
(1) Cluster option. Cluster development may be permitted at the option
of the City Planning Board as an alternative to conventional
development. The Planning Board may permit the cluster option
where the applicant demonstrates that, compared to a conventional
layout, the cluster design will benefit the community in the
following ways: by conserving natural resources; by preserving
open spaces; by better protecting areas that are particularly
susceptible to erosion and sediment loss; by reducing impervious
§ 425-279 VINELAND CODE § 425-279
1:788
surfaces; by better protecting natural drainage features and
vegetation; by minimizing land disturbance from clearing and
grading; by minimizing soil compaction; by reducing the use of
stormwater management basins; by promoting the use of vegetated
open-channel drainage systems that discharge into and through
stable vegetated areas; and by reducing the need for additional
infrastructure. For purposes of evaluating the cluster option, the
applicant shall submit a lot yield map of a conforming conventional
subdivision layout. The Planning Board shall compare the benefit of
the cluster subdivision plan to the conventional subdivision plan by
considering the following factors: reduction in the total area of land
disturbance; reduction in the total area of impervious coverage;
reduction in the total length of new streets; reduction in the
construction of new structural drainage facilities; and the
preservation of trees and woodland.
(a) Required location. A residential cluster of single-family
dwellings shall be located on contiguous land in the R-5 Zone,
with the single-family dwellings located to enable the
preservation of common or public open space.
(b) Minimum total land area required. The minimum total land
area required for development as a residential cluster is 50
acres. At least 65% of the total minimum land area
requirement for a residential cluster shall be unencumbered by
any of the following: wetlands or wetlands transition areas;
areas of special flood hazard; existing easements for utilities or
drainage; rights-of-way; surface waters. Land that is already
permanently protected from development as open space or as
farmland through a conservation easement or other means
cannot be used to satisfy the minimum area requirement.
(c) Maximum permitted number of dwelling units. The residential
cluster shall not yield a greater number of dwelling units than
would result from the development of the land as a fully
conforming conventional subdivision of single-family lots. For
purposes of determining the maximum number of dwellings
permitted under the residential cluster alternative, the
applicant shall submit a lot yield map of a conforming
conventional subdivision layout. The conforming lot yield map
shall be in a sufficient detail to permit the Planning Board to
make an informed decision that the subdivision satisfies all
ordinance requirements in every respect and would be
approvable as a conventional subdivision without the need for
any variances, waivers or exceptions from the City
development regulations. The number of dwellings shown on
an accepted lot yield map of a conforming subdivision shall be
the maximum number of lots permitted in the residential
cluster.
§ 425-279 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-279
1:789
(d) Public sewer and public water required. The dwelling units of a
residential cluster must be served by public sewer and public
water.
(e) Minimum area and bulk standards for residential lots. The
number of dwellings shown on the accepted lot yield map of a
conforming subdivision shall be the maximum number of
residential lots permitted in the residential cluster. The
residential cluster lots shall otherwise conform to the area,
yard and bulk standards as set forth in the Zoning Schedule,
Sheet 1 (Part 1) for conventional one-family development in the
R-4 Residential Zone.189
(f) Open space design requirements. The cluster design for open
space shall be arranged to preserve land as public or common
open space in accordance with the following criteria.
[1] A minimum of 50% of the gross land area of the cluster
shall be preserved as common or public open space. If the
residential cluster includes an existing farm, the continued
use of preserved open space as a farm may be permitted,
subject to Planning Board acceptance of a continued farm
operation as part of the overall cluster design.
[2] All areas to be preserved as public or as common open
space shall be clearly identified and reserved on the plans
submitted for approval. The existing and planned use of
the open space shall be indicated on the plans.
[3] The minimum land area required to be preserved as
common or public open space shall be land that is not
already preserved as open space or preserved as farmland.
[4] The area proposed as common or public open space shall
be suitable for enjoyment and use as open space. The
Planning Board may require that the applicant submit a
Phase I and, if deemed necessary, a Phase II environmental
report. The Planning Board may withhold approval of any
area that it deems unsuitable as open space.
[5] At least 65% of the minimum land area required to be
preserved as common or public open space shall be land
unencumbered by any of the following: wetlands or
wetlands transition areas; areas of special flood hazard;
existing easement areas for utilities or drainage; rights-ofway;
surface waters.
[6] Stormwater management basins are structures and do not
qualify as open space for the purpose of meeting the open
space requirements. In its sole discretion, the Planning
189. Editor's Note: The zoning schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 425-279 VINELAND CODE § 425-279
1:790
Board may permit retention basins for the permanent
storage of water runoff within the open space areas,
provided such basins are integrated into the site as an
aesthetic feature of the open space landscape to enhance
the visual environment. In its sole discretion, the Planning
Board may also permit the integration of nonstructural
stormwater management strategies, such as vegetated
open-channel drainage systems, into the open space
landscape design. Not more than 10% of the minimum
required open space area may be features such as wet
ponds, retention basins, and vegetated open-channel
drainage systems.
[7] Any common or public open space area shall be at least 10
acres in area and have a minimum width of 200 feet and a
minimum depth of 200 feet unless the Planning Board
determines that the proposed open space area is
contiguous with and/or expands or extends an existing
common open space or a public open space; or that the
proposed open space is contiguous with a land area in
other ownership that has been permanently preserved as
open space or as farmland pursuant to a federal, state,
county or City open space acquisition or farmland
preservation program. In such cases, or for other reasons
that would advance the public interest, the Planning Board
may approve a smaller area where it determines that such
action would be beneficial to the open space design of the
cluster.
[8] An open space lot shall have a minimum road frontage of
at least 200 feet.
(g) Common open space ownership. The developer shall provide a
plan for the use, ownership and maintenance of any common
open space in a residential cluster. The plan is subject to
Planning Board review and approval. The ownership plan shall
be submitted with the preliminary application for development
and shall identify the existing and proposed ownership of all
proposed open space areas. The City, at its option and in its
sole discretion, or other governmental agency approved by the
City, at any time and from time to time, may accept the
dedication of land or any interest therein for public use and
maintenance, but the City shall not require as a condition of
the approval of a residential cluster that land proposed to be
set aside for common open space be dedicated or made
available to public use. The developer shall provide for an
organization for the ownership and maintenance of any open
space for the benefit of owners or residents of a residential
cluster if the open space is not dedicated to the municipality or
other governmental agency. The type of ownership of land
§ 425-279 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-279
1:791
dedicated for common open space purposes shall be selected
by the applicant, subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
[1] Type of ownership may include, but is not necessarily
limited to, the following:
[a] The City of Vineland, subject to acceptance by the City
Council.
[b] Homeowner, condominium or cooperative associations
or organizations.
[c] Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in
the subdivision.
[2] Any organization provided for by the developer to own or
maintain open space shall not be dissolved and shall not
dispose of any of its open space without first offering to
dedicate such property, without cost, to the City of
Vineland.
(h) Homeowners' association. If the common open space is owned
and maintained by a homeowners' or condominium
association, the developer shall file a declaration of covenants
and restrictions that will govern the association, to be
submitted with the application for the preliminary approval.
The provisions shall include, but are not necessarily limited to,
the following:
[1] The homeowners' association must be established before
the sale of any residential unit.
[2] Membership shall be mandatory for each buyer and any
successive buyer.
[3] The open space restrictions shall be permanent.
[4] The association shall be responsible for liability insurance,
local taxes, and the maintenance and replacement of
recreational and other facilities.
[5] Homeowners shall pay their pro rata share of the cost; the
assessment levied by the association can become a lien on
the property if allowed in the master deed establishing the
homeowners' association.
[6] The association must be able to adjust the assessment to
meet changed needs.
(i) Maintenance of open space areas. In the event that a
nonmunicipal organization with the responsibility for the
common open space fails to maintain it in reasonable order and
condition, then the City Council, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
§ 425-279 VINELAND CODE § 425-279
1:792
40:55D-43, may correct such deficiencies and assess the cost
of maintenance against the properties within the development.
(j) Use and improvement of common open space for active
recreation. The Planning Board may approve the installation of
recreational facilities suitable to the development, such as
playgrounds, play fields, parks or similar outdoor recreation
facilities, on the common open space. Such facilities shall be
conveniently located and accessible to all dwelling units and
should follow the following guidelines:
[1] One active recreation area should be provided for each
300 persons or 75 children of projected population. Such
areas should not be less than four acres.
[2] For developments of more than 300 persons, active
recreation or park space should be provided at the rate of
10.25 acres per 1,000 population.
(k) Undeveloped common open space. Undeveloped common open
space should be left in its natural state. A developer may,
however, make limited improvements for the installation of
utilities, necessary grading, and the provision of paths and
trails. In addition, the Planning Board may require a developer
to make other improvements, such as removal of dead or
diseased trees; thinning of trees or other vegetation to
encourage more desirable growth; reforestation of disturbed
areas; and grading and seeding, subject to approval by all
regulatory agencies.
(l) Deed restrictions. Any lands dedicated for common open space
purposes shall contain covenants and deed restrictions
approved by the City Attorney that ensure that:
[1] The open space area will not be further subdivided in the
future.
[2] The use of the open space will continue in perpetuity for
the purpose specified.
[3] Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of
the open space.
[4] The open space shall not be utilized for any commercial
purpose. The Planning Board may, however, approve the
use of open space as farmland or pastureland as part of the
residential cluster design.
(m) Prior to the approval of the residential cluster, the Planning
Board shall make a finding of facts and conclusions as required
by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
§ 425-279 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-279
1:793
(2) The residential cluster in the R-5 Zone may be developed as agerestricted
housing at the City's option. An age-restricted residential
cluster shall meet the requirements for a residential cluster in the
R-5 Zone, subject to the following requirements and modifications.
(a) The frontage for the age-restricted residential cluster and the
access to the development shall be provided from a road
classified as an arterial road by the City Master Plan.
(b) The maximum permitted number of dwelling units in the agerestricted
residential cluster shall not exceed the number of
dwelling units permitted for a residential cluster, unless the
age-restricted residential cluster provides for the on-site
construction of affordable housing.
(c) If the age-restricted development provides affordable housing,
then one additional market-rate age-restricted unit will be
permitted for every affordable unit provided. At the City's
option, the City may accept a payment in lieu of construction of
the affordable housing on site. The payment in lieu shall be in
an amount as provided by the City's affordable housing
regulations.
(d) The density of the development, including the additional units
permitted to provide the affordable housing, shall not exceed a
maximum of three dwelling units per acre.
(e) The age-restricted residential cluster may be constructed as
single-family dwelling units or as townhouse units, or as a
combination of such unit types, in accordance with the
standards of the R-1 Zone District.
(f) The Planning Board may reduce the minimum common or
public open space requirement of the cluster to 25% of the
gross land area of the cluster in order to accommodate the
increased number of dwelling units permitted to be developed
on site.
(g) If the zoning on a site has changed subsequent to December
17, 2007, the number of units permitted for the purpose of
calculating the additional number of units shall be the higher
of the current number of units permitted or the number of
units permitted on December 17, 2007.
G. Lot size averaging in the R-5 Zone. In its sole discretion and at its
option, the Planning Board may permit lot size averaging in the R-5
Zone. The purpose of this subsection is to provide an alternative design
technique for conventional development to promote the goals of the
Master Plan. The overall planning for a tract may better advance the
intent and purpose of the Master Plan to protect the environment and
conserve open space if flexibility in the design of a major subdivision is
permitted. The goals and objectives included in the Master Plan for
§ 425-279 VINELAND CODE § 425-279
1:794
maintaining large, contiguous open areas may be better addressed if
some modification of the minimum lot size requirement in conventional
development is allowed, provided the maximum number of lots that
would result from a conforming conventional development is not
exceeded.
(1) Lot size averaging is permitted in the R-5 Zone District in a major
subdivision of a contiguous tract of land that is 15 acres or greater
in area.
(2) Any development proposed for lot size averaging shall be served by
public sewer and public water.
(3) Building area requirements.
(a) Lots shall conform to the requirements of the R-5 Zone as
established in the area, yard and bulk standards as set forth in
the Zoning Schedule, Sheet 1 (Part 1) for the R-5 Residential
Zone, except that the minimum lot area required may be
reduced as indicated below.
R-5 Zone District Requirements for Lot Size Averaging
Minimum Permissible Lot
Size
(square feet)
Average Lot Size
(square feet)
Inside Corner
16,500 18,000 40,000
(b) Within the R-5 Zone, the Planning Board may approve the
varying of lot areas and dimensions and yards and setbacks
otherwise required by the development regulations of the zone
district in such a way that the average lot areas and
dimensions, yards and setbacks within the subdivision conform
to the conventional norms of the R-5 Zone District as
established in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building
Requirements, except that the minimum lot area required shall
be in accordance with the minimum permissible lot size for lot
size averaging, and further provided that no dimension, yard,
setback or other dimensional requirement shall be less than
the minimum requirements of the R-4 Zone.190
(4) Maximum permitted number of lots. The use of lot size averaging in
a subdivision plan shall not result in a greater number of lots than
would result if a parcel were developed as a fully conforming
conventional subdivision of lots. For purposes of determining the
maximum number of lots permitted under lot size averaging, the
applicant shall submit a lot yield map of a conforming conventional
subdivision layout. The conforming lot yield map shall be in a
190. Editor's Note: The Zoning Schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 425-279 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-279
1:795
§ 425-280. R-6 Residential Zone standards. [Added 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
sufficient detail to permit the Planning Board to make an informed
decision that the subdivision satisfies all ordinance requirements
and would be approvable by the Planning Board as a conventional
subdivision without the need for any lot area or lot dimension
variances or exceptions to subdivision design standards. The
number of lots shown on an accepted lot yield map shall be the
maximum number of lots permitted for subdivision under lot size
averaging.
(5) Design criteria. Lot size averaging may be permitted where the
Planning Board determines that the resource conservation and/or
farmland preservation goals and objectives of the Master Plan are
better served by the lot-size-averaging plan than by the
conventional plan for development. The applicant shall
demonstrate to the Planning Board that the lot-size-averaging plan
is clearly preferable to the conventional plan with respect to one or
more of the following factors: stream corridor protection,
agricultural retention, preservation of forests and woodlands,
preservation of habitat for native flora and fauna, protection of
scenic views, protection of landmarks, reduction in site disturbance
from clearing and grading, reduction in impervious surface,
conservation of the site's natural features and topography, and
relationship to open spaces on neighboring parcels.
(6) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area may be reduced to the
minimum permissible lot size for lot size averaging, provided that
the average lot area in the development shall be at least the
conventional lot size required for the R-5 Zone, and further
provided that the total number of lots shall be no greater than the
maximum permitted number of lots established in accordance with
the approved lot yield map.
(7) Deed restrictions. Each lot that is part of a lot-averaging plan shall
be permanently deed restricted from any future subdivision of that
lot. When only a portion of a tract is to be developed in a lotaveraging
plan, deed restrictions against further subdivision shall
be required for the portion of the tract devoted to the lot-averaging
plan.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of the R-6 Zone is to implement the Master Plan
recommendation for a low-density suburban/rural transition area
from the center suburbs to the beginning of the City's greenbelt.
The zones provide an area for development of low-density singlefamily
detached housing. Farms would continue to be permitted
and farmland preservation within the zone is encouraged and
supported by the City.
§ 425-279 VINELAND CODE § 425-280
1:796
(2) Residential cluster development and lot size averaging will be
permitted at the City's option, provided that the total number of
dwellings is the equivalent to the number of dwellings allowed by a
conventional layout. Cluster development and lot size averaging
would only be allowed where the lots are served by sewer and
public water and the reduction in lot size is offset by open space
preservation and protection of the environment.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Residential cluster.
(3) Farm, except for those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(4) Home occupation.
(5) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(6) Community residence, community shelter.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses within the R-6 Residential Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zone.
(2) Farm building for livestock, equipment, storage of supplies or
harvested crops, or for preparation of crops for market for a farm.
(3) Commercial production greenhouse for a farm.
(4) Roadside stand, 300 square feet maximum, for a single-family
dwelling or a farm.
D. Conditional uses in the R-6 Residential Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Church, congregation.
(2) Recreational facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the R-6 Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Piggery.
(2) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
F. Residential cluster in the R-6 Zone. Residential cluster design within
the R-6 Zone may better advance the intent and purpose of the City
§ 425-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-280
1:797
Master Plan for the protection of the environment and the conservation
of open space, provided that the overall intensity of the cluster does
not exceed the intensity of a permitted conventional development.
Accordingly, a residential cluster of single-family dwellings may be
permitted as an alternative form of development in the R-6 Zone on a
contiguous land area that is to be developed as a single entity according
to a plan that preserves a significant area of open space. The Planning
Board may approve a residential cluster where it determines that the
intent and purpose of the City Master Plan is better served by the
cluster design and that the development meets the requisite standards
and criteria for the residential cluster option.
(1) Cluster option. Cluster development may be permitted at the option
of the City Planning Board as an alternative to conventional
development. The Planning Board may permit the cluster option
where the applicant demonstrates that, compared to a conventional
layout, the cluster design will benefit the community in the
following ways: by conserving natural resources; by preserving
open spaces; by better protecting areas that are particularly
susceptible to erosion and sediment loss; by reducing impervious
surfaces; by better protecting natural drainage features and
vegetation; by minimizing land disturbance from clearing and
grading; by minimizing soil compaction; by reducing the use of
stormwater management basins; by promoting the use of vegetated
open-channel drainage systems that discharge into and through
stable vegetated areas; and by reducing the need for additional
infrastructure. For purposes of evaluating the cluster option, the
applicant shall submit a lot yield map of a conforming conventional
subdivision layout for single-family dwellings. The Planning Board
shall compare the benefit of the cluster subdivision plan to the
conventional subdivision plan by considering the following factors:
reduction in the total area of land disturbance; reduction in the
total area of impervious coverage; reduction in the total length of
new streets; reduction in the construction of new structural
drainage facilities; and the preservation of trees and woodland.
(a) Required location. A residential cluster of single-family
dwellings shall be located on contiguous land in the R-6 Zone,
with the single-family dwellings located to enable the
preservation of common or public open space.
(b) Minimum total land area required. The minimum total land
area required for development as a residential cluster is 50
acres. At least 65% of the total minimum land area
requirement for a residential cluster shall be unencumbered by
any of the following: wetlands or wetlands transition areas;
areas of special flood hazard; existing easements for utilities or
drainage; rights-of-way; surface waters. Land that is already
permanently protected from development as open space or as
§ 425-280 VINELAND CODE § 425-280
1:798
farmland through a conservation easement or other means
cannot be used to satisfy the minimum area requirement.
(c) Maximum permitted number of dwelling units. The residential
cluster shall not yield a greater number of dwelling units than
would result from the development of the land as a fully
conforming conventional subdivision of single-family lots. For
purposes of determining the maximum number of dwellings
permitted under the residential cluster alternative, the
applicant shall submit a lot yield map of a conforming
conventional subdivision layout. The conforming lot yield map
shall be in a sufficient detail to permit the Planning Board to
make an informed decision that the subdivision satisfies all
ordinance requirements in every respect and would be
approvable as a conventional subdivision without the need for
any variances, waivers or exceptions from the City
development regulations. The number of dwellings shown on
an accepted lot yield map of a conforming subdivision shall be
the maximum number of lots permitted in the residential
cluster.
(d) Public sewer and public water. The dwelling units of a
residential cluster must be served by public sewer and water.
(e) Minimum area and bulk standards for residential lots. The
number of dwellings shown on the accepted lot yield map of a
conforming subdivision shall be the maximum number of
residential lots permitted in the residential cluster. The
residential cluster lots shall otherwise conform to the area,
yard, and bulk standards as set forth in the Zoning Schedule,
Sheet 1 (Part 1) for one-family development for the R-5
Residential Zone.
(f) Open space design requirements. The cluster design for open
space shall be arranged to preserve land as public or common
open space in accordance with the following criteria.
[1] A minimum of 50% of the gross land area of the cluster
shall be preserved as common or public open space. If the
residential cluster includes an existing farm, the continued
use of preserved open space as a farm may be permitted,
subject to Planning Board acceptance of a continued farm
operation as part of the overall cluster design.
[2] All areas to be preserved as public or as common open
space shall be clearly identified and reserved on the plans
submitted for approval. The existing and planned use of
the open space shall be indicated on the plans.
[3] The minimum land area required to be preserved as
common or public open space shall be land that is not
already preserved as open space or preserved as farmland.
§ 425-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-280
1:799
[4] The area proposed as common or public open space shall
be suitable for enjoyment and use as open space. The
Planning Board may require that the applicant submit a
Phase I and, if deemed necessary, a Phase II environmental
report. The Planning Board may withhold approval of any
area that it deems unsuitable as open space.
[5] At least 65% of the minimum land area required to be
preserved as common or public open space shall be land
unencumbered by any of the following: wetlands or
wetlands transition areas; areas of special flood hazard;
existing easement areas for utilities or drainage; rights-ofway;
surface waters.
[6] Stormwater management basins are structures and do not
qualify as open space for the purpose of meeting the open
space requirements. In its sole discretion, the Planning
Board may permit wet ponds and retention basins for the
permanent storage of water runoff within the open space
areas, provided such basins are integrated into the site as
an aesthetic feature of the open space landscape design to
enhance the visual environment. In its sole discretion, the
Planning Board may also permit the integration of
nonstructural stormwater management strategies, such as
vegetated open-channel drainage systems, into the open
space landscape design. Not more than 10% of the
minimum required open space area may be features such
as wet ponds, retention basins, and vegetated openchannel
drainage systems.
[7] Any common or public open space area shall be at least 10
acres in area and have a minimum width of 200 feet and a
minimum depth of 200 feet, unless the Planning Board
determines that the proposed open space area is
contiguous with and/or expands or extends an existing
common open space or a public open space or that the
proposed open space is contiguous with a land area in
other ownership that has been permanently preserved as
open space or as farmland pursuant to a federal, state,
county or City open space acquisition or farmland
preservation program. In such cases, or for other reasons
that would advance the public interest, the Planning Board
may approve a smaller area where it determines that such
action would be beneficial to the open space design of the
cluster.
[8] An open space lot shall have a minimum road frontage of
at least 200 feet.
(g) Common open space ownership. The developer shall provide a
plan for the use, ownership and maintenance of any common
§ 425-280 VINELAND CODE § 425-280
1:800
open space in a residential cluster. The plan is subject to
Planning Board review and approval. The ownership plan shall
be submitted with the preliminary application for development
and shall identify the existing and proposed ownership of all
proposed open space areas. The City, at its option and in its
sole discretion, or other governmental agency approved by
the City, at any time and from time to time, may accept the
dedication of land or any interest therein for public use and
maintenance, but the City shall not require as a condition of
the approval of a residential cluster that land proposed to
be set aside for common open space be dedicated or made
available to public use. The developer shall provide for an
organization for the ownership and maintenance of any open
space for the benefit of owners or residents of a residential
cluster if the open space is not dedicated to the municipality
or other governmental agency. The type of ownership of land
dedicated for common open space purposes shall be selected
by the applicant, subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
[1] Type of ownership may include, but is not necessarily
limited to, the following:
[a] The City of Vineland, subject to acceptance by the City
Council.
[b] Homeowner, condominium or cooperative associations
or organizations.
[c] Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in
the subdivision.
[2] Any organization provided for by the developer to own or
maintain open space shall not be dissolved and shall not
dispose of any of its open space without first offering to
dedicate such property, without cost, to the City of
Vineland.
(h) Homeowners' association. If the common open space is owned
and maintained by a homeowners' or condominium
association, the developer shall file a declaration of covenants
and restrictions that will govern the association, to be
submitted with the application for the preliminary approval.
The provisions shall include, but are not necessarily limited to,
the following:
[1] The homeowners' association must be established before
the sale of any residential unit.
[2] Membership shall be mandatory for each buyer and any
successive buyer.
[3] The open space restrictions shall be permanent.
§ 425-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-280
1:801
[4] The association shall be responsible for liability insurance,
local taxes, and the maintenance and replacement of
recreational and other facilities.
[5] Homeowners shall pay their pro rata share of the cost; the
assessment levied by the association can become a lien on
the property if allowed in the master deed establishing the
homeowners' association.
[6] The association must be able to adjust the assessment to
meet changed needs.
(i) Maintenance of open space areas. In the event that a
nonmunicipal organization with the responsibility for the
common open space fails to maintain it in reasonable order and
condition, then the City Council, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-43, may correct such deficiencies and assess the cost
of maintenance against the properties within the development.
(j) Use and improvement of common open space for active
recreation. The Planning Board may approve the installation of
recreational facilities suitable to the development, such as
playgrounds, play fields, parks or similar outdoor recreation
facilities, on the common open space. Such facilities shall be
conveniently located and accessible to all dwelling units and
should follow the following guidelines:
[1] One active recreation area should be provided for each
300 persons or 75 children of projected population. Such
areas should not be less than four acres.
[2] For developments of more than 300 persons, active
recreation or park space should be provided at the rate of
10.25 acres per 1,000 population.
(k) Undeveloped common open space. Undeveloped common open
space should be left in its natural state. A developer may,
however, make limited improvements for the installation of
utilities, necessary grading, and the provision of paths and
trails. In addition, the Planning Board may require a developer
to make other improvements, such as removal of dead or
diseased trees; thinning of trees or other vegetation to
encourage more desirable growth; reforestation of disturbed
areas; and grading and seeding, subject to approval by all
regulatory agencies.
(l) Deed restrictions. Any lands dedicated for common open space
purposes shall contain covenants and deed restrictions
approved by the City Attorney that ensure that:
[1] The open space area will not be further subdivided in the
future.
§ 425-280 VINELAND CODE § 425-280
1:802
[2] The use of the open space will continue in perpetuity for
the purpose specified.
[3] Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of
the open space.
[4] The open space shall not be utilized for any commercial
purpose. The Planning Board may, however, approve the
use of open space as farmland or pastureland as part of the
residential cluster design.
(2) The residential cluster in the R-6 Zone may be developed as agerestricted
housing, at the City's option. An age-restricted
residential cluster shall meet the requirements for a residential
cluster in the R-6 Zone, subject to the following requirements and
modifications.
(a) The frontage for the age-restricted residential cluster and the
access to the development shall be provided from a road
classified as an arterial road by the City Master Plan.
(b) The maximum permitted number of dwelling units in the agerestricted
residential cluster shall not exceed the number of
dwelling units permitted for a residential cluster, unless the
age-restricted residential cluster provides for the on-site
construction of affordable housing.
(c) If the age-restricted development provides affordable housing,
then one additional market-rate age-restricted unit will be
permitted for every affordable unit provided. At the City's
option, the City may accept a payment in lieu of construction of
the affordable housing on site. The payment in lieu shall be in
an amount as provided by the City's affordable housing
regulations.
(d) The density of the development, including the additional units
permitted to provide the affordable housing, shall not exceed a
maximum of three dwelling units per acre.
(e) The age-restricted residential cluster may be constructed as
single-family dwelling units or as townhouse units, or as a
combination of such unit types, in accordance with the
standards of the R-I Zone District.
(f) The Planning Board may reduce the minimum common or
public open space requirement of the cluster to 25% of the
gross land area of the cluster in order to accommodate the
increased number of dwelling units permitted to be developed
on site.
(g) If the zoning on a site has changed subsequent to December
17, 2007, the number of units permitted for the purpose of
§ 425-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-280
1:803
calculating the additional number of units shall be the higher
of the current number of units permitted or the number of
units permitted on December 17, 2007.
(3) Prior to the approval of the residential cluster, the Planning Board
shall make a finding of facts and conclusions as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.
G. Lot size averaging in the R-6 Zone. In its sole discretion and at its
option, the Planning Board may permit lot size averaging in the R-6
Zone. The purpose of this subsection is to provide an alternative design
technique for conventional development to promote the goals of the
Master Plan. The overall planning for a tract may better respond to the
intent and purpose of the Master Plan to protect the environment and
conserve open space if flexibility in the design of a major subdivision is
permitted. The goals and objectives included in the Master Plan for
maintaining large, contiguous open areas may be better addressed if
some modification of the minimum lot size requirement in conventional
development is allowed, provided the maximum number of lots that
would result from a conforming conventional development is not
exceeded.
(1) Lot size averaging is permitted in the R-6 Zone District in a major
subdivision of a contiguous tract of land that is 15 acres or greater
in area.
(2) Any development proposed for lot size averaging shall be served by
public sewer and public water.
(3) Building area requirements.
(a) Lots shall conform to the requirements of the R-6 Zone as
established in the area, yard, and bulk standards as set forth in
the Zoning Schedule, Sheet 1 (Part 1) for the R-6 Residential
Zone, except that the minimum lot area required may be
reduced as indicated below.
R-6 Zone District Requirements for Lot Size Averaging
Minimum Permissible Lot
Size
(square feet)
Average Lot Size
(square feet)
Inside Corner
30,000 30,000 80,000
(b) Within the R-6 Zone, the Planning Board may approve the
varying of lot areas and dimensions and yards and setbacks
otherwise required by the development regulations of the zone
district in such a way that the average lot areas and
dimensions, yards and setbacks within the subdivision conform
to the conventional norms of the R-6 Zone as established in the
§ 425-280 VINELAND CODE § 425-280
1:804
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements, except that
the minimum lot area required shall be in accordance with
the minimum permissible lot size for lot size averaging, and
further provided that no dimension, yard, setback or other
dimensional requirement shall be less than the minimum
requirements of the R-5 Zone.
(4) Maximum permitted number of lots. The use of lot size averaging in
a subdivision plan shall not result in a greater number of lots than
would result if a parcel were developed as a fully conforming
conventional subdivision of lots. For purposes of determining the
maximum number of lots permitted under lot size averaging, the
applicant shall submit a lot yield map of a conforming conventional
subdivision layout. The conforming lot yield map shall be in a
sufficient detail to permit the Planning Board to make an informed
decision that the subdivision satisfies all ordinance requirements
and would be approvable by the Planning Board as a conventional
subdivision without the need for any lot area or lot dimension
variances or exceptions to subdivision design standards. The
number of lots shown on an accepted lot yield map shall be the
maximum number of lots permitted for subdivision under lot size
averaging.
(5) Design criteria. Lot size averaging may be permitted where the
Planning Board determines that the resource conservation and/or
farmland preservation goals and objectives of the Master Plan are
better served by the lot-size-averaging plan than by the
conventional plan for development. The applicant shall
demonstrate to the Planning Board that the lot-size-averaging plan
is clearly preferable to the conventional plan with respect to one or
more of the following factors: stream corridor protection,
agricultural retention, preservation of forests and woodlands,
preservation of habitat for native flora and fauna, protection of
scenic views, protection of landmarks, reduction in site disturbance
from clearing and grading, reduction in impervious surface,
conservation of the site's natural features and topography, and
relationship to open spaces on neighboring parcels.
(6) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area may be reduced to the
minimum permissible lot size for lot size averaging, provided that
the average lot area in the development shall be at least the
conventional lot size required for the R-6 Zone, and further
provided that the total number of lots shall be no greater than the
maximum permitted number of lots established in accordance with
the approved lot yield map.
(7) Deed restrictions. Each lot that is part of a lot-averaging plan shall
be permanently deed restricted from any future subdivision of that
lot. When only a portion of a tract is to be developed in a lotaveraging
plan, deed restrictions against further subdivision shall
§ 425-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-280
1:805
§ 425-281. A-5 Agricultural Zone standards.
be required for the portion of the tract devoted to the lot-averaging
plan.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve
areas of active agricultural use, together with adjacent areas of prime
or unique agricultural soils suitable for expansion of agricultural
operations, together with contiguous lands whose development would
impact upon areas of active agricultural use. It is recognized that areas
of active agricultural use are essential to the agricultural industry,
which is a major component of the economic base of the City. It is the
intent that areas of active agricultural use be sustained and that an
environment compatible with agricultural operations be ensured. It is
important that zone requirements and design standards not be
sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon the character of these areas of active
agricultural use. It is the intent that a farm be the preferred use of
property, as none of the other permitted uses are to be considered
unless all other requirements of this chapter can be met. For example,
there is no automatic or implied right to develop a riding academy. A
riding academy should only be considered if all requirements of this
chapter, including design standards, can be met.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the A-5 Agricultural Zone shall
be as follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Farm, except for those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(3) Public purpose uses:
(a) Governmental or public utility facility.
(b) Governmental or public utility yard.
(4) Other uses:
(a) Kennel, cattery.
(b) Riding academy.
(c) Radio, television studio.
(d) Private airfield.
(e) Small contractor's yard.
(f) Golf course.
(5) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
§ 425-280 VINELAND CODE § 425-281
1:806
§ 425-282. A-6 Agricultural Zone standards.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the A-5 Agricultural Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Private garage, 900 square feet maximum, for a single-family
dwelling.
(2) Personal recreational facilities for a single-family dwelling.
(3) One storage shed, 200 square feet maximum, for a single-family
dwelling. [Amended 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-67]
(4) One equipment storage building, 1,000 square feet maximum, for a
single-family dwelling, farm, public purpose use or other use.
[Added 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-67]
(5) Agricultural employee housing for a farm.
(6) Farm building for livestock, equipment, storage of supplies or
harvested crops, or for preparation of crops for market for a farm.
(7) Commercial production greenhouse for a farm.
(8) Roadside stand, 300 square feet maximum, for a single-family
dwelling or a farm.
(9) Trash or waste enclosure.
(10) Fencing.
(11) Signage.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the A-5 Agricultural Zone shall be
as follows: [Amended 5-22-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69; 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
(1) Church, congregation.
(2) Cemetery, crematorium.
(3) Recreational facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the A-5 Agricultural Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Piggery, unless the lot area-net is a minimum of 50 acres and the
requirements of Chapter 224, Article II, of the Code of the City of
Vineland are met.
(2) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve
areas of active agricultural use, together with adjacent areas of prime
or unique agricultural soils suitable for expansion of agricultural
§ 425-281 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-282
1:807
operations, together with contiguous lands whose development would
impact upon areas of active agricultural use. It is recognized that areas
of active agricultural use are essential to the agricultural industry,
which is a major component of the economic base of the City. It is
the intent that areas of active agricultural use be sustained and that
an environment compatible with agricultural operations be ensured.
It is important that zone requirements and design standards not be
sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon the character of these areas of active
agricultural use. It is the intent that a farm be the preferred use of
property, as none of the other permitted uses are to be considered
unless all other requirements of this chapter can be met. For example,
there is no automatic or implied right to develop a riding academy. A
riding academy should only be considered if all requirements of this
chapter, including design standards, can be met.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the A-6 Agricultural Zone shall
be as follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Farm, except for those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(3) Public purpose uses:
(a) Governmental or public utility facility.
(b) Governmental or public utility yard.
(4) Other uses:
(a) Kennel, cattery.
(b) Riding academy.
(c) Private airfield.
(d) Small contractor's yard.
(e) Golf course.
(5) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the A-6 Agricultural Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the A-5 Zone.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the A-6 Agricultural Zone shall be
as follows: [Added 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3]
(1) Church, congregation;
(2) Cemetery, crematorium; and
§ 425-282 VINELAND CODE § 425-282
1:808
§ 425-283. W-5 Woodlands Zone standards.
(3) Recreational facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the A-6 Agricultural Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Piggery, unless the lot area-net is a minimum of 50 acres and the
requirements of Chapter 224, Article II, of the Code of the City of
Vineland are met.
(2) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of forested areas which support habitat of native plant and
animal species, which contribute to recharge of the aquifer and which
protect and enhance the water quality within watersheds contributing
to river segments in the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System. These
areas are viewed as an important element of the environment and are
sensitive to development. These zones, which offer an opportunity for
rural living, are viewed as a transitional area between higher density
development and more undisturbed forested areas. It is important that
zone requirements and design standards not be sacrificed to allow
overdevelopment of properties, as this would negatively impact upon
the natural environment. It is the intent that a single-family dwelling in
a wooded setting be the preferred use of property, as none of the other
permitted uses are to be considered unless all other requirements of
this chapter can be met. For example, there is not an automatic or
implied right to develop a riding academy. A riding academy should only
be considered if all the requirements of this chapter, including design
standards, can be met.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the W-5 Woodlands Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Farm, except those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(3) Public purpose uses:
(a) Governmental or public utility facility.
(b) Governmental or public utility yard.
(4) Other uses:
(a) Kennel, cattery.
(b) Riding academy.
(c) Radio, television studio.
(d) Small contractor's yard.
§ 425-282 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-283
1:809
§ 425-284. W-6 Woodlands Zone standards.
(e) Golf course.
(f) Forestry.
(g) Conservation activity.
(5) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the W-5 Woodlands Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the A-5 Zone.191
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the W-5 Woodlands Zone shall be
as follows: [Amended 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69; 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
(1) Church, congregation.
(2) Cemetery, crematorium.
(3) Recreational facility.
(4) Campground.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the W-5 Woodlands Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Piggery, unless the lot area-net is a minimum of 50 acres and the
requirements of Chapter 224, Article II, of the Code of the City of
Vineland are met.
(2) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of largely undisturbed forested areas which support habitat
of native plant and animal species, which contribute to recharge of the
aquifer and which protect and enhance the water quality within
watersheds contributing to river segments in the National Wild and
Scenic Rivers System. These areas are viewed as an essential element
of the environment and are very sensitive to development. It is
important that zone requirements and design standards not be
sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon this environment. It is the intent that a singlefamily
dwelling in a wooded setting be the preferred use of property, as
none of the other permitted uses are to be considered unless all other
requirements of this chapter can be met. For example, there is not an
191. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), allowing equipment storage for forestry or
conservation activity as an accessory use in this district, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-67.
§ 425-283 VINELAND CODE § 425-284
1:810
automatic or implied right to develop a riding academy. A riding
academy should only be considered if all the requirements of this
chapter, including design standards, can be met.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the W-6 Woodlands Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Farm, except those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(3) Public purpose uses:
(a) Governmental or public utility facility.
(b) Governmental or public utility yard.
(4) Other uses:
(a) Kennel, cattery.
(b) Riding academy.
(c) Small contractor's yard.
(d) Golf course.
(e) Forestry.
(f) Conservation activity.
(g) Sportsmen's club or lodge.
(5) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the W-6 Woodlands Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the A-5 Zone.
(2) Equipment storage building for forestry or conservation activity.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the W-6 Woodlands Zone shall be
as follows: [Amended 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3]
(1) Church, congregation.
(2) Cemetery, crematorium.
(3) Recreational facility.
(4) Campground.
(5) Resource extraction.
§ 425-284 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-284
1:811
§ 425-285. P-A Pinelands Agricultural Production Zone standards.
See § 425-196, which is made a part of this article by reference.
§ 425-286. P-F Pinelands Forest Zone standards.
See § 425-197, which is made a part of this article by reference.
§ 425-287. P-R Pinelands Rural Development Zone standards.
See § 425-198, which is made a part of this article by reference.
§ 425-288. I-1 Industrial Zone standards.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the W-6 Woodlands Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Piggery, unless the lot area-net is a minimum of 50 acres and the
requirements of Chapter 224, Article II, of the Code of the City of
Vineland are met.
(2) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this zone to encourage light industrial and
corporate office development in a campus-like environment. It is
important that zone requirements and design standards not be
sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon the character of these industrial areas. Strict
adherence to design standards is deemed very important because of the
proposed mix of uses.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the I-1 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Research and testing laboratory.
(2) Truck terminal.
(3) Corporate office.
(4) Contractor's yard.
(5) Food processing.
(6) Printing and publishing.
(7) Industrial photofinishing.
(8) Warehousing, if all operations are conducted indoors.
(9) Fabrication of paper or wood products.
(10) Fabrication of electronic products.
(11) Fabrication of metal products.
§ 425-284 VINELAND CODE § 425-288
1:812
(12) Fabrication of plastic products.
(13) Fabrication of clothing.
(14) Fabrication of leather products.
(15) Manufacture of light machinery.
(16) Manufacture of glass or glass products.
(17) Manufacture of pharmaceutical products.
(18) Fabrication or light manufacture free from objectionable odors,
fumes, dirt, vibration or noise.
(19) Public purpose uses:
(a) Child-care center.
(b) Governmental or public utility facility.
(c) Governmental or public utility office.
(d) Governmental or public utility yard.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the I-1 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Administrative office for business on site.
(2) Motor vehicle and equipment storage/repair garage for business on
site.
(3) Recreational facility for business on site.
(4) Restaurant, cafeteria, coffee shop for business on site.
(5) Outdoor storage, provided that it is screened on four sides, for
business on site.
(6) Retail outlet, clearly incidental to the fabrication or manufacture
conducted on site.
(7) Storage of recycled materials for utilization in the fabrication or
manufacture conducted on site.
(8) Incineration or reduction of waste products generated on site.
(9) Sewage industrial pretreatment system for business on site.
(10) Environmental equipment, as may be required by the
Environmental Protection Agency or by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
(11) Child-care center for business on site.
(12) Parking.
§ 425-288 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-288
1:813
(13) Public bus shelter.
(14) Trash enclosure.
(15) Fencing.
(16) Signage.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the I-1 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Heliport, helistop, helipad.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the I-1 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Manufacture of acids, corrosives, ammonia or caustics.
(2) Manufacture of cellulose products, resins, dyes or glues.
(3) Manufacture of explosives, combustible gases or fireworks.
(4) Manufacture of soaps, detergents or fertilizers derived from animal
sources.
(5) Manufacture or smelting of metal or alloy ingots.
(6) Manufacture of carbon.
(7) Manufacture of disinfectants, insecticides or poisons.
(8) Manufacture or rendering of vegetable or animal fats, lard or
tallow.
(9) Manufacture of feeds from refuse, mash or brewers' grain.
(10) Manufacture of lime, gypsum or plaster products.
(11) Manufacture of perfumes or extracts.
(12) Manufacture of plastics.
(13) Manufacture of rubber or rubber treatments.
(14) Manufacture of starches, glucose or dextrines.
(15) Manufacture of brick, tile, terra cotta or charcoal.
(16) Manufacture of linoleum or oil cloth.
(17) Manufacture of sandpaper or emery.
(18) Refining of petroleum or petroleum products.
(19) Extracting of radioactive materials.
(20) Curing or tanning of hides.
§ 425-288 VINELAND CODE § 425-288
1:814
§ 425-289. I-B Industrial-Business Zone standards.
(21) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
(22) Stone-crushing operation.
(23) Distillation of tar, roofing or waterproofing materials.
(24) All uses or operations which are offensive because of emissions,
vibration, noise, glare or fire or explosive hazard.
(25) Commercial incineration or reduction of waste products.
(26) On-site waste disposal (solid or hazardous waste facility).
(27) Sewerage treatment plant.
(28) Resource extraction.
(29) Professional building.
(30) Any residential use.
(31) Production of bitumen products. [Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-62]
F. Special zone standards. In addition to any other standards contained
within this chapter, the following special zone standards shall be
applicable to any use within the I-1 Industrial Zone:
(1) Service areas, loading docks or similar appurtenances shall be
located within side yards or rear yards.
(2) All fabrication and manufacture operations shall be in a closed
building.
(3) Outdoor storage shall be screened from public view (from any
public street, road or sidewalk, from any adjoining property or from
any portion of the site accessible to the public) by fencing and/or
landscaping.
(4) A minimum of 20% of each site shall be maintained as natural
woodland or be seeded and landscaped. All existing trees are to be
retained wherever possible.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to establish an area of mixed
commercial and industrial uses. Because this represents an area in
transition, changing from residential and agricultural uses to
commercial and industrial uses, there remains an allowance for singlefamily
dwellings and farms. It is the intent, however, that a commercial
or industrial development be the preferred use of property, as none of
the other permitted uses are to be considered unless all other
requirements of this chapter can be met. For example, there is not an
automatic or implied right to develop a residential subdivision. A
§ 425-288 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-289
1:815
residential subdivision should only be considered if all the requirements
of this chapter, including design standards, are met.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the I-B Industrial-Business Zone shall
be as follows:
(1) 192Farm, except for those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(2) All uses permitted in the I-1 Zone.
(3) Vocational training facility (industrial).
(4) Wholesale operation.
(5) All uses permitted in the B-3 Zone.
(6) Airport.
(7) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the I-B Industrial-Business Zone shall
be as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the A-6 Zone.
(2) All accessory uses permitted in the I-1 Zone.
(3) All accessory uses permitted in the B-3 Zone.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the I-B Industrial-Business Zone
shall be as follows: [Amended 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3]
(1) 193Recreational facility.
(2) Heliport, helistop, helipad.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the I-B Industrial-Business Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) All uses prohibited in the A-6 Zone.
(2) All uses prohibited in the I-1 Zone, except for single-family dwelling
and professional building.
F. Special zone standards. In addition to any other standards contained
within this chapter, the following special zone standards shall be
applicable to any use within the I-B Industrial-Business Zone: all special
zone standards applicable in the I-1 Zone.
192. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), Single-family dwelling, which preceded this
subsection, was repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39.
193. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1), Church, congregation, which preceded this
subsection, was repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39.
§ 425-289 VINELAND CODE § 425-290
1:816
§ 425-290. I-2 Industrial Zone standards.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of established industrial areas within the City. As there is
acreage suitable for development available within these zones, it is
further the purpose of this chapter to create industrial areas allowing
more uses than the I-1 or I-B Zones, so as to provide varied industrial
opportunities within the City. It is important that zone requirements
and design standards not be sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of
properties, as this would negatively impact upon the utility of these
industrial areas and upon the quality of life of adjoining residential
areas. Strict adherence to design standards is deemed important.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the I-2 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the I-1 Zone, except for corporate office and
governmental or public utility office.
(2) Vocational training facility (industrial).
(3) Wholesale operation.
(4) Manufacture of sandpaper or emery.
(5) Manufacture, reconditioning or rebuilding of machinery.
(6) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
(7) Mass production of pottery or ceramics.
(8) Commercial/industrial operation, such as farm machinery or
earthmoving equipment sales and service.
(9) Passenger terminal facility.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the I-2 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the I-1 Zone.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the I-2 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Recreational facility.
(2) Heliport, helistop, helipad.
(3) Medical marijuana alternative treatment center. [Added
3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the I-2 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Manufacture of acids, corrosives, ammonia or caustics.
§ 425-290 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-290
1:817
(2) Manufacture of cellulose products, resins, dyes or glues.
(3) Manufacture of explosives, combustible gases or fireworks.
(4) Manufacture of soaps, detergents or fertilizers derived from animal
sources.
(5) Manufacture of smelting of metal or alloy ingots.
(6) Manufacture of carbon.
(7) Manufacture of disinfectants, insecticides or poisons.
(8) Manufacture or rendering of vegetable or animal fats, lard or
tallow.
(9) Manufacture of feeds from refuse, mash or brewers' grain.
(10) Manufacture of lime or gypsum products.
(11) Manufacture of perfumes or extracts.
(12) Manufacture of plastics.
(13) Manufacture of rubber or rubber treatments.
(14) Manufacture of starches, glucose or dextrines.
(15) Manufacture of brick, tile, terra cotta or charcoal.
(16) Manufacture of linoleum. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(17) Refining of petroleum or petroleum products.
(18) Extracting of radioactive materials.
(19) Curing or tanning of hides.
(20) Stone-crushing operation.
(21) Distillation of tar, roofing or waterproofing materials.
(22) Commercial incineration or reduction of waste products.
(23) On-site waste disposal (solid or hazardous waste facility).
(24) Sewerage treatment plant.
(25) Resource extraction.
(26) Professional building.
(27) All residential uses.
(28) Production of bitumen products. [Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-62]
§ 425-290 VINELAND CODE § 425-291
1:818
§ 425-291. I-3 Industrial Zone standards.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of established industrial areas within the City. As there is
acreage suitable for development available within these zones, it is
further the purpose of this chapter to create industrial areas allowing
more uses than the I-1, I-B or I-2 Zones, so as to provide varied
industrial opportunities within the City. It is important that zone
requirements and design standards not be sacrificed to allow
overdevelopment of properties, as this would negatively impact upon
the utility of these industrial areas and upon the quality of life of
adjoining residential areas. Strict adherence to design standards is
deemed important.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the I-3 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the I-2 Zone.
(2) Manufacture of brick, tile or terra cotta.194
(3) Manufacture of prestressed concrete or related products.
[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.2009-62]
(4) Concrete mixing plant.
(5) Wholesale lumber yard.
(6) Indoor recycling operation, where all activities are conducted
indoors.
(7) Fuel storage yard.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the I-3 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the I-1 Zone.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the I-3 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Recreational facility.
(2) Heliport, helistop, helipad.
(3) Resource extraction.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the I-3 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
194. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), Stone crushing operation, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-39.
§ 425-291 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-291
1:819
§ 425-292. I-4 Industrial Zone standards.
(1) All uses prohibited in the I-2 Zone, except for manufacture of brick,
tile or terra cotta; recycling facility, if all operations are conducted
indoors; and resource extraction. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
F. Special zone standards. In addition to any other standards contained
within this chapter, the following special zone standards shall be
applicable within the I-3 Industrial Zone:
(1) An indoor recycling operation, where all activities are conducted
indoors, shall be subject to the licensing provisions contained in
Article XII.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this zone to preserve areas exclusively for
heavier industrial uses within the City. It is important that zone
regulations and design standards not be sacrificed to allow
overdevelopment of properties, as this would negatively impact upon
the utility of the industrial areas and upon the quality of life of adjoining
residential areas. Strict adherence to design standards is deemed
important, as is the absolute integrity of these zones, because of the
difficulty in siting and because of the limited supply of land available.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the I-4 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Sewerage treatment plant.
(2) Auto wrecking yard.
(3) Nonhazardous waste reduction facility.
(4) Junkyard.
(5) Recycling operation.
(6) Composting facility.
(7) Public purpose uses:
(a) Child-care center.
(b) Governmental or public utility facility.
(c) Governmental or public utility yard.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the I-4 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the I-1 Zone.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the I-4 Industrial Zone shall be as
follows:
§ 425-291 VINELAND CODE § 425-292
1:820
§ 425-293. B-1 Business Zone standards.
(1) Recreational facility.
(2) Resource extraction.
(3) Production of bitumen products. [Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-62]
E. Special zone standards. In addition to any other standards contained
within this chapter, the following special zone standards shall be
applicable within the I-4 Industrial Zone:
(1) Outdoor storage shall be screened from public view (from any
public street, road or sidewalk; from any adjoining property; or
from any portion of the site accessible to the public) by a screening
fence 10 feet high.
(2) The developed portion of the site of any permitted use, with the
exception of a public purpose use, shall be a minimum of 100 feet
away from any zone boundary line. This expanded buffer area shall
be kept free of weeds and debris.
(3) An auto wrecking yard, a nonhazardous waste reduction facility, a
junkyard or a recycling operation shall be subject to the regulations
contained in Article XII, which by reference is made a part of this
article.
(4) Shrubbery, bushes or hedges shall be installed along all public
street frontages, planted 10 feet in from the right-of-way line to
enhance the aesthetics of the streetscape.
(5) All access drives and parking areas shall be paved.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this zone to recognize and preserve the
character of the City's historic downtown or main street. It is important
that zone regulations and design standards not be sacrificed to allow
overdevelopment or improper utilization of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon the character and viability of the downtown and
upon the stability of adjoining, older neighborhoods.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the B-1 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Retail store, except for those enumerated as prohibited uses.
(2) Convenience store.
(3) Business, professional or medical office. [Amended 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(4) Bank.
(5) Passenger terminal facility, taxi or bus stop.
§ 425-292 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-293
1:821
(6) Personal service shop, salon, except for those enumerated as
prohibited uses.
(7) Vocational training facility (nonindustrial).
(8) Parking lot.
(9) Restaurant (as defined in Chapter 216, Alcoholic Beverages, of the
Code of the City of Vineland). [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
97-41]
(10) Indoor theater.
(11) Public purpose uses:
(a) Child-care center.
(b) Governmental or public utility facility.
(c) Governmental or public utility office.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the B-1 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Indoor storage of goods, which are sold on site (not warehousing),
for business on site.
(2) Residential use, limited to upper floors.
(3) Parking.
(4) Public bus shelter.
(5) Trash enclosure.
(6) Fencing.
(7) Signage.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the B-1 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Church, congregation.195
(2) Recreational facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the B-1 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Adult bookstore.
(2) Amusement facility, video arcade.
195. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), Funeral home, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39.
§ 425-293 VINELAND CODE § 425-293
1:822
§ 425-294. B-2 Business Zone standards.
(3) Establishment which trades or sells used merchandise (flea market,
pawn shop, used furniture store, antique shop, thrift store).
(4) Laundromat.196
(5) Establishment which does tattooing, massage, body piercing.197
(6) Astrologers, cardreaders, psychics.
(7) Substance abuse counseling or treatment center.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve
commercial areas which are specifically intended to provide convenient
service to surrounding neighborhoods. Because of the necessary
interface with residential zones, it is important that negative impacts be
minimized. The intent is that nodes of commercial uses be created and
continued sprawl along collector and arterial roadways be prevented. It
is important that zone requirements and design standards not be
sacrificed to allow overdevelopment or improper utilization of
properties, as this would negatively impact upon the character of the
commercial area and the stability of adjoining neighborhoods. Strict
adherence to design standards is deemed important.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the B-2 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the B-1 Zone, in addition those uses
enumerated as prohibited uses in the B-1 Zone.
(2) Restaurant.
(3) Bar, tavern.198
(4) Senior day-care facility. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the B-2 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the B-1 Zone.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the B-2 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
196. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(5), Linen and/or diaper service, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-39.
197. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(7). Steam bath, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39.
198. Editor's Note: Former Subsections B(4), Gasoline station, and B(5), Public garage, which
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39.
§ 425-293 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-294
1:823
§ 425-295. B-3 Business Zone standards.
(1) Church, congregation.
(2) Recreational facility.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve the
character of highway business areas within the City. As there is acreage
suitable for development available within these zones, it is further the
purpose of this chapter to create business areas allowing more uses
than the B-1 and B-2 Zones, so as to provide varied business
opportunities within the City. It is important that zone requirements
and design standards not be sacrificed to allow overdevelopment of
properties, as this would negatively impact upon the character of these
business areas and upon the quality of life of adjoining residential
areas. Strict adherence to design standards is deemed important,
particularly those standards which govern safe ingress/egress, as the
function of the highway system must be preserved.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the B-3 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the B-1 Zone, in addition those uses
enumerated as prohibited uses in the B-1 Zone.
(2) Restaurant.
(3) Bar, tavern.
(4) Fast-food restaurant.
(5) Drive-in restaurant.
(6) Gasoline station.
(7) Public garage:
(a) General repair garage.
(b) Specialized repair garage.
(c) Car wash.
(d) Auto body shop.
(e) Towing facility.
(8) Produce market.
(9) Animal hospital.
(10) Hotel, motel.
(11) Drive-in theater.
§ 425-294 VINELAND CODE § 425-295
1:824
§ 425-296. B-4 Business Zone standards.
(12) Outdoor amusement.
(13) Flea market.
(14) Bowling alley, skating rink.
(15) Retail greenhouse.
(16) Garden supply store.
(17) Garden equipment sales.
(18) Equipment rental business.
(19) Self-storage business.
(20) Sign business.
(21) Supermarket.
(22) New and used car sales.
(23) Billboard.
(24) Senior day-care facility. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(25) Assisted living residence. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the B-3 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the B-1 Zone.
(2) Manufacturing clearly incidental to on-site retail business, such as
silk-screening T-shirts or making ceramics, employing up to four
persons only, provided that the use is a permitted industrial use
under this chapter.
D. Conditional uses, Conditional uses in the B-3 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) 199Recreational facility.200
(2) Medical marijuana alternative treatment center (dispensary facility
only). [Added 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
199. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1), Church, congregation, which preceded this
subsection, was repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39.
200. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), Mobile home park, which followed this subsection,
was repealed 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69.
§ 425-295 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-296
1:825
§ 425-297. MHP Mobile Home Park Zone standards. [Added
5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to encourage larger scale
comprehensively planned, regional commercial complexes along
selected arterials within the City. It is important that zone requirements
and design standards not be sacrificed to allow overdevelopment or
improper utilization of properties, as this would negatively impact upon
the character of these business areas and upon the quality of life of
adjoining residential areas. Strict adherence to design standards is
deemed very important because these zones contribute significantly to
the City's image because of their high visibility.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the B-4 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the B-3 Zone, except for public garage (car
wash, auto body shop, towing facility), drive-in theater, flea market,
self-storage business, sign business, new and used car sales, and
billboard. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(2) Community shopping center/planned commercial development.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the B-4 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the B-1 Zone.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the B-4 Business Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Recreational facility.201
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of these zones to recognize and preserve
mobile home parks or manufactured home communities and to seek to
maximize the compatibility between the parks and the surrounding
areas. In accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, as amended,202
the City of Vineland finds manufactured housing to be an important
source of affordable housing. The Planning Board, in applying the
standards of this section, will determine the number of mobile or
manufactured home spaces in a park, as well as the overall conditions
of the development approval as included in the final site plan. The City
Council will continue to monitor the operation and maintenance of
parks, once developed, through the annual license renewal procedures.
201. Editor's Note: Former Subsections D(1), Church, congregation, and D(2), Cemetery,
crematorium, which preceded this subsection, were repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39. Former Subsection D(3), Mobile home park,
which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69.
Former Subsection D(4), Heliport, helistop, helipad, which previously followed this
subsection, was repealed 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26 and 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-39.
202. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 425-296 VINELAND CODE § 425-297
1:826
§ 425-298. IN-1 Institutional Zone standards. [Added 7-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-48]
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the MHP Mobile Home Park Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling in accordance with the single-family
dwelling standards of the most restrictive adjoining residential
zone.
(2) Mobile home parks, or expansions thereto, in accordance with
Article IX of this chapter, and only when public sewer service and
public water service (i.e., "community water system" as defined by
the 1966 Safe Drinking Water Act) is provided. See §§ 425-100
through 425-147, which are made a part of this article by
reference.
(3) Public purpose uses:
(a) Governmental or public utility facility.
(4) Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the MHP Mobile Home Park Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zone.
(2) The accessory uses in a mobile home park may include typical
residential storage, including sheds, park maintenance and utility
structures, including a laundry building, a residence and office of
the park manager, which need not be a mobile home, a retail mobile
home sales office and display area and park recreational facilities,
including community building and swimming pool.
(3) Any and all structures incidental to the operation of a mobile home
park, including sewage and water utility improvements,
improvements necessary for any other utilities provided, including
but not limited to cable television and electrical pedestals, and
aboveground oil and propane storage tanks.203
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this zone to encourage development of a
regional medical/educational/cultural center. It is important that zone
requirements and design standards not be sacrificed to allow
overdevelopment or improper utilization of properties, as this would
negatively impact upon the character of this area and upon the desired
symbiotic relationship between uses. Strict adherence to design
standards is deemed very important because this zone contributes
significantly to the City's image because of its high visibility.
203. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Conditional uses, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3.
§ 425-297 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-298
1:827
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the IN-1 Institutional Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Hospital.
(2) Rehabilitation hospital.
(3) Ambulatory care facility.
(4) Diagnostic facility.
(5) Therapeutic/rehabilitation facility.
(6) Long-term care facility.
(7) Assisted-living residence.
(8) Residential treatment center.
(9) Substance abuse counseling or treatment center.
(10) Adult day health-care facility.
(11) Emergency medical service facility.
(12) College/university.
(13) Business or professional office.
(14) Bank.
(15) Restaurant (as defined in Chapter 216, Alcoholic Beverages, of the
Code of the City of Vineland).
(16) Indoor theater.
(17) Passenger terminal facility, taxi or bus stop.
(18) Vocational training facility (nonindustrial).
(19) Senior day-care facility. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(20) Public purpose uses: [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(a) Child-care center.
(b) Governmental or public utility facility, with the exception of an
electrical generating facility.
(c) Governmental or public utility office.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the IN-1 Institutional Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the B-1 Zone.
§ 425-298 VINELAND CODE § 425-298
1:828
§ 425-299. IN-2 Institutional Zone standards. [Added 6-27-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-52]
(2) Emergency electrical-generation equipment.
D. Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the IN-1 Institutional Zone shall
be as follows:
(1) Recreational facility.
(2) Heliport, helistop, helipad.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the IN-1 Institutional Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) Electrical-generation facility.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this zone to implement the City Master
Plan to provide for the appropriate use of a unique and historic area of
the City. The lands within the IN-2 Institutional Zone are planned,
designed and developed as the campuses for public and quasi-public
institutional uses. These uses provide residential facilities, training,
care and therapy for disabled individuals. The IN-2 Institutional Zone
permits the continuation of the institutional activity and use of the
campuses. It also allows for the adaptive reuse of the campuses as one
or more planned developments for age-restricted housing. By
permitting adaptive reuse, the City will expand the housing and care
opportunities available to a growing senior citizen population. The
landscaped open spaces and older buildings associated with the historic
campus designs are part of the City's cultural landscape and contribute
to the desirable and unique visual environment of this area of the City.
Consequently, any planned development permitted as an adaptive reuse
of the campuses must be based upon an overall plan that maintains the
historic buildings and the open space character of the campus
landscape.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the IN-2 Institutional Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Developmental center for the disabled and attendant facilities and
offices.
(2) Therapeutic/rehabilitation facility.
(3) Long-term-care facility.
(4) Adult day health-care facility.
(5) College/university.
(6) Library, museum or art gallery.
(7) Vocational training facility (nonindustrial).
§ 425-298 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-299
1:829
(8) Community residence for the developmentally disabled.
(9) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Government or public utility facility, with the exception of an
electric-generating facility.
(d) Government or public utility office.
(10) Planned development in accordance with Subsection E.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the IN-2 Institutional Zone shall be
as follows:
(1) Parking.
(2) Public bus shelter.
(3) Trash enclosure.
(4) Fencing, walls, and retaining walls.
(5) Signage.
(6) Other uses and structures that are located on the same lot with the
principal use and that are customarily incidental and clearly
subordinate to the permitted principal use of the land or building.
D. Conditional uses in the IN-2 Institutional Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Church congregation.
(2) Recreational facility.
E. Planned development standards. Planned development of an agerestricted
residential community and nonresidential uses is permitted
within the IN-2 Institutional Zone. Planned development shall be
designed and coordinated with the overall plan for the use and adaptive
reuse of an institutional campus. Planned development shall be subject
to the following requirements:
(1) A comprehensive plan for the campus must be submitted by the
applicant and approved by the Planning Board, except as provided
under Subsection E(10), Commercial land use. The comprehensive
plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100
feet. Architectural plans and elevations required as part of the
comprehensive plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1/8
inch equals one foot.
(2) The comprehensive plan shall include the following:
§ 425-299 VINELAND CODE § 425-299
1:830
(a) Cultural and natural resources inventory. The cultural and
natural resources inventory shall include, but not be limited to,
historic or architecturally important buildings, archaeological
features, designed landscapes, and any other significant
features within the campus.
(b) Land use plan. The land use plan shall show the tract and the
locations of the land uses within the tract proposed for the
planned development. The total number of dwelling units, the
amount of nonresidential floor area and the proposed land area
to be devoted to each use shall be shown and set forth. In
addition, the proposed types of residential and nonresidential
uses to be included in the planned development shall be shown
and set forth, and the land area to be occupied by each
proposed use shall be calculated. The residential density and
the nonresidential floor area ratio shall be provided. The plan
shall also provide for the location of public areas in accordance
with the recommendations of the City Master Plan.
(c) Adaptive reuse plan. The adaptive reuse plan shall identify the
features, open spaces and buildings of the campus that will be
retained as part of the planned development. The adaptive
reuse plan shall also identify the features, open spaces and
buildings proposed to be altered or removed as part of the
planned development.
(d) Circulation plan. The circulation plan shall show the location
and types of transportation facilities, including facilities for
pedestrians, bicycles, transit and motor vehicles (e.g.,
automobiles and trucks) within the planned development and
the connections and access into the planned development from
the surrounding City streets or adjoining land uses. The
circulation plan shall also identify the hierarchy and
classification and design standards proposed for all streets
within the planned development. The circulation plan shall
identify any proposed improvements or modifications to the
existing transportation system outside the planned
development.
(e) Open space and recreation plan. The open space and
recreation plan shall show the location of and shall identify the
open space areas proposed for the planned development. The
plan shall indicate whether they will be private, common or
public open space areas. The plan shall include a description of
the improvements proposed to the open space areas and
identify the recreation features and facilities, both active and
passive, to be provided. The plan shall address the proposed
ownership, operation, and maintenance of the open space
areas and recreation features and facilities of the planned
development.
§ 425-299 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-299
1:831
(f) Utility plan. The utility plan shall identify the need for and the
proposed location of the sanitary sewer lines and facilities and
the waterlines and identify how the sewer and water demands
of the site will be met. The plan shall also identify the proposed
methods for handling solid waste disposal.
(g) Stormwater management plan. The stormwater management
plan shall set forth the method for controlling and managing
stormwater within the planned development, in addition to any
off-site impacts and connections to the public drainage system.
The plan shall show the location of the drainage facilities
proposed on site and off site, including any retention or
detention basins or underground stormwater facilities.
(h) Community facility plan. The community facility plan shall
indicate the type and scope of any community facilities
proposed for the planned development, such as but not limited
to educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, or
public areas.
(i) Housing plan. The housing plan shall identify the number, type,
and location of housing units to be provided. The plan shall
identify how the development will provide for the construction
of affordable housing, as required by the City's affordable
housing regulations.
(j) Conservation plan. A conservation plan shall demonstrate how
the development will be designed and how the buildings will be
arranged to conserve energy and air and water resources.
(k) Architectural plan. The preliminary architectural elevations
and floor plans for the proposed buildings shall be submitted.
The plan shall be based on a common architectural theme for
the adaptive reuse of the campus. The architectural plan shall
include the proposed design of porches, patios, decks and
terraces for dwelling units. The architectural plan will promote
an attractive visual environment and establish a convenient
relationship among buildings and the circulation system and
the open space system of the planned development.
(l) Timing and phasing plan. The timing and phasing plan for the
proposed planned development shall provide the timing and
phasing of improvements in each section within the
development and shall include the terms and conditions to
protect the interests of the public and the residents, occupants
and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development.
(m) Local service plan. The local service plan shall identify the
public services that the applicant proposes to provide to the
development.
§ 425-299 VINELAND CODE § 425-299
1:832
(n) Municipal development agreement. A written agreement
between the developer and the City shall be provided for City
review and approval. The agreement shall provide for, but not
necessarily be limited to, the obligation of the developer to
provide and pay for municipal services enumerated under the
Municipal Services Act. The agreement shall require that the
developer shall provide and pay for such services until such
time as the City is required to provide the services or to
reimburse a qualified private community for the services,
pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law and
the Municipal Services Act.
(3) Permitted uses within an age-restricted residential community.
Planned development in the IN-2 Institutional Zone is limited to the
following uses:
(a) Uses permitted as of right in the IN-2 Zone.
(b) Residential cluster(s) of housing limited to dwellings that
qualify as "55 and over housing" within the meaning of the
Federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq. Occupancy
of such housing shall be by at least one person 55 years of age
or older per unit, and further provided that no child who has
not attained the age of 18 years shall be domiciled therein. The
type and the number of dwelling units shall be limited as
follows:
[1] Only single-family detached dwellings, townhouses and
assisted living facilities shall be permitted as part of a
residential cluster. A single-family detached dwelling is a
building containing one dwelling unit which is not
attached to any other dwelling unit by any means and
which is surrounded by open space or yards. For purposes
of this section, a townhouse is a structure that contains
three to six dwelling units in a row, in which each unit has
its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is
located over another unit, and each unit is separated from
any other unit by one or more vertical common fireresistant
walls.
[2] Not less than 50% of the dwelling units shall be singlefamily
detached dwellings.
[3] Not more than 50% of the dwelling units shall be
townhouse dwelling units.
(c) Assisted living facility. An assisted living facility licensed by the
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services,
providing residences for the frail elderly and the disabled, may
be permitted as part of the planned development of an agerestricted
residential community.
§ 425-299 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-299
1:833
[1] An assisted living facility shall contain not more than 100
residential units.
[2] The assisted living facility shall not exceed three stories in
height.
(4) Accessory uses within an age-restricted residential community. The
planned development of an age-restricted residential community in
the IN-2 Institutional Zone is limited to the following accessory
uses:
(a) Open space areas and recreation features and facilities,
including buildings for the common use and enjoyment of the
residents of the planned development such as, but not
necessarily limited to, clubhouse or community building, tennis
courts, trails and walking paths.
(b) Facilities for the maintenance and administration of the
planned development.
(c) Other uses incidental and customarily associated with the
permitted residential uses.
(5) Requirements for the development of an age-restricted residential
community. An age-restricted residential community in the IN-2
Institutional Zone shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Minimum contiguous tract area: 140 acres.
(b) Minimum tract frontage: 500 feet on each public street.
(c) Minimum tract depth: 500 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious coverage for the entire tract area: 40%.
(e) Maximum total tract building coverage for the entire tract
area: 18%.
(f) Minimum open space requirement for the entire tract area:
50%. The stormwater management facilities of the
development, including retention basins, detention basins, and
infiltration basins, shall be considered structures and shall not
be considered as open space for the purpose of meeting the
minimum open space requirement. The Planning Board,
however, may, in its sole discretion, partially or wholly credit as
open space facilities such as bioretention systems, vegetative
filters, and other stormwater management features that are
designed, landscaped and arranged to visually enhance the
open space areas, to provide natural approaches to stormwater
management, and to improve the appearance of the
development.
§ 425-299 VINELAND CODE § 425-299
1:834
(g) Minimum perimeter open space requirement. The planned
development shall provide landscaped open space at the tract
perimeter to buffer the planned development and to maintain
existing campus open space as a greenbelt. No buildings shall
be located in the open space except for the following:
gatehouse building or a structure purely incidental to and
designed to complement the open space; an existing building
approved to remain as part of the adaptive reuse of the
campus; a nonresidential building(s) at a location on Main
Road approved as part of the comprehensive plan for the agerestricted
residential community as the commercial
component of the planned development. No stormwater
management basin shall be located in the open space. The
minimum depth of the perimeter open space shall be as
follows:
[1] From Spring Road: 100 feet.
[2] From East Chestnut and Landis Avenues: 150 feet.
[3] From Maple Avenue: 100 feet.
[4] From Main Road: 150 feet.
[5] From an adjoining lot: 100 feet.
(h) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) permitted for all buildings,
including both residential and nonresidential, for the entire
tract area: 0.18.
(i) Maximum residential permitted density for the entire tract
area (all dwellings inclusive of assisted living units): three
dwellings per acre.
(6) Water and sewerage facilities. The development shall be served by
public water and public sanitary sewer, which shall be installed at
the expense of the developer. No construction permit shall be
issued unless and until plans for such facilities have been
submitted to the proper authority for approval and adequate
provisions are made to ensure that all necessary facilities are
installed.
(7) Utilities. All utilities shall be installed underground. The developer
shall establish and convey appropriate utility easements to the
utility provider.
(8) Requirements for single-family detached dwelling units. Singlefamily
detached dwelling units shall be located and designed to
meet the requirements set forth below. Setbacks from the streets
within the planned development shall be measured from the street
right-of-way line assigned by the state Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS), whether the street is public or
§ 425-299 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-299
1:835
private. The street right-of-way shall include the street cartway,
curb and sidewalk.
(a) The street system of the development shall conform to the
comprehensive plan of the development. Interior streets shall
be classified in a hierarchy with design tailored to function.
Each dwelling unit shall front on and be accessed from a
residential street within the planned development that meets
the minimum standards for a neighborhood street in
accordance with the standards for a neighborhood street as set
forth in the residential street hierarchy standards of the state
Residential Site Improvement Standards. Each collector street
shall be designed to meet the standards of the state Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(b) All streets, driveways, and parking areas shall be private. The
City shall have no responsibility to maintain or contribute to
the maintenance of parking areas or driveways.
(c) Prior to final approval, the developer shall provide a municipal
services agreement with the City for the contribution by the
City for removal of snow, ice and other obstructions from roads
and streets, for lighting of roads and streets, and for collection
of leaves. The agreement shall be consistent with the provision
of the Municipal Services Act and the Municipal Land Use Law.
(d) Minimum building setback from a minor or major collector
street: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum building setback from a residential access or
residential neighborhood street: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum distance between buildings (side to side): 15 feet.
(g) Minimum distance between buildings (rear to rear or rear to
side): 60 feet.
(h) Minimum spacing between driveways: 10 feet.
(i) Each dwelling unit shall be designed and constructed with and
shall maintain a private outdoor space that may be designed as
a patio, porch, terrace or a deck at the first living level at the
rear of the dwelling unit. The patio, porch, terrace or deck
shall be in accordance with the approved site plan for the
development. The patio, porch, terrace or deck shall not
project more than 12 feet from the building. The patio, porch,
terrace or deck shall be at least 160 square feet in area but not
more than 300 square feet in area. Privacy fencing is permitted
to a height not to exceed six feet above the surface level of the
patio, porch, terrace or deck. A fence to a height not to exceed
four feet is permitted to extend and complete the enclosure,
§ 425-299 VINELAND CODE § 425-299
1:836
installed parallel with and located a distance of up to 12 feet
from the rear wall of the dwelling unit.
(j) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
(k) Garage requirement: Each dwelling unit shall be constructed
with and shall maintain an attached garage for at least one car
and be served by a paved driveway with a width of at least 10
feet. The master deed and bylaws of the community association
shall prohibit the conversion of the required garage to any
other use.
(9) Requirements for townhouses. Buildings containing townhouse
dwelling units shall be located and designed to meet the
requirements set forth below. Setbacks from the streets within the
planned development shall be measured from the street right-ofway
line assigned by the state Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS), whether the street is public or private. The
street right-of-way shall include the street cartway, curb and
sidewalk.
(a) The street system of the development shall conform to the
comprehensive plan of the development. Interior streets shall
be classified in a hierarchy with design tailored to function.
Each dwelling unit shall front on and be accessed from a
residential street within the planned development that meets
the minimum standards for a neighborhood street in
accordance with the standards for a neighborhood street as set
forth in the residential street hierarchy standards of the state
Residential Site Improvement Standards. Each collector street
shall be designed to meet the standards of the state Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(b) All streets, driveways and parking areas shall be private. The
City shall have no responsibility to maintain or contribute to
the maintenance of parking areas or driveways.
(c) Prior to final approval, the developer shall provide a municipal
services agreement with the City for the contribution by the
City for removal of snow, ice and other obstructions from roads
and streets; for lighting of roads and streets; and for collection
of leaves. The agreement shall be consistent with the
provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law and the Municipal
Services Act.
(d) Minimum building setback from a minor or major collector
street: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum building setback from a residential access or
residential neighborhood street: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum distance between buildings (side to side): 30 feet.
§ 425-299 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-299
1:837
(g) Minimum distance between buildings (rear to rear or rear to
side): 60 feet.
(h) Each dwelling unit shall be constructed with and shall maintain
a private outdoor space that may be designed as a patio,
terrace, deck or porch at the first living level at the rear of the
dwelling unit. The patio, terrace, deck or porch shall be in
accordance with the approved site plan for the development.
The patio, porch, terrace or deck shall not project more than
12 feet from the building. The patio, porch, terrace or deck
shall be at least 160 square feet in area but not more than 300
square feet in area. Privacy fencing is permitted to a height not
to exceed six feet above the surface level of the patio, porch,
terrace or deck. A fence to a height not to exceed four feet is
permitted to extend and complete the enclosure, installed
parallel with and located a distance of up to 12 feet from the
rear wall of the dwelling unit.
(i) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
(j) Garage requirement: Each dwelling unit shall be constructed
with and shall maintain an attached garage for at least one car
and be served by a paved driveway with a width of at least 10
feet. The master deed and bylaws of the community association
shall prohibit the conversion of the required garage to any
other use.
(10) Commercial land use. The Planning Board may permit a limited
commercial development area for retail, personal service and office
use as a section of the planned development. Notwithstanding the
comprehensive planning provisions of Subsections E(1) and E(2),
above, the Planning Board may review and approve an application
for the commercial development area prior to submission of a
comprehensive plan for the adaptive reuse of the entire campus
tract as a planned development. Review and approval of the
commercial development area is subject to the following
requirements and limitations.
(a) The maximum area permitted for the commercial development
area is 5.5 acres.
(b) The commercial development area must be a contiguous area
of the tract fronting on Main Road.
(c) The commercial development area shall not be subject to the
minimum perimeter open space requirement for Main Road as
set forth in Subsection E(5)(g). However, no portion of the
commercial development area shall be within the perimeter
open space required from Landis Avenue.
(d) An overall conceptual development plan for the commercial
development area shall be submitted for review and approval
§ 425-299 VINELAND CODE § 425-299
1:838
by the Planning Board. The overall conceptual development
plan shall depict the commercial development area at its full
development by showing the building locations within the
commercial development area in relation to proposed
circulation, parking, stormwater management, open spaces,
and adjoining land uses. Individual applications for subdivision
approval or for site plan approval within the commercial
development area may be submitted in conjunction with or
subsequent to the submission of the overall conceptual
development plan.
(e) The layout and circulation plan for the commercial
development area shall provide for vehicular and pedestrian
access directly from Main Road into the remainder of the
campus tract. The plan for the commercial development area
shall be arranged to facilitate circulation and interconnect its
pedestrian and vehicular circulation system with the
development of the campus.
(f) The total floor area of the building(s) within the commercial
development area shall not exceed 30,000 square feet.
(g) The commercial development area shall provide and maintain
a landscaped buffer at least 50 feet in width to any residential
section of the campus.
(h) The commercial development area shall meet the area, yard,
bulk, and parking requirements for the B-3 District for
business uses. Signs shall be subject to the signage standards
of the IN-2 Zone.
(i) The permitted uses within the commercial development area
shall be limited to the following uses: retail store; personal
service shop; convenience store; business or professional
office; bank; restaurant. No use within the commercial
development, except for a bank, shall be a drive-in use or a
drive-through use that by design, physical facilities, service or
packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to
receive services or obtain goods while remaining in their motor
vehicles. No gasoline station or automotive repair or auto body
repair use shall be permitted as part of the commercial
development. No use listed as a prohibited use in the B-1 Zone
shall be permitted as part of the commercial development.
(j) Prior to approving a site plan for the commercial development
area, the Planning Board shall make the requisite finding of
facts under Subsection E(15), as applicable.
(k) The subdivision of individual lots within the commercial
development area for a permitted nonresidential land use is
permissible, provided that the lot meets the requirements of
the B-3 Zone and is created in conformance with an approved
§ 425-299 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-299
1:839
final site plan. Each subdivided lot shall be subject to and may
only be improved in accordance with the approved site plan.
(11)Common open space and recreation area requirements. The
planned development shall provide open space and recreation
areas and improvements for the use of residents, owners and
guests to meet the following requirements:
(a) A minimum of 50% of the entire tract area shall be reserved for
open space and recreation use. Areas shall be designated as
common open space for the use and enjoyment of the residents
and owners of the development.
(b) The recreational facilities within the development shall include
a clubhouse community building of at least 6,000 square feet in
floor area and an indoor swimming pool with a minimum area
of 2,500 square feet. The clubhouse community building and
the indoor swimming pool shall be completed by the issuance
of the 150th building permit of the single-family units and the
townhouse units approved for the development.
(c) The development shall provide other appropriate outdoor
active recreation facilities as approved by the Planning Board
for common use. Such facilities may include walking paths,
tennis courts, and similar facilities. All common open space
and any common recreation facilities shall be set aside for the
use and benefit of the owners and residents of the development
owned in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
The developer shall provide for an organization for the
ownership and maintenance of the open space and recreation
facilities for the benefit of owners or residents of the
development in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-43.
(d) The Planning Board may allow a greater concentration of
density or intensity of land use within a section or sections of
the development, whether it be earlier, later or simultaneous in
the development, than in others. A greater concentration of
density or intensity of land use for any section must be offset
by a smaller concentration in any completed prior stage or by
an appropriate reservation of open space on the remaining
land by grant of easement or by covenant in favor of the City.
(12) Landscaping requirement. The development shall plan and provide
for the landscaping of the entire tract. Landscaping shall include
building foundation plantings, clusters of plantings in strategic
areas, shade trees along roadways, sidewalks and pedestrian
paths, and preservation of existing vegetation and specimen
plantings.
(13) Architectural and building design requirements. Buildings and
their environs should be designed to be attractive from all vantage
§ 425-299 VINELAND CODE § 425-299
1:840
points, including fences, storage areas, and rear entrances and
elevations. All groups of related buildings shall be designed to
harmonize architectural treatment and exterior materials and to
meet the following requirements:
(a) Accessory structures should be architecturally coordinated
with the principal structure.
(b) Visual harmony should be created between new and older
buildings.
(c) Buildings should be designed to avoid long unbroken lines and
monotony of expression. Building detail, forms and setback
should be used to provide visual interest.
(d) Buildings should be spaced to permit sufficient light and
privacy and circulation.
(e) Signage shall be coordinated with architectural design. Signs
shall be subject to the sign standards of the IN-2 Zone.
(14) Approval of the community association, covenants and easements.
The proposed restrictive covenants, articles of incorporation,
master deed and bylaws, or other documents concerning the
creation of an association for the ownership and maintenance of
common land and/or common elements and facilities and the
restriction of occupancy and use of the development shall be
submitted to the Planning Board and approved by the Planning
Board attorney prior to preliminary approval of the site plan for the
planned development.
(15) Findings for planned developments. Prior to the approval of the
planned development in the IN-2 Zone, the Planning Board shall
find the following facts and conclusions as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the Zoning Ordinance standards for planned
development.
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(c) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate.
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established.
§ 425-299 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-299
1:841
§ 425-300. CO Conservation Zone. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
§ 425-301. P Public Zone. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26;
amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
(e) That the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests
of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of the
proposed development in the total completion of the
development are adequate.
(16) Subdivision of individual lots. The subdivision of individual lots
within the planned development as public or common open space
for active or passive recreational facilities, or for assisted living
facilities, or for a permitted nonresidential land use is permissible,
provided that any such lot is created in conformance with an
approved overall preliminary site plan for the entire planned
development and the subdivided parcel has received final site plan
approval. Each subdivided lot and any proposed improvement on
that lot shall be subject to and may only be improved in accordance
with the approved site plan for the planned development.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the CO Conservation Zone is to provide for the
conservation and use of the dedicated open spaces within the City that
are owned and managed by the City, the county, the state or the federal
government or that are privately owned and dedicated to open space
and conservation uses.
B. Permitted uses in the CO Conservation Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Public parks or public outdoor recreation area.
(2) Public or private open space.
(3) Public or private conservation areas.
(4) Water, forest and wildlife conservation or management areas and
related uses.
(5) Public agricultural or environmental research centers.
(6) Existing public utility installations.
C. Accessory uses in the CO Conservation Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Parking.
(2) Public bus shelter.
(3) Trash enclosure.
(4) Fencing.
(5) Signage.
§ 425-299 VINELAND CODE § 425-301
1:842
§ 425-302. MF Multifamily Zone. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
MF Multifamily Zone standards.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the P Public Zone is to provide for the public
use and development of areas owned by the City, the county, the state,
the federal government, or agencies thereof, on a permanent basis, for
public purposes.
B. Permitted uses. The permitted uses in the P Public Zone shall be public
uses as located and approved by the City of Vineland, including, but not
necessarily limited to, the following:
(1) Public office or administration buildings, maintenance yards,
garages, and similar structures.
(2) Public education and cultural institutions.
(3) Public parks, playgrounds, play fields, and open space.
(4) Public library.
(5) Public recreation facilities.
(6) Public water storage and treatment facilities.
(7) Public wastewater treatment facilities.
(8) Utility installations.
(9) Communications installations.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the P-Public Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Parking.
(2) Public bus shelter.
(3) Trash enclosure.
(4) Fencing.
(5) Signage.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the MF Multifamily Zone is to permit
residential development that includes the multifamily development of
townhouses as a residential cluster. The townhouse cluster is an
alternative to single-family development in the zone. The increased
density for the townhouse development must be offset by open space
preservation as part of the cluster.
B. Permitted uses in the MF Multifamily Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
§ 425-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-302
1:843
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Multifamily residential cluster of townhouses.
(3) Public purpose uses:
(a) School.
(b) Child-care center.
(c) Governmental or public utility facility.
(4) Community residence, community shelter.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses within the MF Multifamily Residential
Zone shall be as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zone.
(2) Farm building for livestock, equipment, storage of supplies or
harvested crops, or for preparation of crops for market for a farm.
(3) Commercial production greenhouse for a farm.
(4) Roadside stand, 300 square feet maximum, for a single-family
dwelling or a farm.
D. Conditional uses in the MF Multifamily Residential Zone shall be as
follows:
(1) Church, congregation.
(2) Recreational facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the MF Multifamily Residential Zone
shall be as follows:
(1) Piggery.
(2) Animal or poultry processing (slaughtering).
F. Multifamily residential cluster in the MF Zone. A residential cluster of
townhouses may be permitted in the MF Zone on a contiguous area that
is to be developed as a single entity according to a plan in accordance
with the requirements below. The Planning Board may approve a
residential cluster of townhouses where it determines that the intent
and purpose of the City Master Plan is better served by the cluster
design and that the development meets the requisite standards and
criteria for the residential cluster option. [Amended 2-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-12; 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-42]
(1) The maximum permitted number of townhouse dwelling units in
the residential cluster shall not exceed the number of single-family
dwelling units permitted for a fully conforming subdivision of
residential lots in the zone, unless modified by Subsection F(2)
§ 425-302 VINELAND CODE § 425-302
1:844
hereinbelow. For purposes of determining the maximum number
of dwellings permitted, the applicant shall submit a yield map
of a conforming conventional subdivision layout. The conforming
lot yield map shall be in sufficient detail to permit the Planning
Board to make an informed decision that the subdivision would
satisfy the ordinance requirements in every respect and would be
approvable as a conventional subdivision without the need for any
variances, waivers or design exceptions from the City development
regulations.
(2) If the townhouse development provides affordable housing on site,
then the maximum density of the development shall be in
accordance with the densities as indicated below:
(a) For development within Planning Area 1 of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan, or substantially similar
land use designation, the maximum density shall be eight
dwellings to the gross acre.
(b) For development within Planning Area 2 of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan, or substantially similar
land use designation, the maximum density shall be six
dwellings to the gross acre.
(3) The affordable housing units may be constructed as townhouse
units or as dwelling units located one over another.
(4) The first floor of all townhouse dwelling units and of all other
multistory dwellings shall comply with the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and the following requirements:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
(c) An accessible route of travel; however, an interior accessible
route of travel shall not be required between stories;
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) An accessible entranceway.
(5) The Planning Board may reduce the minimum common or public
open space requirement of the cluster to 25% of the gross land area
of the cluster in order to accommodate an increased number of
dwellings to provide affordable housing.
(6) If the zoning on a site has changed subsequent to December 17,
2007, the number of units permitted for the purpose of calculating
the additional number of units shall be the higher of the current
§ 425-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-302
1:845
number of units permitted or the number of units permitted on
December 17, 2007.
(7) Minimum total land area required. The minimum total land area
required for development of a multifamily residential cluster of
townhouses is five developable acres.
(8) Sewer and water. The dwelling units of a residential cluster shall be
served by public sewer and water.
(9) Open space design requirements. The cluster design for open space
should be arranged to preserve land as public or common open
space in accordance with the following criteria:
(a) A minimum of 40% of the gross land area of the cluster shall be
preserved as common open space.
(b) All areas to be preserved as common open space shall be
clearly identified and reserved on the plans submitted for
approval. The existing and planned use of the open space shall
be indicated on the plans.
(c) The minimum land area required to be preserved as common
open space shall be land that is not already preserved as open
space or preserved as farmland.
(d) The area proposed as public or private open space shall be
suitable for enjoyment and use as open space. The Planning
Board may withhold approval of any area that it deems
unsuitable as open space.
(e) At least 65% of the minimum land area required to be
preserved as common open space shall be land unencumbered
by any of the following:
[1] Wetlands or wetlands transition areas;
[2] Areas of special flood hazard;
[3] Existing easement areas for utilities or drainage;
[4] Rights-of-way; and
[5] Surface waters.
(f) Stormwater management basins are structures and do not
qualify as open space for the purpose of meeting the common
open space requirements.
(g) Any common open space area shall be at least two acres in
area and have a minimum width of 200 feet and a minimum
depth of 200 feet. The Planning Board may approve a smaller
area where it determines that such action would be beneficial
to the open space design of the cluster.
§ 425-302 VINELAND CODE § 425-302
1:846
(h) An open space lot shall have a minimum road frontage of at
least 100 feet.
(10)Common open space ownership. The developer shall provide a plan
for the use, ownership and maintenance of any common open space
in a residential cluster. The plan is subject to Planning Board
review and approval. The ownership plan shall be submitted with
the preliminary application for development and shall identify the
existing and proposed ownership of all proposed open space areas.
The City, at its option and in its sole discretion, or other
governmental agency approved by the City, at any time and from
time to time, may accept the dedication of land or any interest
therein for public use and maintenance, but the City shall not
require as a condition of the approval of a residential cluster that
land proposed to be set aside for common open space be dedicated
or made available to public use. The developer shall provide for an
organization for the ownership and maintenance of any open space
for the benefit of owners or residents of a residential cluster if the
open space is not dedicated to the municipality or other
governmental agency. The type of ownership of land dedicated for
common open space purposes shall be selected by the applicant,
subject to the approval of the Planning Board. Type of ownership
may include, but is not necessarily limited to, the following:
(a) The City of Vineland, subject to acceptance by the City Council.
(b) Homeowners', condominium or cooperative associations or
organizations.
(c) Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in the
subdivision.
(11) Homeowners' association. If the common open space is owned and
maintained by a homeowners' or condominium association, the
developer shall file homeowners' organization or condominium
documents, to be submitted with the application for final approval.
The provisions shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following:
(a) The homeowners' association shall be established before the
release for building permits.
(b) Membership shall be mandatory for each buyer and any
successive buyer.
(c) The open space restrictions shall be permanent.
(d) The association shall be responsible for liability insurance,
local taxes, and the maintenance and replacement of
recreational and other facilities.
§ 425-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-302
1:847
(e) Homeowners shall pay their pro rata share of the cost; the
assessment levied by the association may become a lien on the
property.
(f) The association shall be able to adjust the assessment to meet
changed needs.
(12) Maintenance of open space areas. In the event that a nonmunicipal
organization with the responsibility for the common open space
fails to maintain it in reasonable order and condition, then the City
Council, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43, may correct such
deficiencies and assess the cost of maintenance against the
properties within the development.
(13) Use and improvement of common open space for active recreation.
The Planning Board may require the installation of recreational
facilities suitable to the development, such as playgrounds, play
fields, parks or similar outdoor recreation facilities, on the common
open space. Such facilities shall be conveniently located and
accessible to all dwelling units and should adhere to the following
guidelines:
(a) One active recreation area should be provided for the first 125
dwelling units. Such areas should not be less than four acres.
(b) For developments of more than 125 dwellings, active
recreation or park space should be provided at the rate of one
acre per each 12 dwelling units or fraction thereof.
(c) Undeveloped common open space. Undeveloped common open
space should be left in its natural state. A developer may,
however, make limited improvements for the installation of
utilities, necessary grading, and the provision of paths and
trails. In addition, the Planning Board may require a developer
to make other improvements, such as removal of dead or
diseased trees; thinning of trees or other vegetation to
encourage more desirable growth; reforestation of disturbed
areas; and grading and seeding, subject to approval by all
regulatory agencies.
(14) Deed restrictions. Any lands dedicated for common open space
purposes shall contain covenants and deed restrictions approved
by the Board Attorney that ensure that:
(a) The open space area will not be further subdivided in the
future.
(b) The use of the open space will continue in perpetuity for the
purpose specified.
(c) Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the
open space.
§ 425-302 VINELAND CODE § 425-302
1:848
§ 425-303. Regional Mall Overlay District. [Added 6-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-39]
§ 425-304. Conditional uses.
A zoning ordinance may provide for conditional uses to be granted by the
Planning Board according to definite specifications and standards which
shall be clearly set forth with sufficient certainty and definiteness to enable
the developers to know their limit and extent.
(d) The open space shall not be utilized for any commercial
purpose. The Planning Board may, however, approve the use of
open space as farmland or pastureland as part of the
residential cluster design.
(15) Prior to the approval of the residential cluster, the Planning Board
shall make a finding of facts and conclusions as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Regional Mall Overlay District is to provide
an opportunity for the development of a regional shopping mall and/or
large-scale shopping opportunities. The area of the Regional Mall
Overlay District is accessible from the interchanges of Route 55 with
Sherman Avenue and South Delsea Drive and overlays portions of the
B-3, IN-1 and MHP Zone Districts. The intent of the Regional Mall
Overlay District is to permit shopping center development as an
additional permitted use within the underlying zone districts.
B. Permitted use. The development of a shopping center with a minimum
gross floor area of 250,000 square feet on a tract of 100 acres or
greater shall be permitted within the Regional Mall Overlay District.
Shopping center development shall be in accordance with the
standards of the B-4 Zone District for shopping centers.
A. The following conditional uses are established in the City of Vineland:
[Amended 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69]
(1) Boardinghouse, rooming house.
(2) Hospital, medical center, convalescent home.204
(3) Church, congregation.
(4) Funeral home.
(5) Cemetery, crematorium.
(6) Recreational facility.
(7) Campground.
204. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding community residences and community
shelters, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-3.
§ 425-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-304
1:849
(8) Heliport, helistop, helipad.
(9) Resource extraction.
(10) Production of bitumen products. [Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-62]
(11) Medical marijuana alternative treatment center. [Added
3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
(12) Medical marijuana alternative treatment center (dispensary facility
only). [Added 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
B. Specific standards. Specific standards for each conditional use are
provided in the Zoning Schedule, Sheet 2, Conditional Use Specific
Standards.205 Failure to meet any one or more of the specific standards
for a conditional use shall constitute a variance in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(3). [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-35]
C. General standards. Any conditional use shall be subject to the design
standards contained in Article VII of this chapter. Failure to meet any
one or more of the general standards for a conditional use shall
constitute a variance in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c).
Additionally, the following articles are made a part of this article by
reference, and all requirements contained therein shall be considered
as general standards: [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-35]
(1) Article X, Campgrounds.206
(2) Article XIII, Heliports, Helistops, Helipads.
(3) Article XIVA, Resource Extraction.
(4) Article XXVII, Medical Marijuana Alternative Treatment Center.
[Added 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
D. Application. An application for a conditional use, if all specific
standards are met, shall be submitted to the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for a conditional use
within 95 days of submission of a complete application by a developer to
the Planning Board Secretary, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. The review by the Planning Board of a
conditional use shall include site plan review pursuant to Article VI of
this chapter. The time period for action by the Planning Board on
conditional uses shall apply to such site plan review. In instances where
all specific standards are not met, an application for a conditional use
shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76b. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act on the
conditional use and site plan in lieu of the Planning Board. Whenever
205. Editor's Note: Sheet 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
206. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), Article IX, Mobile Home Parks, which immediately
preceded this section, was repealed 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69.
§ 425-304 VINELAND CODE § 425-304
1:850
§ 425-305. Special provisions.
review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board is
required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of a subdivision,
or N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, in the case of a site plan, the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, whichever is appropriate, shall condition
any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
A. Model homes. For purposes of this chapter, model homes or sales
offices within a subdivision shall not be considered a business use only
during the period necessary for the sale of new homes within said
subdivision.
B. Public and private nonprofit day schools. None of the provisions of this
chapter, or any regulation adopted in accordance therewith, shall
discriminate between public and private nonprofit day schools of
elementary or high school grade accredited by the State Department of
Education.
C. Foster children in single-family dwellings. None of the provisions of this
chapter, or any regulation adopted in accordance therewith, shall
discriminate between children who are members of families by reason
of their relationship by blood, marriage or adoption and foster children
placed with such families in a dwelling by the Division of Youth and
Family Services in the Department of Institutions and Agencies or a
duly incorporated child care agency and children placed pursuant to
law in single-family dwellings known as group homes. As used in this
section, the term "group home" means and includes any single-family
dwelling used in the placement of children pursuant to law recognized
as a group home by the Department of Institutions and Agencies in
accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Commissioner of
Institutions and Agencies; provided, however, that no group home shall
contain more than 12 children.
D. Community residences for the developmentally disabled, community
shelters for victims of domestic violence, community residences for the
terminally ill and community residences for persons with head injuries
shall be a permitted use in all residential districts of a municipality, and
the requirements therefor shall be the same as for single-family
dwelling units located within such districts. [Amended 2-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-3]
E. Family day-care homes.
(1) Family day-care homes shall be a permitted use in all residential
districts of a municipality. The requirements for family day-care
homes shall be the same as for single-family dwelling units located
within such residential districts. Any deed restriction that would
§ 425-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-305
1:851
prohibit the use of a single-family dwelling as a family day-care
home shall not be enforceable unless that restriction is necessary
for the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the other
residents in the neighborhood. The burden of proof shall be on
the party seeking to enforce the deed restriction to demonstrate,
on a case-by-case basis, that the restriction is necessary for the
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the residents in
the neighborhood who were meant to benefit from the restriction.
(2) In condominiums, cooperatives and horizontal property regimes
that represent themselves as being primarily for retirees or elderly
persons or which impose a minimum age limit tending to attract
persons who are nearing retirement age, deed restrictions or
bylaws may prohibit family day-care homes from being a permitted
use.
(3) In condominiums, cooperatives and horizontal property regimes
other than those permitted to prohibit family day-care homes from
being a permitted use under the preceding subsection, deed
restrictions or bylaws may prohibit family day-care homes from
being a permitted use; however, if such condominiums,
cooperatives or horizontal property regimes prohibit such use, the
burden of proof shall be on the condominium association,
cooperative association or council of co-owners to demonstrate, on
a case-by-case basis, that the prohibition is reasonably related to
the health, safety and welfare of the residents. The burden of proof
also shall be on the condominium association, cooperative
association or council of co-owners to demonstrate, on a case-bycase
basis, that any other restrictions imposed upon a family daycare
home, including but not limited to noise restrictions and
restrictions on the use of interior common areas, are reasonably
related to the health, safety and welfare of the residents.
F. Child-care centers.
(1) Child-care centers for which, upon completion, a license is required
from the Department of Human Services pursuant to the Child Care
Center Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq., shall be a permitted
use in all nonresidential districts of a municipality. The floor area
occupied in any building or structure as a child-care center shall be
excluded in calculating any parking requirement otherwise
applicable to that number of units or amount of floor space, as
appropriate, under state or local laws or regulations adopted
thereunder, and the permitted density allowable for that building or
structure under any applicable municipal zoning ordinance.
(2) In considering an application for development approval for a
nonresidential development that is to include a child-care center
that is located on the business premises, is owned or operated by
employers or landlords for the benefit of their employees, their
tenants' employees or employees in the area surrounding the
§ 425-305 VINELAND CODE § 425-305
1:852
development and is required to be licensed by the Department of
Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq., an approving
authority may exclude the floor area to be occupied in any building
or structure by the child-care center in calculating the density of
that building or structure for the purposes of determining whether
or not the density is allowable under any applicable municipal
zoning ordinance.
G. Groundwater remedial actions.
(1) The siting of a structure or equipment required for a groundwater
remedial action approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., shall be deemed to
be essential to the continuation of an existing structure or use of a
property, including a nonconforming use, or to the development of
a property, as authorized in the zoning ordinance of a municipality.
A groundwater remedial action subject to this section, including
any structure or equipment required in connection therewith, shall
therefore be deemed to be an accessory use or structure to any
structure or use authorized by the development regulations of a
municipality; shall be a permitted use in all zoning or use districts
of a municipality; and shall not require a use variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
(2) A municipality may, by ordinance, adopt reasonable standards for
the siting of a structure or equipment required for a groundwater
remedial action subject to the preceding subsection. The standards
may include specification of the duration of time allowed for the
removal from a site of all structures or equipment used in the
remedial action upon expiration of the term of the discharge permit
or completion of the remedial action, whichever shall be sooner.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to authorize a
municipality to require site plan review by a municipal agency for a
groundwater remedial action, but an ordinance establishing siting
standards may provide penalties and may authorize the
municipality to seek injunctive relief for violations of the ordinance.
(3) If, for any of the reasons set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, a variance
is required for the siting of a structure or equipment to be used in a
groundwater remedial action subject to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.8, a
variance for the remedial action shall be deemed necessary to
avoid exceptional and undue hardship on an owner, lessee or
developer of a property for which a variance application is made;
however, a zoning ordinance may authorize the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board, as appropriate, to establish
reasonable terms and conditions for issuance of a variance. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board, as appropriate,
shall review and take final action on an application for a variance
for a groundwater corrective action at the next meeting of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board, as appropriate,
occurring not less than 20 days following the filing of an application
§ 425-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-305
1:853
therefor, unless the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board,
as appropriate, determines that the application lacks information
indicated on a checklist adopted by ordinance and made available
to the applicant, and the applicant has been notified, in writing,
of the specific deficiencies prior to expiration of the twenty-day
period.
H. Height standards.
(1) The height standards, as provided in this chapter, shall not apply to
silos; to belfries, cupolas or domes not used for human occupancy;
to chimneys, ventilators, skylights or other mechanical devices
usually carried above roof level; to water tanks; or to television,
radio or satellite dish antennas. Such structures shall be carried
only to the height necessary for their purpose.
(2) The height standards, as provided in this chapter, shall not apply to
a parapet wall or ornamental cornice having no windows, provided
that such feature rises no more than five feet above the standard
building height.
(3) Public or quasi-public buildings which are approved to exceed the
height standard, as provided in this chapter, shall increase the
front, side and rear yards by one foot for every one foot the building
exceeds the height standard, up to a maximum height of 50 feet.
I. Accessory buildings and structures/accessory structures on lots or
tracts split by zone district boundary lines: [Amended 8-28-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-68]
(1) Accessory buildings shall not be placed in front yard areas or in
front of the principal building.
(2) In the case of any lot or tract of land that is divided by a zoning
district boundary line (commonly known as being split zoned),
except for zoning districts in which residential housing of any type
is allowed as a principal permitted use, any accessory structure or
use that is permitted in the less intensive zoning district shall also
be considered as being permitted in both zoning districts. This may
thus apply to common accessory structures such as parking and
drive aisles, landscaping and drainage facilities so long as the
Zoning Officer, in the reasonable exercise of his discretion, deems
same to be permitted accessory structures or uses in the less
intensive zoning district.
J. Minor arterial streets. The building line setback along a minor arterial
street shall be 100 feet from the center line of the street, except that a
building or structure which was legally located along such an arterial
but was made nonconforming by the passage of this chapter shall be
permitted to increase the size of the building or structure or portion
thereof which is located within the nonconforming area by up to 25%.
§ 425-305 VINELAND CODE § 425-305
1:854
§ 425-306. Developable area requirement. [Added 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
All lots must provide a contiguous minimum developable land area within
the lot. The contiguous developable land area within the lot shall be equal
to or greater than the applicable minimum lot area required for the zone
district in which the lot is located. The contiguous developable land area
must also meet the minimum lot dimensions required by the zone district,
except that the minimum contiguous developable land area is not required
to exceed 40,000 square feet where the lot is served by public sewer and
public water, nor is it required to have a minimum dimension greater than
150 feet. Where the lot is not served by public sewer or by public water, the
contiguous developable land area within the lot is not required to exceed
80,000 square feet nor is it required to have a minimum dimension greater
than 150 feet.
No other increase of such nonconforming structure shall be permitted
as of right within the building line setback established herein.
K. Exempted uses. The following uses are permitted in all zones, provided
that the location and siting are approved by the City Engineer:
(1) Outdoor telephone booth.
(2) School bus weather shelter.
(3) Public utility service and distribution lines located within public
right-of-way.
L. Home occupations. A home occupation shall be permitted in the
specified zones only if the following standards are met:
(1) A maximum of 25% of the total square footage of the residence
shall be devoted to the home occupation.
(2) No advertising display of any kind shall be permitted, except for an
identification sign with a maximum sign face area of two square
feet.
(3) A minimum of two on-site parking spaces shall be provided for
visitors in addition to the spaces required for the residential use.
Additionally, parking facilities shall be located within side yards or
rear yards and shall be completely screened from neighboring
properties and any public street.
(4) No goods, chattels, materials, supplies or items of any kind
pertaining to the home occupation shall be delivered to or from the
premises by articulated vehicles.
(5) No retail sales or products shall be offered to the public.
(6) The home occupation shall be free from objectionable odors, fumes,
dirt, vibration and noise.
§ 425-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-307
1:855
§ 425-307. Conformity.
A. Zoning permit.
(1) An application for a zoning permit shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer prior to the commencement of a use or the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation
of a structure or building. Said application shall be accompanied by
payment of a fee as established by this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall determine that such use, structure or
building complies with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or
variance therefrom authorized by the Planning Board or by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or
40:55D-70.
B. Nonconforming use or structure.
(1) Any nonconforming use or structure may be continued upon the lot
or in the structure so occupied, and any such structure may be
restored or repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof. If,
however, the cost to restore or repair a partially destroyed
structure is greater than the tax assessed value of the structure
prior to the partial destruction, restoration or repair is prohibited.
(2) Following intended abandonment of a nonconforming use, said
nonconforming use shall not thereafter be reinstated nor shall any
structure be occupied except in conformance with this chapter.
(3) A nonconforming use, once converted to a conforming use, shall
not revert to the prior nonconforming use or to another
nonconforming use.
(4) Changing a valid nonconforming use to another nonconforming use
shall only be by resolution of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(5) Expansion of a nonconforming use shall require a use variance,
which shall be by resolution of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
provided in § 425-348A(4). Any application for expansion of a
nonconforming use shall require submission of a plot plan to allow
the Zoning Board of Adjustment to make an informed
determination that the existing site improvements are adequate to
serve the proposed use and to meet the minimum requirements
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In the
event that the existing site improvements are found to be
inadequate, any approval of an expansion of a nonconforming use
shall be conditioned upon site plan approval.
(6) An addition to a nonconforming structure is allowable, provided
that the use of the property is permitted in the zoning district in
which it is located and that the addition itself meets the area and
§ 425-307 VINELAND CODE § 425-307
1:856
§ 425-308. Zoning schedules.207
bulk requirements for the lot, as established by § 425-308 of this
article.
C. Nonconforming lot.
(1) A lot which does not conform to the standards set for the smallest
lot allowable in the zoning district in which it is located, but which
has been duly recorded under law, may be used for the purposes
permitted on the smallest lot allowable in the zoning district in
which it is located, provided that the proposed construction meets
the yard requirements for the lot, as established by § 425-308 of
this article.
(2) A nonconforming lot shall not be reduced in area or dimensions.
D. Certificate of zoning compliance and certification of nonconforming use
or structure.
(1) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other
person interested in any land upon which a use or structure exists
may apply, in writing, to the Zoning Officer for the issuance of a
certificate certifying that the use or structure complies with the
provisions of this chapter or authorized variance therefrom. The
Zoning Officer shall be entitled to demand and receive for such
certificate issued by him a fee as established by this chapter.
(2) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other
person interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or
structure exists may apply, in writing, to the Zoning Officer for the
issuance of a certification certifying that the use or structure
existed before the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the
use or structure nonconforming. The applicant shall have the
burden of proof. The application for such certification shall be
made to the Zoning Officer within one year of the adoption of the
ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming or
at any time to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Denial by the
Zoning Officer shall be appealable to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Officer shall be entitled to demand and
receive for such certification issued by him a fee, as established by
this chapter. Should the prospective purchaser, prospective
mortgagee or other interested person request that the Zoning
Officer research past ordinances and approvals on his behalf, an
additional fee, as established by this chapter, shall be charged.
A. Any departure from the following zoning schedules shall require
approval of a variance:
(1) Sheet 1, Area, Yard, Bulk and Parking Standards.
207. Editor's Note: The zoning schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 425-307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-308
1:857
§ 425-309. Duration of use variance, bulk variance, conditional use
and zoning permit.
§ 425-310. Temporary use permit.
It is recognized that there may be the need in very selected instances to
allow for a temporary use on a property which may not be in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. A temporary use may be necessitated
by a public emergency or by a personal hardship created by a catastrophic
(2) Sheet 2, Conditional Use Specific Standards.
(3) Sheet 3, Parking Standards.
(4) Sheet 4, Signage Standards.
B. Additionally, any departure from the space standards for buffers, as
specified in § 425-73D(1) through (4) shall require approval of a
variance.
A. Use variance. After a use variance has been granted by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, in instances where further Board action (i.e.,
subdivision or site plan approval) is not required the applicant shall
have one year in which to institute commencement of use. Said
commencement of use must be in compliance with all other regulatory
requirements. For example, occupancy of a structure shall not be
deemed the commencement of use in the event that appropriate
construction permits and certificate of occupancy have not been
secured. After a use variance has been granted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, in instances where further Board action (i.e., subdivision or
site plan approval) is required the applicant shall have one year in
which to secure said approval. The applicant shall then be limited by
the duration of said approval. Following commencement of use, the use
shall remain valid until there is intended abandonment of said use.
B. Bulk variance. After a bulk variance has been granted by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, in instances where further Board action (i.e.,
subdivision or site plan approval) is not required the applicant shall
have one year in which to complete the construction which necessitated
the bulk variance. After a bulk variance has been granted by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment as part of a subdivision
or site plan approval, the applicant shall be limited by the duration of
said approval. Following completion of the construction which
necessitated the bulk variance, the bulk variance shall remain valid as
long as said construction remains.
C. Conditional use. A conditional use approval, because it is always
companion to a site plan approval, shall be limited by the duration of
said site plan approval.
D. Zoning permit. A zoning permit shall be valid for a period of six months
from date of issuance.
§ 425-308 VINELAND CODE § 425-310
1:858
event (e.g., hurricane, fire). These events, because of their sudden and
unexpected nature, cannot be planned for in advance, yet require
immediate remedy. The Zoning Officer is therefore empowered in these very
selected instances to grant a temporary use permit if, in his judgement, the
proposed use is of such a nature that there will be no detrimental impact
upon adjoining properties. Said temporary use permit shall be valid for a
period of six months from date of issuance. Upon written request made
prior to the expiration date, the Zoning Officer may grant one six-month
extension if good cause is shown. A temporary use may also be desired for
other reasons not related to a public emergency or to a personal hardship
created by a catastrophic event. In these instances, application shall be
made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, which is empowered to authorize
the granting of a temporary use permit not related to a public emergency
or to a personal hardship created by a catastrophic event under the same
regulations and procedures as for the issuance of a zoning permit for a
use not permitted in a zone. Said temporary use permit shall be valid for a
period of six months from the date of approval. Upon written request made
prior to the expiration date, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant one
six-month extension, if good cause is shown.
§ 425-311. Interpretation.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to interpret the
meaning of this article in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55-70b. It is the intent
that this article is to receive a reasonable construction and is to be liberally
construed in favor of the City.
§ 425-312. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Zoning
Officer.
B. Where a provision of this article is violated, the Zoning Officer shall
serve the property owner or other responsible agent with a written
notice of violation stating that the violation must cease and that
corrective action must be taken immediately. For purposes of this
chapter, each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. In the event that the violation has not ceased and that corrective action
has not been taken within 10 days of the date of the written notice of
violation, the Zoning Officer may issue a summons and file a complaint
for the violation in Municipal Court. Alternatively, the City may bring an
action in Superior Court to enjoin the property owner or other
responsible agent from continuing the violation.
D. If convicted, the property owner or other responsible agent shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 per day or imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 425-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-312
1:859

ARTICLE XVI
River Conservation Area
[Added 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
§ 425-313. Purpose.
A. On May 7, 1987, the U.S. Congress passed legislation (Public Law
100-33) authorizing the study of portions of the Maurice and
Manumuskin Rivers and Menantico Creek for possible inclusion in the
National Wild and Scenic Rivers System. This study, conducted jointly
by the National Park Service and the Cumberland County Department
of Planning and Development, evaluated the portions of the rivers
included in the National Rivers Inventory, in addition to other segments
suggested by the Wild and Scenic Rivers Task Force. At the conclusion
of the study, it was found that, within Vineland, the Manumuskin River
in its entirety and the Menantico Creek from the impoundment at
Menantico Lake southward were eligible for inclusion as "scenic"
rivers.
B. On November 26, 1991 (Resolution No. 91-680), and on February 9,
1993 (Resolution No. 93-133), City Council endorsed inclusion of these
river segments in the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System and
authorized development of an ordinance to implement local regulatory
controls. It is therefore the purpose of this resultant ordinance to:
(1) Delineate identifiable areas, to be known as River Conservation
Areas, within which additional regulatory controls shall be
imposed.
(2) Protect the health, safety and welfare of residents within River
Conservation Areas, as well as the community in general.
(3) Provide for the protection and enhancement of resource values
identified in the draft report, entitled "The Maurice River and Its
Tributaries National Wild and Scenic Rivers Study," prepared by
the National Park Service in May 1992.
(4) Preserve environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited
to freshwater wetlands, floodplains and fish and wildlife habitat
areas.
(5) Prevent environmental degradation.
(6) Protect threatened and endangered species and their supporting
habitat areas.
(7) Encourage utilization of portion of sites with most suitable soils for
development.
(8) Maintain the scenic qualities within River Conservation Areas.
§ 425-313 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-313
1:861
§ 425-314. Delineation of River Conservation Areas.
§ 425-315. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to this article:
(9) Preserve specimen trees, as inventoried by the Department of
Environmental Protection, and minimize cutting of trees with
diameters of more than 12 inches, measured three feet above
grade.
(10) Prevent degradation of water quality, including both purity and
clarity, in waterways within River Conservation Areas and ensure
the free-flowing condition of these waterways.
(11) Identify those land uses which would effectuate the purpose of this
article, those land uses which would effectuate the purpose of this
article only if special conditions are applied and those land uses
which would be contrary to the purpose of this article.
(12) Allow the continuation of existing, traditional land and water uses
at their present scale within River Conservation Areas and only
encourage expansion if said uses would effectuate the purpose of
this article.
(13) Implement development and design standards to provide for the
protection and enhancement of resource values.
(14) Provide for regional management of the waterways through
implementation of comparable, though not identical, land use
controls and development and design standards with neighboring
communities.
A. River Conservation Areas are hereby established along the
Manumuskin River in its entirety and the Menantico Creek from the
impoundment at Menantico Lake southward. These overlay areas shall
be one-half-mile wide, measuring 1/4 mile on each side of the center
line of the waterways, as shown on the City of Vineland Zoning Map.
B. As it is the intent of this article that River Conservation Areas be
overlay areas, any development standards not expressly provided in
this article shall be governed by the underlying zoning district. In
instances where there are duplicative standards for a River
Conservation Area and an underlying zoning district, the more
stringent standard shall take precedence. A permitted or accessory use
must be allowed in both the River Conservation Area and the
underlying zoning district to be permissible. Additionally, lot sizes
resulting from development in accordance with conditional use
standards contained in this article must not be smaller than what would
otherwise be allowed in the underlying zoning district.
§ 425-313 VINELAND CODE § 425-315
1:862
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL OPERATION — The production of
plants, animals, poultry, bees, forest products, fruits or flowers with all
related pursuits.
CONSERVATION ACTIVITY — The utilization of land by public or nonprofit
entities for the intended purpose of protection and enhancement of
resource values. Such activities shall include, but not be limited to, fish and
wildlife areas, bird sanctuaries, nature areas and historic sites.
FORESTRY — The growing and harvesting of trees for commercial
purposes.
PASSIVE RECREATIONAL USE — Any recreational activity which has no
significant impact on the environmental integrity of the area, including but
not limited to such uses as hiking, hunting, trapping, fishing, canoeing,
bicycling and nature study.
PERSONAL RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any recreational facility which is
accessory to a residential use and which is intended to be utilized solely by
the occupants of the residential use and their guests.
UTILITY TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION LINES — Lines, conduits
or pipes located in a street, road, alley, easement or utility-owned property
through which natural gas, electricity, telephone, cable television, water,
sewerage or stormwater are collected or conveyed, whatever the case may
be.
WASTE STORAGE, DISPOSAL OR TRANSFER FACILITY — Any facility
which stores, either temporarily or permanently, disposes of, or transfers
solid waste, hazardous waste, radioactive waste or sludge.
§ 425-316. Permitted uses.
The following uses, if likewise allowed in the underlying zoning district,
shall be permitted in a River Conservation Area, if all other requirements of
this chapter are met:
A. Single-family dwelling.
B. Agricultural or horticultural operation.
C. Forestry.
D. Conservation activity.
E. Passive recreational use.
F. Utility transmission and distribution lines.
G. Sewerage pumping station.
H. Community residence, community shelter. [Added 2-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-3]
§ 425-315 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-317
1:863
§ 425-317. Accessory uses.
The following accessory uses, if likewise allowed in the underlying zoning
district, shall be permitted in a River Conservation Area, if all other
requirements of this chapter are met:
§ 425-318. Conditional uses.
The following conditional use shall be permitted in a River Conservation
Area if the specific standards in this article, in addition to all other
requirements of this chapter, are met:
§ 425-319. Prohibited uses.
The following uses, even if permitted in the underlying zoning district, shall
be prohibited in a River Conservation Area:
§ 425-320. Design standards.
The following design standards shall be applicable to all permitted uses,
along with their allowable accessory uses, in a River Conservation Area,
unless otherwise stated. In instances where a design standard for an
A. Private garage (900 square feet maximum) for a single-family dwelling.
B. Personal recreational facility for a single-family dwelling.
C. Storage shed (150 square feet maximum) for a single-family dwelling.
D. Agricultural employee housing for agricultural or horticultural
operations.
E. Farm buildings for livestock, equipment, storage of supplies or
harvested crops, or for preparation of crops for market for agricultural
or horticultural operations.
F. Roadside stand (300 square feet maximum) for a single-family dwelling
or agricultural or horticultural operation.
G. Equipment storage building for forestry, conservation activities or
passive recreational uses.
H. Fencing.
I. Signage.
A. Conservation cluster development in accordance with § 425-322.
A. Waste storage, disposal or transfer facility.
B. Resource extraction.
C. All industrial uses.
§ 425-317 VINELAND CODE § 425-320
1:864
underlying zoning district is more stringent than the same design standard
for a River Conservation Area, the underlying zoning district shall govern.
§ 425-321. Subdivisions.
Subsequent to enactment of this article, no lot of record in existence at
the time of enactment of this article may be partitioned into more than five
lots (four new lots plus remainder) or be subject of a major subdivision
application, except as provided for in § 425-322 of this article. The number
of lots created by successive development applications shall be counted
cumulatively.
A. Lot size. The minimum lot size shall be five acres.
B. Waterway frontage. For any lot abutting a waterway (Manumuskin
River or Menantico Creek), the minimum waterway frontage shall be
300 feet. Said frontage shall be the measurement of a straight line
connecting the two points where two opposing property lines of the lot
in question intersect the center line of the waterway, as shown on the
City of Vineland Zoning Map.208
C. Building setback from waterway. Principal and accessory buildings
shall be a minimum of 350 feet from the center line of the waterway
(Manumuskin River or Menantico Creek), as shown on the City of
Vineland Zoning Map.
D. Clearing of vegetation.
(1) No more than 20% of a property may be cleared of natural,
indigenous vegetation.
(2) Dead, diseased, unsafe or fallen trees and noxious plants and
shrubs, such as poison ivy, may be removed without regard to the
above-referenced standard.
E. Vegetation buffer. Any clearing of natural, indigenous vegetation shall
be a minimum of 100 feet from the center line of the waterway
(Manumuskin River or Menantico Creek), as shown on the City of
Vineland Zoning Map, to provide for the protection and enhancement of
resource values, including the scenic qualities of said waterway. This
provision shall not be applicable to conservation activities, passive
recreational uses, utility transmission and distribution lines and
sewerage pumping stations.
F. Individual subsurface sewage disposal systems. Design, approval and
construction of individual subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:9A.
208. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is located at the end of this volume.
§ 425-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-322
1:865
§ 425-322. Conservation cluster development.
A conservation cluster development shall be permitted in a River
Conservation Area as a conditional use, provided that all the provisions of
this section are met and that none of the resultant lot sizes are less than
what would be allowed in the underlying zoning district. Deviation from any
of the provisions of this section shall constitute a use variance. It is the
purpose of this section to require that greater consideration be given to
the protection and enhancement of resource values in the development of
property, as more specifically enumerated in § 425-313 of this article.
A. Eligibility standards. The property to be developed as a conservation
cluster development shall comprise a minimum of 25 contiguous acres,
exclusive of public right-of-way.
B. Permitted and accessory uses. Only single-family dwellings and
associated accessory uses, as enumerated in § 425-317 of this article,
shall be permitted on the lots within a conservation cluster
development, with the exception of the property devoted to open space,
where conservation activities and passive recreational uses and their
associated accessory uses, as enumerated in § 425-317 of this article,
shall be permitted.
C. Design standards: All the design standards contained in § 425-320 of
this article, with the exception of lot size, shall apply to a conservation
cluster development, in addition to the following design standards:
(1) Lot size. The minimum lot size within a conservation cluster
development shall be one acre. (Please note that this lot size is only
attainable if public water and sewer are provided because of other
provisions in this chapter.)
(2) Density. The maximum gross density within a conservation cluster
development shall be one dwelling unit per four acres.
(3) Open space. Within a conservation cluster development, 50% of the
land area shall be permanently reserved as contiguous open space.
A minimum of 1/2 of the required amount of open space shall be
upland, free of water bodies, waterways, freshwater wetlands and
freshwater wetlands transition areas established by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Maintenance of open space. Permanently reserved open space shall be
held by a homeowners' association, of which all owners of lots within
the conservation cluster development are obligated to be members; a
nonprofit conservation organization or a governmental entity. Said open
space shall not be subject to further subdivision and may only be used
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 425-322 VINELAND CODE § 425-323
1:866
§ 425-323. Application procedure, submission requirements and the
effect of approval.
The application procedure, submission requirements and effect of approval
for any type of development within a River Conservation Area, with the
exception of a conservation cluster development, shall be in accordance
with the provisions contained elsewhere in this chapter. A conservation
cluster development, while a conditional use, shall require submission of a
preliminary major subdivision plat as part of an application, rather than a
site plan. The application procedure, submission requirements and effect of
approval for a conservation cluster development shall therefore be the same
as those of a major subdivision, except that in addition to the subdivision
plat details and other required data contained in § 425-60, the following
need also be submitted with a conditional use/preliminary major subdivision
application:
A. An environmental impact statement in accordance with §§ 425-80 and
300-81.
B. Draft homeowners' association documents.
C. Copies of all restrictive covenants to be applied to any of the lots within
the conservation cluster development, including the required open
space.
D. A map of existing vegetation showing predominant species, any
specimen trees as inventoried by the Department of Environmental
Protection, and trees with diameters of more than 12 inches, measured
three feet above grade, in addition to limits of clearing for each lot
within the development.
§ 425-323 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-323
1:867

ARTICLE XVII
Vineland Downtown Improvement District Area
[Added 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
§ 425-324. Purpose.
In 1990, City Council created a special improvement district and designated
a district management corporation in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq. The Vineland Downtown Improvement District, as
it is called, was created in an effort to preserve and enhance the function
and appearance of the traditional business core of the City. Recognizing
the importance of appearance to the economic vitality of the area, it is
the purpose of this article to establish the regulatory framework by which
the Vineland Downtown Improvement District will participate in the
development approval process, as allowed by N.J.S.A. 40:56-71.
§ 425-325. Delineation of district area.
The Vineland Downtown Improvement District Area, which shall encompass
the special improvement district as described in Ordinance No. 90-99, as
amended, is hereby established as an overlay area, as shown on the City
of Vineland Zoning Map.209 The intent of this delineation is to require that
any application for development, including all applications to the Planning
Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment in addition to applications for zoning
or construction permits, for properties within the district be referred to the
District Management Corporation for comment and/or approval, whichever
the case may be.
§ 425-326. Vineland Downtown Improvement District ordinance.
The Vineland Downtown Improvement District shall develop aesthetic
design criteria, not otherwise provided for in this chapter, related to the
construction or alteration of building and structure facades within the
district, including signage. These aesthetic design criteria must be
approved by the Planning Board prior to recommendation being made to
City Council for incorporation into a regulatory ordinance for the Vineland
Downtown Improvement District. Said ordinance, which will grant
regulatory authority to the District Management Corporation, should also
include application and administrative procedures related to the
development approval process. Said ordinance shall also allow that the
District Management Corporation be advisory to the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment regarding other applications within the
Vineland Downtown Improvement District Area not involving the
construction or alteration of building and structure facades or signage. In
this advisory capacity, the District Management Corporation shall adhere
to scheduling established by the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
209. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is located at the end of this volume.
§ 425-324 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-327
1:869
§ 425-327. Effect of district approval.
No application to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment related
to the construction or alteration of building and structure facades within
the district, including signage, shall be deemed complete until approved by
the District Management Corporation. In the event that no Board approval
is required, no zoning or construction permit shall be issued related to
the construction or alteration of building and structure facades within
the district, including signage, until approved by the District Management
Corporation.
§ 425-328. Appeal to Planning Board.
Individual determinations of the District Management Corporation related
to construction or alteration of building and structure facades within the
district, including signage, may be appealed to the Planning Board within 10
days of the District Management Corporation's official action. To initiate an
appeal, an applicant shall submit a written request specifying the grounds
for the appeal, along with one complete copy of the application submitted
to the Vineland Downtown Improvement District, one copy of the District
Management Corporation's official action and a processing fee of $75 to
the Secretary of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall review the
written record, accepting no further testimony, and shall decide on the
appeal within 95 days of the District Management Corporation's official
action. A resolution documenting the decision of the Planning Board shall
be sent to the applicant, the Zoning Officer and the Vineland Downtown
Improvement District within 10 days of the date of the decision.
§ 425-329. When effective.
This article shall not take effect until the Vineland Downtown Improvement
District Ordinance, as described in § 425-326, is enacted. This article shall
remain in effect until the expiration of the Vineland Downtown
Improvement District, unless otherwise amended or repealed by City
Council.
§ 425-327 VINELAND CODE § 425-329
1:870
ARTICLE XVIII
Flood Hazard Overlay District210
[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; amended 6-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-39]
§ 425-330. Purpose.
The flood hazard areas of the City of Vineland are subject to periodic
inundation which threatens life and property, disrupts commerce, and
requires expenditures for flood protection and relief. The purpose of the
Flood Hazard Overlay is to control the use of land to discourage
construction and fill or regrading in flood hazard areas; to prevent
encroachments which would obstruct or constrict the movement of
floodwaters; to prevent damage to property and loss of life; to prevent the
endangerment of areas otherwise protected from flood damage; to prevent
pollution of watercourses by preventing the placing or storing of unsanitary
or dangerous substances in the flood hazard areas; and to support the
conservation, protection and maintenance of the stream corridors within
the City.
§ 425-331. Delineation of flood hazard overlay area.
Any and all lands within the City of Vineland which are classified as a
floodway, flood-fringe or one-hundred-year floodplain by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and/or by the Federal Emergency
Management Administration, or as an area of special flood hazard or
floodway pursuant to § 425-71, Flood damage prevention, of this chapter
(the City of Vineland Land Use Ordinance), is hereby designated as the
Flood Hazard Overlay Zone. The Flood Hazard Overlay Zone shall operate
in conjunction with the underlying zone such that the overlay provisions,
where more restrictive or imposing a higher standard, shall govern.
§ 425-332. Permitted land use.
Land use with the Flood Hazard Overlay Zone shall be limited to the
following:
A. Open space.
B. Wildlife sanctuaries, woodland preserves, and arboretums, but
excluding enclosed structures.
C. Game farms, fish hatcheries, and fishing reserves, operated for the
protection and propagation of wildlife, but excluding enclosed
structures.
D. Hiking, bicycle and bridle trails, including bridges or other structures
appurtenant thereto constructed.
210. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2009-72, adopted 11-24-2009, readopted in its entirety
without change Ord. No. 2008-39, which amends this article.
§ 425-330 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-332
1:871
§ 425-333. Flood damage prevention.
Any development within the Flood Hazard Overlay Zone shall comply with
§ 425-71, containing flood damage prevention design standards.
E. Trails or pathways, including bridges or other structures appurtenant
thereto constructed and/or maintained by or under the authority of the
City for the purpose of providing access to public recreation areas.
F. Fishing areas.
G. Cultivation of the soil for agricultural or horticultural production,
pasture and similar agricultural uses undertaken in accordance with
agricultural best management practices to reduce or prevent nonpointsource
pollution.
H. Forestry where a plan approved by the New Jersey Bureau of Forestry is
on file with the City Engineer.
I. A use, structure or activity that has been allowed as part of a
development approved pursuant to the stream corridor design
regulations, and the determination that there is no other reasonable or
prudent alternative to placement of the use, structure or activity in the
Flood Hazard Overlay.
§ 425-332 VINELAND CODE § 425-333
1:872
ARTICLE XIX
Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Standards
[Added 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-84; amended 12-26-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-110]
§ 425-334. Purpose; statutory authority.
This article establishes land use and design standards for areas adjacent to
public use airports with the intent of minimizing airport and aeronautical
hazards, as required by the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983,
P.L. 1983, c. 260.211 These standards are based upon and comply with the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 16:62-1 et seq.
§ 425-335. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRPARK — An area of land, adjacent to a public use airport, to be utilized
as a combined single-family residence and aircraft storage facility.
AIRPORT — Any area of land or water, or both, designed and set aside
for the landing and takeoff of fixed-wing aircraft, utilized or to be utilized
by the general public for such purposes, publicly or privately owned and
licensed by the Commissioner as a public use airport or landing strip, or an
area which has been determined by the Commissioner to be likely to be so
licensed within one year of the determination.
AIRPORT HAZARD —
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water, or both, upon which
an airport hazard might be created or established if not prevented by the
Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act.212
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Transportation.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction, creation or
establishment of any structure or planting of a tree.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Aeronautics.
DIVISION — The Division of Aeronautics.
Any use of land or water, or both, which may create a dangerous
condition for persons or property in or about an airport or aircraft
during landing or takeoff at an airport; or
A.
Any structure or tree which obstructs the airspace required for the
flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport.
B.
211. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.
212. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.
§ 425-334 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-335
1:873
PERSON — Any corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership, joint-stock company, individual, the state and all political
subdivisions of the state or any agencies or instrumentalities thereof.
STRUCTURE — Any object constructed or installed by man, including but
not limited to buildings, towers, smokestacks, chimneys and overhead
transmission lines.
TREE — An object of natural growth.
§ 425-336. General requirements and provisions.
A. No person shall build, rebuild, create or cause to be built, rebuilt or
created any object or structure or plant or cause to be planted or permit
to grow any tree or vegetation which will interfere with, diminish,
change or obstruct the airspace or landing and takeoff area available
for the landing and takeoff of aircraft at public use airports.
B. This article is intended to implement and maintain land use and
aeronautical hazard control standards in accordance with the Air Safety
and Hazardous Zoning Act.
C. This article shall not require the removal or lowering of or other change
or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the rules when
N.J.A.C. 16:62-1 et seq. was adopted (March 20, 1985), nor otherwise
interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use.
D. Airport hazard areas adjacent to airports not licensed by the State of
New Jersey are not subject to the specific provisions of this article.
E. All persons are hereby put on notice that the standards of this article
are minimum statewide standards. Implementation of these standards
does not necessarily guarantee a prudent and comprehensive land use
and hazard program suitable for all airports.
F. The review of applications under this article is limited to the purposes
stated herein as they relate to the public health, safety and welfare.
G. In the event that an airport owner or operator has an agreement with
the Federal Aviation Administration for the control of airport hazards,
the airport owner or operator shall comply with the most protective
provisions of both this article and any agreement with the Federal
Aviation Administration.
H. This article shall not apply to any person who has submitted a complete
application, as defined and required by the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., for approval of the proposed development as
of April 15, 1985, or as of May 15, 1989, for commercial and industrial
development proposed to be located in the clear zone; nor to any person
immune to local ordinances whose proposed development has
progressed beyond the preliminary engineering stage as of April 15,
1985, or as of May 15, 1989, for commercial and industrial development
§ 425-335 VINELAND CODE § 425-336
1:874
§ 425-337. Municipal requirements.
§ 425-338. Delineation of airport hazard areas.
proposed to be located in the clear zone. [Amended 2-13-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-10]
A. No variance or other relief from the provisions of this article may be
granted by the City of Vineland to itself or to any person except upon
condition that the variance or relief is contingent upon the issuance of a
permit allowing the variance or relief by the Commissioner.
B. Airports regulated by the provisions of this article may not hereafter be
classified as nonconforming land uses.
A. Methodology used to delineate airport hazard areas.
(1) An airport hazard area shall be established for each runway at an
airport.
(2) Each airport hazard area shall consist of a runway subzone, two
runway end subzones and two clear zones.
(3) The overall airport hazard area for an airport is geometrically
constructed by defining and locating the runway subzone and
runway end subzones for each runway open to the public on an
airport open to the public. The outermost borders of the subzones
comprise the outermost boundary of the airport hazard area. The
area within those outermost boundaries is that area regulated by
the provisions of this article and is the airport hazard area for an
airport.
(4) The methodology used to delineate the overall construction and
outermost boundaries of the airport hazard area for an airport is
further graphically depicted in Figure 3.213
B. Delineation of the runway subzone.
(1) The runway subzone of an airport hazard area shall consist of a
rectangle having the same center line and length as the runway,
unless a shorter length is necessitated by limited property
ownership at the airport.
(2) The width of the runway subzone shall be 2,350 feet.
(3) The exact length of the runway subzone shall be determined by one
of the two following methods.
(a) For most airports, the length of the runway subzone will be the
same as the physical length of the runway.
213. Editor's Note: See Figure 3 in the Airport Hazard Area Drawings included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 425-336 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-338
1:875
(b) If the physical end of a runway is closer than 200 feet to the
property or easement line of the airport, as measured along the
runway's extended center line, then the end of the runway
subzone shall be defined by a line drawn perpendicular to the
runway center line at a point 200 feet inside of the airport
property or easement line. In this case, a portion of the runway
will extend beyond the bounds of the runway subzone.
(4) The methodology used to delineate the runway subzone of an
airport hazard area is illustrated in Figure 1.214
C. Delineation of the runway end subzones.
(1) The runway subzones of an airport hazard area shall consist of
trapezoids located at either end of the runway subzone along the
flight approach and departure path.
(2) Each runway end subzone shall extend 3,000 feet from the end of
the runway subzone, as measured along the extended center line of
the runway.
(3) The base of the runway end subzone shall be defined by the end of
the runway subzone and shall have a width of 2,350 feet. The width
of the runway end subzone shall narrow as the distance from the
end of the runway subzone increases. Its final width shall be 850
feet.
(4) The methodology used to delineate the runway end subzone of an
airport hazard area is illustrated in Figure 2.215
D. Delineation of the clear zones.
(1) The clear zones of an airport hazard area shall consist of trapezoids
located within the runway end subzone along the flight approach
and departure path.
(2) Each clear zone shall extend 1,000 feet from the end of the runway
subzone, as measured along the extended center line of the runway.
(3) The base of the clear zone shall be co-located with the end of the
runway subzone and shall have a width of 250 feet The width of the
clear zone shall increase as the distance from the end of the
runway safety zone increases. Its final width shall be 450 feet.
(4) The methodology used to delineate the clear zone of an airport
hazard area is illustrated in Figure 2.216
214. Editor's Note: See Figure 1 in the Airport Hazard Area Drawings included at the end of
this chapter.
215. Editor's Note: See Figure 2 in the Airport Hazard Area Drawings included at the end of
this chapter.
216. Editor's Note: See Figure 2 in the Airport Hazard Area Drawings included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 425-338 VINELAND CODE § 425-339
1:876
§ 425-339. Minimum obstruction standards.
A. Minimum obstruction ordinance standards establish the vertical limits
up to which structures or trees may be allowed to be developed or grow
within an airport hazard area.
B. Minimum obstruction ordinance standards are vertical standards
measured in respect to elevations, whose datum is the horizontal plane
established by runway elevations. For example, if a point in an airport
hazard area permits at a specific point development up to "x" feet, that
means "x" feet above the runway horizontal plane and not "x" feet above
the natural grade of the land at that point in the airport hazard area.
See Figure 4217 for graphic illustration.
C. The vertical standards within the runway subzone of an airport hazard
area are determined first by establishing the elevations at the runway
center lines at the ends of the runway subzone of the airport hazard
area. From those elevations at the runway subzone ends, a line is run
90° outward from each side of the runway center line for a distance of
125 feet. Within the area defined by these four points, no development
is allowed above the natural grade of the soil except for runway and
flight safety equipment. See Figure 5.218
D. The vertical standards within the remainder of the runway subzone of
an airport hazard area are determined by establishing planes from the
edges of the longitudinal zero-foot development restriction line (see
above) which slope upward and outward at a rate of seven feet
horizontally to one foot vertically. This upward plane ceases when it
reaches the outer longitudinal borders of the runway subzone of any
airport hazard area at the elevation of 150 feet above its starting point
at the longitudinal zero-foot development line. See Figure 5.
[Amended 2-13-1991 by Ord. No. 91-10]
E. The vertical standards within the runway end subzone of an airport
hazard area are determined by first establishing a plane with a rising
slope of one foot upward to 20 feet outward from the end of the runway
subzone to the outermost end of the runway end subzone. This plane is
bisected by the extended runway center line and is 250 feet in total
width at its innermost dimension and widens uniformly along its threethousand-
foot length so as to have a total width of 850 feet at its
outermost dimension, where it intersects with the outermost portion of
the runway end subzone at an elevation of 150 feet above its starting
point at the zero-foot development line.
F. The vertical standards within the remainder of the runway end subzone
of an airport hazard area are determined by establishing sloping planes
from the outermost longitudinal edges of the plane established in
217. Editor's Note: Figure 4 is included in the Airport Hazard Area Drawings at the end of this
chapter.
218. Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included in the Airport Hazard Area Drawings at the end of this
chapter.
§ 425-339 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-339
1:877
§ 425-340. Land use standards.
Subsection E above. These planes rise upward at a rate of one foot
upward to seven feet outward from the plane established in Subsection
E above, to where they meet the outermost longitudinal boundaries of
the runway end subzone at the elevation of 150 feet. See Figure 6 for
graphic illustration of Subsections E and F.219
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the primary regulation of
airport development, airport property use, internal dimensional criteria
and vertical development on airports is accomplished within N.J.A.C.
16:54.
A. Permitted land uses shall be as follows:
(1) Residential single-family dwelling units which are situated on a lot
at least three acres in size and not located in a clear zone.
Residential zoning is permitted in the clear zone as long as all
dwellings are physically located outside of the clear zone.
(2) Airpark (minimum lot size of at least three acres which are not
located in a clear zone).
(3) Open space.
(4) Agricultural.
(5) Transportation.
(6) Airport.
(7) Commercial (not located in a clear zone).
(8) Industrial (not located in a clear zone).
B. Specifically prohibited land uses shall be as follows:
(1) Residential dwelling units not situated on a lot of at least three
acres in size.
(2) Planned unit developments and multifamily dwellings.
(3) Hospitals.
(4) Schools.
(5) Aboveground bulk tank storage of compressed flammable or
compressed toxic gases and liquids.
(6) Within the runway end subzones only, the aboveground bulk tank
storage of flammable or toxic gases and liquids.
219. Editor's Note: Figure 6 is included in the Airport Hazard Area Drawings at the end of this
chapter.
§ 425-339 VINELAND CODE § 425-340
1:878
§ 425-341. Permit for development or expansion in airport hazard
area.
(7) Uses that may attract massing birds, including landfills.
(8) Above-grade major utility transmission lines and/or mains.
C. Unwanted concentrations of persons within airport hazard areas,
especially along the extended runway center lines within runway end
subzones, shall be discouraged.
NOTE: Prohibited land uses are specifically prohibited without the
written approval of the Commissioner. Such uses may be allowed
by the Commissioner on airport property when they are determined
necessary by the Director for air commerce purposes or for the
operation of the airport and its vendors directly serving air commerce
needs. An example of this is a flight school.
A. Application procedure.
(1) A site plan shall be submitted for any development proposed in an
airport hazard area.
(2) Said site plan shall show the following:
(a) An accurately dimensioned plan view of the property in
question in relation to the airport hazard area, including the
runway subzone, runway end subzones and clear zones.
(b) Adequate elevations of proposed development, to document
relationship of all structures, trees, public roads, private roads
and railroads in relation to planes, limiting vertical
development.
NOTE: Public roads are considered to be a fifteen-foot vertical
development, a private road is considered to be a ten-foot
vertical development, and railroads are considered to be a
twenty-three-foot vertical development.
(3) If a site is necessitated by other provisions of this chapter, the
requirements of this article shall be in addition to those otherwise
required.
B. Municipal approval.
(1) A developer of a project requiring the creation or establishment of
a prohibited land use or vertical height development shall first
apply for development approval from the appropriate municipal
agency. If the municipal agency approves the development, that
approval shall be conditioned on the issuance of a permit by the
Commissioner in accordance with N.J.A.C. 16:62-1 et seq.
Construction, development or the creation of any prohibited land
§ 425-340 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-341
1:879
§ 425-342. Permits for developments immune to local ordinances.
§ 425-343. Nonconforming structures and uses.
§ 425-344. Violations and penalties; legal remedies.
use shall not commence until a permit has been issued by the
Commissioner.
(2) An application for a permit will only be considered by the
Department if accompanied by a letter from the municipality
requesting the permit.
(3) Any person proposing to create or establish a prohibited land use
or vertical height development in a designated airport hazard area
not subject to municipal ordinances established in accordance with
the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) shall
present the proposed development to the municipal governing
body, which shall be considered the municipal agency for purposes
of this article.
A. In the event of a proposed development to be located within an airport
hazard area which is immune to local ordinance, the standards of
N.J.A.C. 16:62-1 et seq. shall still apply to such proposed development.
B. Any persons proposing a development immune to local ordinance within
an airport hazard area shall make application to the Department in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 16:62-6.1 and 16:62-6.3. The requirement for
local approval under N.J.A.C. 16:62-6.2 and 16:62-6.3(a)2 is waived.
A. The removal or lowering or other change or alteration of any structure
or tree not conforming to the regulations of N.J.A.C. 16:62-1 et seq. at
the time of adoption shall not be required.
B. A preexisting land use which is located within a clear zone as delineated
in § 425-338 of this article and which is not in conformance with the
rules shall be classified as a nonconforming use.
A. Violation of any provision of N.J.A.C. 16:62.1 et seq. may be grounds for
fine, modification, suspension or revocation of any license issued under
Title 6 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
B. The Commissioner may institute, in any court of competent jurisdiction,
an action in the name of the state to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
any violation of any provision of N.J.A.C. 16:62-1 et seq., and, by way of
injunction or otherwise, relief from the court.
§ 425-341 VINELAND CODE § 425-344
1:880
ARTICLE XX
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 425-345. Establishment; membership; terms; restrictions on
members; removal; vacancy.
§ 425-346. Alternate members.
§ 425-347. Organization.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
members and select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the
Board or a municipal employee.
§ 425-348. Powers and duties.
A. The City of Vineland hereby establishes a Zoning Board of Adjustment
comprised of seven regular members and four alternate members.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2," "Alternate No. 3" and "Alternate
No. 4." [Amended 12-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-85]
B. The terms of office of each member shall be so determined and
continued that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of such
terms shall be distributed, in the case of regular members, evenly over
the first four years of appointment, and in the case of alternate
members, evenly over the first two years of appointment, provided that
the initial term of no regular member shall exceed four years and that
the initial term of no alternate member shall exceed two years.
Thereafter, the term of each regular member shall be four years and the
term of each alternate member shall be two years.
C. No member may hold any elective office or position under the
municipality nor shall any member be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
D. A member may, after public hearing if he requests it, be removed by the
governing body for cause.
E. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
A. Alternate members may participate in discussion of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, alternate
members shall vote in the order of their numerical designations.
[Amended 12-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-85]
B. The same rules of ethical conduct and the conditions for removal which
apply to regular members shall apply to alternate members.
§ 425-345 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-348
1:881
§ 425-349. Funding of Board of Adjustment.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal
made by an administrative officer based on or made in the
enforcement of the zoning standards as set under Article XV of this
chapter.
(2) Hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of said Article
XV, requests for interpretation of the Zone Map or zoning
standards or for decisions pertaining to special questions upon
which such Board is directed to pass as may be authorized herein.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation of Article XV would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and
undue hardship upon the developer of such property, grant, upon
an application for an appeal relating to such property, a variance
from the strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship, including a variance for a conditional use,
provided that:
(a) No variance shall be granted under this subsection to allow a
structure or use in a district restricted against such structure
or use; and
(b) The proposed development does not require approval by the
Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a
request for a variance as provided under Article XV.
(4) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from the regulations of Article XV, including but
not limited to allowing a structure or use in a zone restricted
against such structure or use, but only by affirmative vote of at
least five members.
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and zoning
regulations of Article XV.
A. The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the Board of Adjustment.
§ 425-348 VINELAND CODE § 425-349
1:882
§ 425-350. Appeals procedure; application for development.
§ 425-351. Limit on review period.
§ 425-352. Land use inquiries.
Inquiries as to whether a proposed land use is permissible under Article XV
or the Zone Map shall be submitted in writing to the Board of Adjustment.
The Board shall issue a written response within 45 days after the next
meeting following receipt of the request or within such additional time as
may be consented to by the inquirer.
§ 425-353. Options of Board on appeals.
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or
may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and, to that end, shall have all the powers of
the administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 425-354. Stay of proceedings; exception.
An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
B. The Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, as
well as experts, other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, not
exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
municipality made in the enforcement of the Article XV or the Official
Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days by filing a notice of
appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is taken, specifying the
grounds of such appeal. Said officer shall immediately transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
to an administrative officer.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
officer or after the date of the submission of a complete application for
development to the Board pursuant to § 425-350B
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period, or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant, shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 425-349 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-354
1:883
was made unless the officer from whose action the appeal is taken certifies
to the Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed other than by order of the Superior Court upon notice to said officer
with due cause shown.
§ 425-355. Additional powers.
§ 425-356. Other regulations.
A. Sections 425-349 through 425-353 of this article shall apply to the
power of the Board of Adjustment to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to Article V, § 425-38,
Issuance of building permits, for a building or structure in the bed
of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or
public area reserved on the Official Map pursuant to Article V.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to Article V, § 425-40,
Variances; appeals, for a building or structure not related to a
street.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article VI or conditional
use approval pursuant to Article XV whenever the proposed
development requires approval by the Board of Adjustment of a
variance for use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. The developer may
elect to submit a separate application requesting approval of the use
variance and a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the
use variance shall be conditioned upon approval of all required
subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent
approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial
impairment of the intent and purpose of the Zone Map and Article XV.
C. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to
Subsection B of this section, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or
deny approval of the application within 120 days after submission of a
complete application. In the event that the developer elects to submit
separate consecutive applications, this provision shall apply to the
application for approval of the use variance. The period for granting or
denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this
chapter. Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval and a certificate pursuant to
Article VI, § 425-55.
A. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3) in
§ 425-354 VINELAND CODE § 425-356
1:884
§ 425-357. Application procedure; contents of application.
the case of a subdivision, or Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.6) in the case of a site plan, the Board of Adjustment shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report from the County Board.
B. An application pursuant to § 425-355 of this article may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board
pursuant to Article II, § 425-25, for its report, provided that such
reference does not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its decisions
on applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by
resolution a report on its findings on Zoning Ordinance provisions
which were the subject of variance requests and its recommendations
for Zoning Ordinance amendment or revision, if any. The Board shall
send copies of the report and resolution to the governing body and the
Planning Board.
A. All applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be submitted
30 days prior to the meeting on which it will be heard. [Amended
8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-65]
B. A complete application shall consist of the following:
(1) Thirteen copies of the certified list of landowners located within
200 feet of the subject property.
(2) Thirteen copies of the completed application form, and disclosure
statement, with all required signatures, including that of the Tax
Collector. [Amended 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-49]
(3) Thirteen copies of the plot plan or, where applicable, 13 copies of
the site plan and other required data.
(4) Thirteen copies of the petition and notice of hearing.
(5) The application fee and, where applicable, the appropriate review
fee pursuant to Article I, § 425-5.
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 to
40:55D-76.)
§ 425-356 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-357
1:885

ARTICLE XXI
Joint Exercise of Powers of Planning and Land Use Control220
220. Editor's Note: Refer to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-77 to 40:55D-88.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-357
1:887

ARTICLE XXII
Periodic Reexamination of Master Plan and Regulations
§ 425-358. Periodic reexamination; report.
The governing body shall, at least every six years, provide for a general
reexamination of its Master Plan and development regulations by the
Planning Board. The Board shall prepare and adopt by resolution a report
on the findings. A copy shall be sent to the County Planning Board and to
the Clerk of each adjoining municipality. The next reexamination of the City
of Vineland Master Plan and development regulations shall be completed
by August 1, 1988. Thereafter, a reexamination shall be completed at least
once every six years from the previous reexamination. The Planning Board
report shall state:
§ 425-359. Moratoriums; interim zoning.
A. The major problems and objectives cited at the time of the adoption of
the last reexamination.
B. The extent to which the problems and objectives have been reduced or
increased.
C. The extent to which there have been significant changes in the
assumptions, policies and objectives forming the basis of the Master
Plan or development regulations, with particular regard to the density
and distribution of population and land uses, housing conditions,
circulation, conservation of natural resources, energy conservation and
changes in state, county and municipal policies and objectives.
D. The specific changes recommended, if any, including underlying
objectives, policies and standards or whether a new plan or regulations
should be prepared.
A. The prohibition of development in order to prepare a Master Plan and
development regulation is prohibited.
B. No moratoriums on application for development or interim zoning shall
be permitted except in cases where the City demonstrates, on the basis
of a written opinion by qualified health professional, that a clear,
imminent danger to the health of the inhabitants of the community
exists. In no case shall the moratorium or interim ordinance exceed a
six-month term.
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89 to 40:55D-90.)
§ 425-358 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-359
1:889

ARTICLE XXIII
Severability; Construal
§ 425-360. Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision
or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this chapter, and, to this end, the provisions of each article,
section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
§ 425-361. Construal of provisions.
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the City of Vineland and its
residents, shall be considered liberally to effect the purposes thereof.
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-91 to 40:55D-92.)
§ 425-360 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-361
1:891

ARTICLE XXIV
Stormwater Management Plan221
221. Editor's Note: Refer to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 to 40:55D-99. In this chapter, see also §§ 425-72,
Stormwater control, and 425-217, Stormwater control, pertaining to Pinelands Area.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-361
1:893

ARTICLE XXV
Manufactured Homes
§ 425-362. Legislative findings; purpose.
§ 425-363. Definitions.
A. Based on legislative findings and declarations:
(1) Only 1/2 of the estimated annual need for new housing units in New
Jersey has actually been constructed.
(2) The costs of conventional housing construction, mortgages, land
and utilities have increased tremendously, making it very difficult
for the majority of the population to afford conventional housing.
(3) The community has responsibility to encourage alternate means of
housing.
(4) The design, durability and appearance of manufactured housing
has improved significantly so that many manufactured homes are
difficult to distinguish from conventional homes.
(5) Despite improvements in manufactured homes, their cost has not
escalated accordingly, hence these homes remain affordable for the
general population.
B. It is therefore in the public interest and the purpose of this article to
promote the use of manufactured homes in order to provide affordable
housing.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MANUFACTURED HOME — A unit of housing which consists of one
or more transportable sections which are substantially constructed off
site and, if more than one section, joined together on site; is built
on a permanent chassis; is designed to be used, when connected to
utilities, as a dwelling on a permanent or nonpermanent foundation;
and is manufactured in accordance with the standards set forth by
the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and the State Uniform
Construction Code Act of 1975.222
B. For all definitions which pertain, see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-102.
222. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-102.
§ 425-362 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-364
1:895
§ 425-364. Permitted location. [Amended 5-25-1999 by Ord. No.
98-69]
Manufactured homes may be permitted to be assembled and erected on
land which is owned by the manufactured-home owner.
§ 425-365. Applicability of development regulations.
The City of Vineland shall not exclude or restrict through its development
regulations the use, location, placement or joining of sections of
manufactured homes which are not less than 22 feet wide, are on land
owned by the manufactured-home owner and are located on permanent
foundations, unless said development regulations are equally applicable to
all buildings and structures of similar use.
§ 425-366. Encouragement and practicability of use.
§ 425-367. Trailers.
A. When reviewing and approving development regulations pertaining to
residential development, the Planning Board shall encourage the use of
manufactured homes in order to provide affordable housing to those
who cannot obtain conventional housing.
B. The City Council of the City of Vineland, in 1970 by Ordinance No. 786,
approved mobile home parks as a practical means of providing
affordable housing. Eighteen approved mobile home park licenses were
current and valid. In 1986, eight parks had been completed, and the
remaining 10 were partially completed. Of the 2,668 spaces authorized,
1,234 had been installed, and 1,221 spaces were currently occupied.
Approximately 175 additional spaces were in the process of completion.
A total of 67 units which predate Ordinance No. 786 existed on private
properties. Therefore, the Planning Board found that mobile home
parks were creating a practical means to provide affordable housing in
the City of Vineland. [Amended 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-69]
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
TRAILER — A recreational vehicle, travel trailer, camper or other
transportable, temporary dwelling unit, with or without its own motor
power, designed and constructed for travel and recreation purposes, to
be installed on a nonpermanent foundation if installation is required.
B. Trailers are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(NOTE: The basis for this article is N.J.S.A. 40:55D-100 to
40:55D-112.)
§ 425-364 VINELAND CODE § 425-367
1:896
ARTICLE XXVI
Enforcement
§ 425-368. Notice of violation; immediate abatement required.
When written notice of a violation of any provision of this chapter has been
served by the appropriate authority to the owner, owner's agent, contractor
or builder, such violation shall be discontinued or removed immediately.
§ 425-369. Determination of separate offenses.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 425-370. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
for each violation, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not more than
$500 for each offense, with costs recoverable before the Municipal Court
of the City of Vineland or any court having jurisdiction, and upon default
of payment of penalty and costs, the person or persons convicted may be
committed to the county prison for a period not to exceed six months.
§ 425-371. Applicability.
The provisions of §§ 425-368 through 425-370 of this article may be applied
in addition to any specific penalties cited elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 425-368 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-371
1:897

ARTICLE XXVII
Medical Marijuana Alternative Treatment Center
[Added 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
§ 425-372. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CULTIVATION FACILITY — Any site for the planting, propagating,
cultivation, growing, harvesting, labeling or manufacturing, compounding
and storing of medical marijuana for the limited purpose of the New Jersey
Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act (N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq.) and the
Medicinal Marijuana Program Rules (N.J.A.C. 8:64 et seq.).
DISPENSARY FACILITY — Any site for the sale of medical marijuana and
paraphernalia to a qualifying patient or primary caregiver for the limited
purpose of the New Jersey Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act
(N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq.) and the Medicinal Marijuana Program Rules
(N.J.A.C. 8:64 et seq.).
MARIJUANA (MEDICAL CANNABIS) — Marijuana (medical cannabis) has
the meaning given in the New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act
(N.J.S.A. 24:21-2). Marijuana means all parts of the plant genus Cannabis,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its
seeds, except those containing resin extracted from the plant; but shall not
include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or
cake made from the seed of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation or such mature stalks, fiber, oil, or
cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
The words "marijuana" and "medical cannabis" shall be used
interchangeably in this chapter.
MARIJUANA CONSUMPTION AREA — Any designated location operated
by an alternative treatment center, for which both a state and local
endorsement has been obtained, that is either: 1) an indoor, structurally
enclosed area of an alternative treatment center that is separate from the
area in which retail sales of marijuana (cannabis) items or the dispensing of
medical marijuana occurs; or 2) an exterior structure on the same premises
as the alternative treatment center, either separate from or connected to
the center, at which cannabis items or medical cannabis either obtained
from the retailer or center, or brought by a person to the consumption area,
may be consumed.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER — Any
organization approved by the Department of Health to perform activities
necessary to provide registered qualifying patients with usable marijuana
(medical cannabis) and related paraphernalia in accordance with the
provisions of the New Jersey Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act
(N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq.). An alternative treatment center may acquire and
possess an ongoing inventory of marijuana seeds or seedlings and
§ 425-372 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-372
1:899
paraphernalia, possess, cultivate, plant, grow, harvest, process, display,
manufacture, deliver, transfer, transport, distribute, supply, sell or dispense
marijuana, or related supplies to qualifying patients or their primary
caregivers who are registered with the state. A medical marijuana
alternative treatment center may have cultivation facility and dispensary
facility functions.
PARAPHERNALIA — Paraphernalia has the meaning given in the New
Jersey Code of Criminal Justice (N.J.S.A. 2C:36-1). Paraphernalia means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used or intended
for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human
body medical marijuana.
§ 425-373. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
§ 425-374. Statutory authority.
This article is authorized under N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq., pertaining to
medical marijuana, and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., pertaining to land use.
§ 425-375. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 425-376. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
A. Provide regulations and standards for the establishment and operation
of a medical marijuana alternative treatment center.
B. Provide appropriate locations for a medical marijuana alternative
treatment center that will allow development of a complete facility,
from growing to dispensing, and that will minimize conflicts with other
uses, thereby advancing public health, safety and welfare.
C. Provide appropriate locations for a medical marijuana alternative
treatment center (dispensary facility only) that will minimize conflicts
with other uses, thereby advancing public health, safety and welfare.
A. Medical marijuana cultivation facility, in accordance with this chapter.
B. Medical marijuana dispensary facility, in accordance with this chapter.
A. Administrative office for business on site.
B. Environmental equipment, as may be required by the Environmental
Protection Agency or by the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 425-372 VINELAND CODE § 425-376
1:900
§ 425-377. Prohibited uses.
The following uses shall be prohibited:
§ 425-378. Signs.
Signage shall be in accordance with the standards in this chapter, in
addition to N.J.A.C. 8:64-12.1. Standards specific to medical marijuana
alternative treatment centers are as follows:
§ 425-379. Construction standards.
C. Parking.
D. Trash enclosure for solid waste and recyclables.
E. Fencing.
F. Signage.
A. Outdoor grow area.
B. Agricultural greenhouse.
C. Sale or consumption of food, beverages, alcohol or tobacco on the
premises.
D. Marijuana consumption area.
E. Recreational cannabis establishment.
A. Alternative treatment centers shall restrict signage to black text on a
white background on external signage.
B. Alternative treatment center signage shall not be illuminated at any
time.
C. Alternative treatment centers shall not display on the exterior of the
facility advertisements for medical marijuana or a brand name except
for the purposes of identifying the building by the permitted name.
D. Marijuana and paraphernalia shall not be displayed or clearly visible to
a person from the exterior of an alternative treatment center.
E. Signs restricting access to the medical marijuana alternative treatment
center shall be installed at the entrance drive and at the public
entrance to the building.
A. A medical marijuana alternative treatment center shall be developed in
accordance with the standards in this chapter. In the event there is a
conflict with a provision in this article, the provision in this article shall
govern.
§ 425-376 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-379
1:901
§ 425-380. Security.
Security shall be provided in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:64-9.7.
§ 425-381. Parking.
§ 425-382. Buffers, screening, fencing and landscaping.
§ 425-383. Zoning and location restrictions.
§ 425-384. Enforcement.
B. Medical marijuana shall only be produced at an indoor cultivation site,
which is an enclosed, locked facility.
A. The parking requirement for the cultivation facility function of a
medical marijuana alternative treatment center shall be one space per
employee on the main work shift.
B. The parking requirement for the dispensary facility function of a
medical marijuana alternative treatment center shall be one space per
200 square feet of gross floor area.
A. Buffers alongside any rear property lines shall be a minimum of 25 feet,
while buffers along front property lines shall be a minimum of 30 feet.
B. Screening shall not be required because of the heightened need for
security for a medical marijuana alternative treatment center.
C. Fencing, a minimum of eight feet tall, shall be installed around the
developed portion of the site that is restricted from public access.
Fencing may be installed around the entire site behind the required
thirty-foot front buffer.
D. The thirty-foot front buffer shall be an irrigated landscaping bed.
Vegetation in this bed shall not exceed a height of three feet. Additional
landscaping shall not be required because of the heightened need for
security for a medical marijuana alternative treatment center.
A. A medical marijuana alternative treatment center shall be a minimum
of one mile from what is viewed as the historic center of the City, an
area bound by Park Avenue, East Avenue, Chestnut Avenue and West
Avenue. The one mile shall be measured from the center lines of these
abutting roadways.
B. A medical marijuana alternative treatment center shall not be located
within a drug-free school zone.
C. Only one medical marijuana alternative treatment center having a state
permit shall be permitted in the City. The medical marijuana dispensary
facility may or may not be located on the same site as the medical
marijuana cultivation facility.
§ 425-379 VINELAND CODE § 425-384
1:902
A. The state shall enforce the provisions of the medical marijuana
alternative treatment center facility permit.
B. The Zoning Officer shall enforce the zoning and site plan provisions of
this article.
§ 425-384 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-384
1:903
Chapter 431
LIBRARY, PUBLIC
§ 425-384 VINELAND CODE § 425-384
1:904
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Management
[Adopted 7-11-1952 by Ord. No. 5 (Ch. 304, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 431-1. Establishment.
The free public library established and heretofore created by the Borough
of Vineland and the Township of Landis and now existing be and the same
is hereby established as the Free Public Library of the City of Vineland and
known as the "Vineland Free Public Library."
§ 431-2. Management; composition of Board; terms of office.
[Amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-40]
The Board of Trustees shall be increased from seven members to nine
members, who shall hold in trust and manage all property of the library.
Said Board shall be composed of the Mayor of the City of Vineland, the
Superintendent of Schools of the Vineland School District and seven citizens
to be appointed by the Mayor. The appointments shall be for terms of one,
two, three, four and five years, respectively, as they may be selected by the
Mayor. The terms of the two additional members increasing the number of
Board members from seven to nine shall be for a term of five years. Upon
the expiration of the term of office of any Trustee, the Mayor shall appoint
a citizen for the term of five years in the same manner as the original
appointment was made. Vacancies occurring in the Board of Trustees shall
be filled for the unexpired term only, in the same manner as the original
appointments are made. The Mayor and Superintendent of Schools serving
as a member of the Board may, respectively, appoint an alternate to act in
his/her place and stead with authority to attend all meetings of the Board
and, in his/her absence, to vote on all questions before the Board.
§ 431-3. Compensation of Trustees.
The Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services and shall not
incur any expense or enter into any obligation to an amount in excess of the
annual appropriation for Library purposes and of the funds on hand.
§ 431-4. Annual report.
The Board of Trustees shall annually make a report of its transactions and
accounts and the state and condition of the Library to the governing body
of the City.
§ 431-5. Powers of Board.
The Board of Trustees shall have all the powers conferred by statute.
§ 431-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 431-6
1:905
§ 431-6. Annual appropriation for support and maintenance.
The governing body of the City of Vineland shall annually appropriate and
raise by taxation the money needed for support and maintenance of the
Library, as provided for by law.
§ 431-6 VINELAND CODE § 431-6
1:906
ARTICLE II
Use of Library Property
[Adopted 2-10-1981 by Ord. No. 124 (Ch. 304, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 431-7. Time limit for return.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any
other article borrowed from the Vineland Public Library contrary to the
rules and regulations of the Library after 30 days has elapsed from the date
of posting by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice demanding
return thereof, addressed to said person at the last address furnished to the
Library. In the case of a minor, the notice shall be sent to the parents of the
minor involved.
§ 431-8. Destruction of materials.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or destroy any book or other article or any part thereof which is owned by
or is in the custody of the Library.
§ 431-9. Fraudulent registration or use of card.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address or use any card other than the one issued to said person for the
purpose of borrowing any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction,
phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any other article from the
Library, nor shall any person allow the use of his or her library card
by another individual. The obtaining of any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any
other article by means of the registration or furnishing of a false name or
address or the use of a card other than the one issued to said person shall
be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud.
§ 431-10. Rules and regulations to be adopted and posted.
The Library Board shall adopt and post, in a conspicuous place in the
Vineland Public Library building, rules, regulations and procedures
governing the borrowing of books, periodicals, pamphlets or any other item
or article which may be available for such borrowing to the public.
§ 431-11. Unauthorized removals.
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any other
article or item from the Vineland Public Library building without complying
with the rules, regulations and procedures of the Library for borrowing such
items or articles.
§ 431-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 431-12
1:907
§ 431-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-68]
Any person violating any provisions of this article or any rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty,
exclusive of restitution to the Library for the costs of the damage or the loss
of the article.
§ 431-12 VINELAND CODE § 431-12
1:908
Chapter 437
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 647.
§ 431-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 431-12
1:909

ARTICLE I
Refusal, Revocation or Suspension for Delinquent Property Taxes
[Adopted 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-35 (Ch. 305, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 437-1. Proof of payment required prior to issuance or renewal.
§ 437-2. Suspension for nonpayment.
In the event that any permit holder or licensee who is the owner of the
property upon which the licensed activity or business is conducted fails to
pay property taxes on the property for at least three consecutive quarters,
a notice shall be sent by the City of Vineland to said property owner
advising that if his taxes are not brought current within 90 days, then any
and all licenses or permits issued by the municipality shall immediately
be suspended. Said suspension shall become effective immediately and
automatically upon failure of the property owner to bring his taxes current
within 90 days from the issuance of the notice by the City set forth herein.
§ 437-3. Restoration of license or permit.
Upon payment by the licensee or permit holder of all delinquent taxes or
assessments on the property on which the licensed activity or business is
conducted, said license or permit shall automatically be restored.
§ 437-4. Applicability; exemptions.
A. Every person applying for the issuance or the renewal of any license or
permit issued by or requiring the approval of the municipality shall
provide proof that there are no delinquent property taxes or
assessments due on the property wherein or upon which the business or
activity for which the license or permit is sought is to be conducted.
B. If the applicant is the owner of the property where the business or
activity for which the license or permit is sought or where the business
or activity is to be conducted, then the municipality or the municipal
officer charged with issuing or renewing the license or permit shall
condition the issuance or renewal of said license or permit upon the
payment by the applicant of any delinquent property taxes or
assessments on the subject property.
A. The provisions of § 437-2 of this article shall only apply in the event that
the licensee or permit holder is also the owner of the property upon
which the licensed business or activity is conducted.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to nor include dog licenses
or any alcoholic beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
C. The provisions of this article shall not apply to properties with code
violations that threaten the health, safety and welfare of the occupant,
§ 437-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 437-4
1:911
said determination to be made by the appropriate City official or his
designated subcode officials; said authorization for exemption is limited
to correction of the code violation only. [Added 4-9-1991 by Ord. No.
91-30]
D. The provisions of this article shall not apply to nor include any permits
or any certificates issued pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code,
Chapter 23 of the New Jersey Administrative Code, promulgated by the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs pursuant to the
authority of the State Uniform Construction Code Act (P.L. 1975,
c.217,223 as amended). [Added 9-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-82]
223. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 437-4 VINELAND CODE § 437-4
1:912
Chapter 441
LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicabs — See Ch. 651.
§ 441-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
APPLICANT — Any individual, partnership or corporation that owns a
limousine service.
LIMOUSINE — Includes any automobile or motor car used in the business
of carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter
basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity in
no event of more than 14 passengers, not including the driver, provided that
such a vehicle shall not have a seating capacity in excess of four passengers,
not including the driver, beyond the maximum passenger seating capacity
of the vehicle not including the driver at the time of manufacture. Nothing
in this chapter contained shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel
buses, buses employed solely in transporting schoolchildren or teachers,
vehicles owned and operated directly or indirectly by businesses engaged in
the practice of mortuary science when those vehicles are used exclusively
for providing transportation related to the provision of funeral services,
autobuses which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation or interstate autobuses required by federal or state law or
regulations of the Department of Transportation to carry insurance against
loss from liability imposed by law on account of bodily injury or death.224
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — The business of carrying passengers for hire by
limousine.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other public
place.
§ 441-2. License required.
An owner of a limousine service having his or her principal place of business
in the City of Vineland must obtain a license for said service from the
Municipal Clerk of the City of Vineland as hereinafter provided.
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 437-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-3
1:913
§ 441-3. License application; requirements.
Applications for licenses shall be made in writing, upon forms provided
by the City of Vineland, signed by the applicant before a notary public
or another person duly authorized to administer oaths, and filed with the
Municipal Clerk. Said applications shall contain or be accompanied with the
following:
§ 441-4. License contents.
§ 441-5. License term.
A new license issued under this chapter shall be valid from its date of
issuance until December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, a renewal license
shall be valid for one year from January 1 until December 31.
§ 441-6. Violations and penalties.
A. The name, age and residence of applicant.
(1) If a partnership, the names, ages and residences of all partners,
along with the business address of the partnership.
(2) If a corporation, the names, ages and residences of its president,
secretary and treasurer, along with its certificate of incorporation
and a certified copy of the corporate resolution authorizing the
application. Applications made by corporations shall be signed in
its name by the president and attested by the secretary.
B. Copy of an insurance policy, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, for
$1,500,000 against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon
every limousine owner for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered by any person as the result of an accident occurring by reason
of the ownership, maintenance or use of the limousine upon any public
street.
C. Name of insurance company, the number and the date of expiration of
the policy, a description of every limousine insured thereunder and the
registration number of the same.
D. A certificate of compliance attesting that the applicant has complied
with all state statutes governing limousine services.
E. A nonrefundable limousine license fee of $50 per year.
A. The Municipal Clerk, upon the filing of the required application, its
attachments and fee, shall issue, in duplicate, a license to operate a
limousine service showing that the applicant has complied with the
terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. The license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number
and date of expiration of the policy, a description of every limousine
insured thereunder and the registration number of the same.
§ 441-3 VINELAND CODE § 441-6
1:914
Chapter 446
HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Deceptive advertising — See Ch. 200.
Nuisances — See Ch. 473.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 511.
Abandoned and nuisance property — See Ch.
530.
Public property — See Ch. 542.
Special sales — See Ch. 568.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 630.
§ 446-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Handbill Ordinance."
§ 446-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. A person who owns and operates a limousine in any street in this state
in violation of any state statute referenced in this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties as prescribed by law.
B. A person who owns and operates a limousine in any street in this City
and fails to obtain a limousine license issued by the Municipal Clerk
shall be punishable, upon conviction, as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, General Penalty. The Municipal Court shall have
jurisdiction to collect and enforce the penalty for failure to obtain a
limousine license.225
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future tense, words used in the plural number include the
singular number, and words used in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
discretionary.
B. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance, now known or hereafter invented, used
or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft"
shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature which:
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 441-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-2
1:915
HANDBILL — Any printed sheet or pamphlet distributed by hand. For
purposes of this chapter, any printed sheet or pamphlet distributed by
an aircraft shall also be considered a handbill.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal
Service in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided
by general law and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any
periodical or current magazine regularly published with not fewer than
four issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the
aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — Any park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any
other public area owned or used by the City and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any vacant parcel or tract of land or spaces not
in the public domain but privately owned by one or more persons and
any fountain, pool, lake, stream or body of water located within any
parcel or tract of land privately owned or any dwelling, house, building
(1) Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing.
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
(2)
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit,
but the terms of this subsection shall not apply where an admission
fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of
defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the
same is held, given or takes place in connection with the
dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and
good order, provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall
be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
without a license, where such license is or may be required by any
law of this state or under any ordinance of the City.
(3)
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes or for private benefit and
gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
(4)
§ 446-2 VINELAND CODE § 446-2
1:916
§ 446-3. Distribution in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City,
nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill
in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the City for any person to hand
out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial
handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 446-4. Placement on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 446-5. Deposit on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 446-6. Distribution on posted property.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises, in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisements" or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 446-7. Distribution on inhabited premises.
or other structure designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private
residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include, but not be limited to, any yard,
grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging
or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 446-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-7
1:917
§ 446-8. Dropping from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the City any
litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 446-9. Posting of notices.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or devise
calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
§ 446-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this chapter, or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty. Each
day for which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a
separate offense. In addition, any person convicted of a violation of this
chapter shall pay all expenses that may have been incurred by the City in
the enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 469
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Burglar alarm service — See Ch. 211.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 224.
Freight cars — See Ch. 386.
Motor vehicles — See Ch. 700.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial handbill in
or upon private premises which are inhabited except by handing or
transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other
person then present in or upon such private premises; provided,
however, that in the case of inhabited private premises which are not
posted as provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested by
anyone upon such premises not to do so, shall have the authority to
place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private
premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or
prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises
or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes
may not be used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or
regulations.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States Postal Service nor to newspapers.
§ 446-7 VINELAND CODE § 446-10
1:918
§ 469-1. Definitions.
The terms in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle designed for transportation of persons
or property and propelled by an internal-combustion engine or other type
engine, including electrically assisted bicycles and similar devices.[Added
5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-19]
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, firm, association, club or
partnership.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
unaided hearing faculties at a distance of 25 feet from the sound source. For
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or personal
vehicular sound-amplification or -reproduction device, the detection of the
rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible
sound. A law enforcement officer need not determine the title, specific
words or artist performing the song.
§ 469-2. Noise disturbance; hours. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-19]
No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated
any radio, television, phonograph, jukebox, musical instrument or other
device for the production or reproduction of sound with louder volume
than is necessary and convenient for the hearing of the person so playing,
using or operating such instrument or device and such persons who are
voluntary listeners thereto or in such a manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants. The use or operation of any
such radio, television, phonograph, jukebox, musical instrument or other
device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that is plainly audible
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
§ 469-3. Authorized activities; applicability of state laws.
§ 469-4. Audible advertising; permit required.
No person, in an attempt to advertise or attract public attention, shall
sound, play, operate or permit to be sounded, played or operated any
radio, television, receiving set, musical instrument, jukebox, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier, sound truck or other machine or device that
produces or reproduces sound that is plainly audible in any public space,
A. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a musical band or
orchestra from performing in an authorized parade during a Citysponsored,
community-sponsored or religious-sponsored event or
during any lawful activity subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. State noise control laws and regulations apply where appropriate.
§ 446-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 469-4
1:919
public right-of-way or adjacent neighboring premises, unless a permit has
been obtained from the Police Department or as provided in another City
ordinance.
§ 469-5. Construction operations; emergency permit.
No person shall, from Monday through Saturday between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or on Sunday, in conducting any excavation, demolition,
erection, alteration, repair or other building operation within 1,000 feet
of any dwelling or business property, operate or use any steam shovels,
tractors, excavators, pneumatic hammers, pile drivers, derricks, steam or
electric hoists or any tools or equipment which shall make any plainly
audible noise, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interests of public
safety, and then only upon obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector.
§ 469-6. Hours noisy operations prohibited.
No person shall create any plainly audible noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening or destruction of any
bales, boxes, crates or other containers between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
§ 469-7. Quiet zones.
No person shall create any plainly audible noise that is on any public space
or public right-of-way adjacent to any school, hospital, library, house of
worship, senior citizen center or any other area designated by City Council
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions.
§ 469-8. Disturbing the peace with noise.
No person shall create any plainly audible noise that disturbs the peace,
quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or persons in any public
space or public right-of-way. Furthermore, noise of such character, intensity
or duration detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited.
§ 469-9. Industrial and commercial operations excluded.
This chapter shall not apply to the normal operation of any plant, factory
or industry engaged in the business of manufacturing, processing of food or
other industrial or commercial operation.
§ 469-10. Violations and penalties.226
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 473
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 469-4 VINELAND CODE § 469-10
1:920
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 469.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
Sexually contagious diseases — See Ch. 593.
§ 473-1. Establishment of standards.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts,
and each of them, as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188 of the Laws of
1950.227 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 473-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 473-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Vineland
upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there for the
use and examination of the public.
§ 473-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1980 by Ord. No.
1228; 5-13-1986 by Ord. No. 86-26228]
Any person who violates any section of this chapter or the code established
herein, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty
§ 473-5. Word usage.
Wherever the term "Board of Health" is used in the Public Health Nuisance
Code of New Jersey (1953), the same shall mean the Director of the
Department of Health of the City of Vineland.
227. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1. et seq.
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 469-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 473-5
1:921
Chapter 481
OBSCENE MATERIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 511.
§ 473-5 VINELAND CODE § 473-5
1:922
ARTICLE I
Retail Display
[Adopted 11-13-1990 by Ord. No. 90-98 (Ch. 329, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 481-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOWINGLY —
OBSCENE FILM — Any motion-picture film or preview or trailer to a
film not including newsreels portraying actual events or pictorial news of
the day, in which a scene, taken by itself, depicts a specified anatomical
area or specified sexual activity or the simulation of a specified sexual
activity or verbalization concerning a specified sexual activity as set forth
in the definition of that term and emits sensuality sufficient in terms of the
duration and impact of the depiction to appeal to the prurient interest. For
the purpose of this article, all films and rentals which have received a rating
of "X" or its equivalent from the Motion Picture Academy shall be presumed
an obscene film. For the purpose of this article, it shall be conclusively
presumed that all films rated by the Motion Picture Academy other than "X"
are not obscene films [N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, Subsection (a)(2)].
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of a specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity
contained in or consisting of a picture or other representation, publication,
sound recording, live performance or film, which by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details emits sensuality with
sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or activity
[N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, Subsection 3(a)(1)].
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under
18 years old, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or
other publications at retail, containing pictures, drawings and photographs
(N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.1).
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA —
Having knowledge of the character and content of the material
described herein.
A.
Having failed to reasonably exercise reasonable inspection which would
disclose its character and content [N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, Subsection (a)(5)].
B.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the aureola; or
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
[N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, Subsection (a)(3)].
B.
§ 481-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-1
1:923
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY —
§ 481-2. Prohibited acts.
§ 481-3. Public display to constitute evidence.
Public display of the obscene material, as defined herein, shall constitute
presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the
display (N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.2).
§ 481-4. Violations and penalties.229
Any person violating any provisions of this article or any rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual
intercourse.
B.
Fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast [N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3,
Subsection (a)(4)].
C.
A. It shall be a petty disorderly person's offense for a retailer to knowingly
display or permit to be displayed at his business premises any obscene
materials or obscene films as defined herein:
(1) At a height of less than five feet; or
(2) Without a blinder or other covering placed or printed on the front
of the material displayed, irrespective as to the height of the
material.
B. The restrictions contained in this section shall not apply, however, in the
event that said material is located at a controlled access point behind
which the public at large can reasonably neither observe nor have
access to the material (N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.2).
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 481-1 VINELAND CODE § 481-4
1:924
Chapter 485
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Licenses and
Inspections — See Ch. 92.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 300.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 372.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Effect of delinquent property taxes on
permits — See Ch. 437, Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
§ 481-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-4
1:925

ARTICLE I
Registration and Occupancy Permits for Residential Buildings230
[Adopted 1-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-1231]
§ 485-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
person or persons authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed
upon the owner by this article. The agent or owner shall be a resident of the
City of Vineland or Cumberland County.
APARTMENT — Shall include that portion of a dwelling unit rented or
offered for rent, for living and dwelling purposes, to one individual or family
unit together with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment,
facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such
portion of the property.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — Two or more apartments which are located
within close proximity of each other and are owned by the same owner.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — The certificate of registration issued
by the Director of Licenses and Inspections or his/her designee attesting
that the rental unit has been properly registered and meets the minimum
standards as provided in accordance with the City's Land Use Ordinance,
and all state and local laws and ordinances, including, but not limited to,
Chapter 537 of the Code of the City of Vineland.[Added 9-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-41232]
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — As utilized herein, shall refer to the owner's or
his/her spouse's mother, father, grandmother, grandfather, children,
grandchildren, brothers and/or sisters and the spouses of the immediate
family member. Should the owner be a corporation, LLC or partnership,
owner shall refer to the stockholder, partner or member with a legal
ownership interest of 50% or greater therein.[Added 1-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 2017-96]
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation, LLC,
partnership, association or trust who owns, operates, exercises control over
or is in charge of the rental facility.
OWNER OCCUPIED — The primary residential living unit of the owner.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or a portion thereof
which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where
230. Editor's Note: The title of this article was changed from "Registration, Licensing and
Occupancy Permits for Residential Buildings" to "Registration and Occupancy Permits for
Residential Buildings" 9-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-41.
231. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 485, Occupancy Permits, Art. I,
Residential Buildings, adopted 5-27-1980 by Ord. No. 1214, as amended; see § 485-10.
232. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "license," which
immediately followed.
§ 485-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-1
1:927
living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for
pay or other consideration, to one or more individuals and is meant to
include apartments and apartment complexes.
RENTAL UNIT — Shall include that portion of a dwelling, building or
structure available for lease or rental for living and dwelling purposes to
individuals or family units.
§ 485-2. Registration.
A. With the exception of owner-occupied units, all rental units shall be
registered with the Director of Licenses and Inspections or his/her
designee prior to and at all times a person occupies said rental unit.
Each rental unit shall be subject to a new certificate of registration and
inspection with each change of occupancy. All registrations shall be on
the form provided by the Director of Licenses and Inspections, and shall
be on file with that department. Copies are to be provided to the Chief
of Police, Construction Official, Chief of the Fire Department, and Fire
Official. The information contained therein is subject to the Open Public
Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47: 1A-1 et seq. [Amended 9-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-41]
B. Registration shall be made during the period of September 1 through
December 31 for the next ensuing calendar year.
C. Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28, all rental units shall be registered and licensed as
provided herein. Every owner shall file with the Director of Licenses
and Inspections or his/her designee a registration form for each unit
contained within a building or structure which shall include the
following information:
(1) The name and address of the record owner or owners of the
premises and the record owner or owners of the rental business if
not the same persons. In the case of a partnership, the names and
addresses of all general partners shall be provided together with
the telephone numbers for each of such individuals, indicating
where such individual may be reached both during the day and
evening hours. If the record owner is a corporation, the name and
address of the registered agent and corporate officers of said
corporation shall be provided together with the telephone numbers
for each of such individuals, indicating where such individual may
be reached both during the day and evening hours.
(2) If the address of any record owner is not located in Vineland or in
Cumberland County, the name and address of a person who resides
in Cumberland County and who is authorized to accept notices
from a tenant or the City of Vineland and to issue receipts therefor
and to accept services or process on behalf of the record owner
shall be provided.
(3) The name and address of the agent of the premises, if any.
§ 485-1 VINELAND CODE § 485-2
1:928
§ 485-3. Periodic inspections.
(4) The name and address, including the dwelling unit number, of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual employed by
the owner or agent to provide regular maintenance services, if any.
(5) The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent who may be reached or
contacted at any time in the event of an emergency affecting the
premises or any unit of dwelling space therein, including such
emergencies as the future of any essential service or system, and
who has the authority to make emergency decisions concerning the
building and any repair thereto or expenditure in connection
therewith.
(6) The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on
the premises.
(7) If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the
heat in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer
servicing the building and the grade of fuel used.
(8) As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of
sleeping rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to satisfy the
requirements of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor plan
which shall become part of the application and which shall be
attached to the registration form when filed by the Director of
Licenses and Inspections.
(9) The number of adults and children occupying each rental unit.
(10) Such other information as may be prescribed by the City of
Vineland.
D. Registration form; amendments; filing. Every person required to file a
registration form pursuant to this article shall file an amended
registration form within 20 days after any change in the information
required to be included thereon. No fee shall be required for the filing
of an amendment where the ownership of the premises is changed.
E. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, should the residential
unit be occupied by a member of the owner's immediate family as
defined herein, no rental registration fee or inspection shall be
required, provided the owner of the residential unit provides proof of
percentage of ownership, provides proof of familial relationship of
occupant to owner in the form of governmental records and provides all
information required in accordance with § 485-2C(4), (5), (7), (8) and
(9) to the Department of License and Inspections on forms provided
thereby. [Added 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. Each rental unit shall be inspected at least once every twelve-month
period.
§ 485-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-3
1:929
§ 485-4. Access for inspection repairs.
B. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the City of Vineland, Director of
Licenses and Inspections.
C. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining Zoning
Ordinance compliance,233 and, to the extent applicable, to determine if
the property complies with Chapter 537 of the Code of the City of
Vineland, Property Maintenance, Chapter 300 of the Code of the City of
Vineland, Uniform Construction Codes, the BOCA Maintenance Code,
and/or the Uniform Fire Safety Act.
D. In the event that the inspection of the rental unit does not result in a
satisfactory inspection, such rental unit shall not hereafter be
registered, nor shall a certificate of registration be issued, and the
owner of the rental unit, or his/her agent, shall not lease or rent such
rental unit, nor shall any tenant occupy the rental unit, until the
necessary corrections have been made so as to bring the rental unit into
compliance with the applicable code, and the rental unit is thereafter
subsequently inspected, registered and a certificate of registration
issued. In the event that the rental unit is occupied when such
conditions are discovered, all such corrections shall be made within 30
days and, if not made within that time period, the owner shall be
deemed in violation of this article, and every day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, should any violation
be deemed an imminent hazard, all repairs shall be performed
immediately and in a manner so as to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the occupants. [Amended 9-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-41]
E. Should the rental unit which is the subject of an inspection or
reinspection not meet the requirements of this section and results in an
in satisfactory inspection, the inspector shall provide the owner or his/
her agent/employee with a checklist of violations to be corrected. Upon
submission of the checklist executed by the owner or the owner's agent/
employee certifying that the violations have been abated, a reinspection
shall be scheduled and completed within 45 days of the receipt of said
certifications. Excepting any violation deemed an imminent hazard, any
unit not inspected within 45 days of receipt of said certification shall be
deemed to have passed and a certificate of registration issued provided
all fees required in accordance with the chapter have been paid in full.
[Added 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12]
A. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of rental facilities and rental units in order that
they may promote the purposes of this article to safeguard the health,
safety, and welfare of the occupants of rental facilities, rental units and
233. Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use, Art. XV, Zoning.
§ 485-3 VINELAND CODE § 485-4
1:930
§ 485-5. Certificate of registration. [Amended 9-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-41]
§ 485-6. Revocation or suspension of certificate of registration.
of the general public. For the purposes of making such inspections, the
inspecting officers are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
rental facilities and rental units at all reasonable times. The owner or
occupant of every rental facility and rental unit shall give the inspecting
officer free access to the rental facility and rental unit at all reasonable
times for the purpose of such inspections, examinations and surveys.
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility and rental unit
access to any part of such rental facility and rental unit at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or any
lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
C. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported violation of
this article, an inspecting officer shall conduct an inspection as
hereinbefore provided.
A. Upon the filing of a completed registration form and payment of the
prescribed fee as set forth herein, and a satisfactory inspection, the
owner shall be entitled to the issuance of a certificate of registration,
commencing on the date of issuance and expiring on the same day of
the next calendar year. A registration form, inspection and certificate of
registration shall be required for each rental unit.
B. In the event the owner or his/her agent has completed the registration
form and has paid the registration and inspection fee as required under
§ 485-8, and the City of Vineland has failed to perform an inspection
prior to the expiration of the previous year's license, the owner shall
receive a provisional certificate of registration until an inspection is
complete. This section shall only relate to rental units which have been
registered in the previous year. The City of Vineland shall endeavor to
perform all inspections within 30 days of completion of the registration
and payment of all fees, dependent upon ability to provide such
services.
A. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, an owner may be
subject to the revocation or suspension of the certificate of registration
issued hereunder upon the happening of one or more of the following:
[Amended 9-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-41]
(1) Conviction of a violation of this article in the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Determination of a violation of this article at a hearing held
pursuant to § 485-6B herein.
§ 485-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-6
1:931
(3) Continuously renting the unit or units to a tenant or tenants who
are convicted of a violation of the Noise Ordinance of the City of
Vineland.234 Three convictions or more in a ninety-day period shall
be considered a continuous event.
(4) Continuously permitting the rental unit to be occupied by more
than the maximum number of occupants permitted. Three written
notices of violations within a ninety-day period, 30 days apart, shall
be considered a continuous event.
(5) Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.
(6) A false, misleading or fraudulent statement made in connection
with the registration or inspection of a rental unit or units under
this chapter.
(7) A pattern of conduct which results in creating, maintaining,
permitting or suffering the existence of any of the following
conditions at or about the rental unit:
(a) Disorderly conduct on the part of tenants or occupants or their
guests. "Disorderly conduct" shall be as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:33-2; provided, however, that a conviction of such person or
persons under that statute shall not be required in order for
the City to take action under this section;
(b) A nuisance, as that term is defined by N.J.S.A. 2C.33-12;
provided, however, that a conviction of such person or persons
under that statute shall not be required in order for the City to
take action under this section;
(c) The failure to comply with any directive of the City concerning
the abatement of conduct prohibited by Subsection A(7)(a) or
(b) hereof;
(d) The public manifestation by tenants, occupants or guests of
being under the influence of alcohol or controlled dangerous
substances; provided, however, that a conviction of such
individuals for such violation(s) shall not be required in order
for the City to take action under this section; and
(e) The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by
minors.
(8) Whenever the Police Department shall have made an arrest of or
issued a summons to a tenant, occupant or guest or owner on three
or more occasions during any thirty-day period for an offense
related to or arising out of the use and occupancy of the same
234. Editor's Note: See Ch. 469, Noise.
§ 485-6 VINELAND CODE § 485-6
1:932
rental unit(s), the same shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of § 485-6 of this chapter, provided that the owner and/or managing
agent shall have had written notice of the existence of such
circumstances or conditions.
(9) It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension, or other disciplinary action involving a certificate of
registration by demonstrating that the owner has taken
appropriate action and has made a good faith effort to abate the
conditions or circumstances giving rise to the revocation
proceeding, including but not limited to the institution of legal
action against the tenants, occupants or guests for recovery of the
premises, eviction of the tenants or otherwise.
B. Procedure; written complaint; notice; hearing.
(1) A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a certificate of
registration may be filed by any one or more of the following:
Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police, Construction Code
Official, Housing Inspector, Zoning Officer or any other persons or
office authorized to file such complaint. Such complaint shall be in
writing and filed with the Director of Licenses and Inspections or
his/her designee. The complaint shall be specific and shall be
sufficient to apprise the owner of the charges so as to permit the
owner to present a defense. The individual(s) filing the complaint
may do so on the basis of information and belief, and need not rely
on personal information. [Amended 9-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-41]
(2) Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Director of Licenses
and Inspections or his/her designee shall immediately schedule a
date for a hearing, which shall not be sooner than 10 nor more than
30 days thereafter. The Director of Licenses and Inspections, or his/
her designee, shall forward a copy of the complaint and a notice as
to the date of the hearing to the owner and the agent, if any, at the
address indicated on the registration form. Service upon the agent
shall be sufficient. [Amended 9-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-41]
(3) The hearing required by this section shall be held before the
Director of Licenses and Inspections unless, in his or her
discretion, he or she determines that the matter should be heard by
a hearings officer, who shall be appointed by the Business
Administrator. If the matter is referred to a hearings officer, such
officer shall transmit his or her findings of fact and conclusions of
law to the Director of Licenses and Inspections within 30 days of
the conclusion of the hearing. The Director of Licenses and
Inspections shall then review the matter and may accept, reject, or
modify the recommendations of the hearings officer based on the
record before such hearings officer. In the event that the matter is
not referred to a hearings officer and is heard by the Director of
Licenses and Inspections, then he or she shall render a decision
§ 485-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-6
1:933
§ 485-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the City of Vineland or such other court having
jurisdiction, be liable to a fine not less than $200 for a first offense, $500
for a second offense and $1,000 for a third and subsequent offense. Each
day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation
subject to the penalty provisions of this article.
§ 485-8. Certificate of registration/renewal fee; inspection fee;
municipal assessments. [Amended 10-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-48;
9-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-41]
within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. Following the
hearing, a decision shall be rendered, dismissing the complaint,
revoking or suspending the certificate of registration or
determining that the certificate of registration shall not be renewed
or reissued for one or more subsequent registration years.
[Amended 9-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-41]
(4) A stenographic transcript shall be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
(5) The City Solicitor or his/her designee shall appear and prosecute
on behalf of the complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to
this section.
C. Defenses. [Amended 9-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-41]
(1) It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension, or other disciplinary action involving a certificate of
registration by demonstrating that the owner has taken
appropriate action and has made a good faith effort to abate the
conditions or circumstances giving rise to the revocation
proceeding, including but not limited to the institution of legal
action against the tenants, occupants or guests for recovery of the
premises, eviction of the tenants or otherwise.
A. The annual certificate of registration/renewal fee shall be $75 per
annum, commencing for the registration period of 2015 if issued to
prior to January 1. However, there shall be a ten-day grace period
afforded for the payment of the annual certificate of registration/
renewal fee so that should the fee be paid prior to January 11, no
additional fee shall be due. Subsequent to January 1, or any grace
period, the certificate of registration/renewal fee shall be $125.
§ 485-6 VINELAND CODE § 485-8
1:934
§ 485-9. Prohibition on occupancy.
No person shall occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner permit
occupancy of any rental unit within the City of Vineland which is not
registered and licensed in accordance with this article.
§ 485-10. Effective date; repealer. [Amended 9-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-41]
This article shall take effect immediately upon adoption according to law, at
which time the terms and conditions contained herein shall be enforceable.
Any ordinance, or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article will be repealed and superseded. In the event
that any portions of this article that are deemed by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unenforceable, the balance of this article not so deemed
to be unenforceable shall remain in full force and effect.
B. In the event of an unsatisfactory inspection requiring subsequent
inspections in accordance with § 485-3D herein, the subsequent
inspection shall be $75 for each such inspection.
C. No rental unit shall be registered and no certificate of registration shall
be issued for a rental unit unless all municipal taxes for land and
improvements upon which the rental unit is located, water, sewer,
electric in the name of the owner or agent and any other municipal
assessments arc paid on a current basis or reasonable arrangements for
payment are accepted by the City of Vineland.
§ 485-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-10
1:935
Chapter 491
PARKING, HANDICAPPED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Semipublic parking lots — See Ch. 496, Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 700.
§ 491-1. Purpose; statutory authority.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the City of Vineland is
authorized to establish handicapped parking spaces in front of residences,
schools, hospitals and other public buildings and in shopping and business
districts for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles when using a motor
vehicle on which is displayed a handicapped person's certificate issued by
the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 491-2. Parking restricted; vehicles to be marked.
No person shall park a motor vehicle in any parking space designated for
handicapped persons unless the driver or occupant of the vehicle is actually
handicapped and said vehicle bears a certificate, registration or license
plate for handicapped persons issued by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 491-3. Specifications of spaces.
Handicapped parking spaces shall meet specifications as required by the
Department of Transportation. Appropriate regulatory and warning signs
shall be erected and maintained as authorized by the Department of
Transportation. Such signs shall also state the penalties set forth in this
chapter.
§ 491-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a handicapped parking space without
a special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine of $250 for the
first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least $250 and up to
90 days' community service on such terms and in such form as the court
shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 485-10 VINELAND CODE § 491-4
1:936
Chapter 496
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 491.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 700.
§ 491-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 491-4
1:937

ARTICLE I
Semipublic Lots
[Adopted 10-28-1969 by Ord. No. 722 (Ch. 342, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 496-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEMIPUBLIC PARKING LOT — A privately owned area designed or
intended to park 10 or more automobiles in connection with the operation of
one or more retail stores, offices, places of business, places of amusement
or shopping centers.
§ 496-2. Parking regulations.
§ 496-3. Parking places; signs to be erected.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time anywhere in any semipublic
parking lot except in a designated parking place, which places shall be
designated by appropriate markings. Appropriate warning signs shall be
posted in each semipublic parking lot of the City of Vineland giving
sufficient notice of this regulation to the public. Said signs shall be erected
by the owner of each semipublic parking lot upon request by the Director of
Public Safety.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any semipublic parking lot in the
City of Vineland between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. nor on
Sundays.
B. However, the following persons shall be permitted to park a vehicle
during said hours: patrons and customers of any business, store or
place of amusement which is open for business during the
aforementioned hours while said person or a passenger in said vehicle
is in said place of business, store, office or place of amusement or going
to or from said vehicle for said purpose.
C. Owners and employees of any business, store, office or place of
business or amusement served by said semipublic parking lot may park
their motor vehicles in said semipublic parking lot at any time,
irrespective of the aforementioned hours.
D. Identification cards shall be available from the Police Department of the
City of Vineland upon request for use by persons who are permitted to
park their vehicles during the aforesaid hours, as set forth above.
E. It is the purpose of these parking regulations to prevent the use of any
semipublic parking lot by unauthorized persons during the
aforementioned hours, and interpretation of this section shall be guided
accordingly.
§ 496-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-4
1:939
§ 496-4. Violations and penalties.235
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, General Penalty
235. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 496-4 VINELAND CODE § 496-4
1:940
ARTICLE II
Municipal Business Lots
[Adopted 3-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-18 (Ch. 342, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 496-5. Purpose. [Amended 6-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-38]
Municipal business parking lots are reserved for the following vehicles:
§ 496-6. Designated parking. [Amended 6-25-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-38]
A. Vehicles of City employees and employees of Vineland Public Schools.
B. City-owned vehicles.
C. Vehicles properly identified to transport those with disabilities.
D. Visitors who have short-term business in City offices.
A. The following municipal business lots are reserved as follows:
Location Restrictions
The parking lot between 6th and
7th Streets and Plum and Pear
Streets with access to Plum and
Pear Streets (also known as City
Employee Parking Lot)
Reserved for City employees and
as designated by signs
The parking lot on the northeast
corner of 6th and Plum Streets
Reserved for City employees and
as designated by signs
The parking lot between 6th and
7th Streets and Wood and Plum
Streets
Reserved for police vehicles, City
employees and City business
visitors and as designated by signs
The parking lot between 6th and
7th Streets and Wood and Plum
Streets with access to Plum Street
(also known as the Executive
Parking Lot)
Reserved for City officials and as
designated by signs
B. Any parking space not designated by a sign shall be considered a free
space for any use stated in this article.236
236. Editor's Note: Former § 342-7, Statutory authority, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 6-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-38.
§ 496-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-6
1:941
Chapter 502
PARKING NEAR DRIVEWAYS OR ALLEYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 491.
Parking lots — See Ch. 496.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
§ 502-1. Parking prohibited within certain distance of driveways
and alleys.237
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in order to
comply with the directions of a traffic or police officer or traffic sign or
signal, no person shall park a vehicle within five feet of any public or private
driveway or alley.
§ 502-2. Signage.
Signs shall be erected and maintained as authorized by the Commissioner
of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 507
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Health — See Ch. 62.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 135.
Board of Recreation Commissioners — See
Ch. 146.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 216.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 224.
Firearms — See Ch. 358.
Graffiti — See Ch. 400.
Littering — See Ch. 446.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 511.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 516.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 639.
Transient merchants and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 676.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 700.
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 496-6 VINELAND CODE § 502-2
1:942
ARTICLE I
Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 7-27-1971 by Ord. No. 813 (Ch. 346, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 507-1. Prohibition.
The sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages be and is hereby
prohibited on parkland owned by the City of Vineland.
§ 507-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-68]
Any person violating any provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
General Penalty.
§ 507-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-2
1:943

ARTICLE II
General Use Regulations
[Adopted 3-26-1974 by Ord. No. 920 (Ch. 346, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 507-3. Definitions. [Amended 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-85]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS — Costs associated with the performance of
prohibited acts and which are not anticipated expenditures in the yearly
budget of the City of Vineland. Such extraordinary costs shall not include
costs for police and fire protection but shall include costs for such services
as temporary electric, cleanup, temporary sanitary facilities and the related
manpower, machinery and equipment for the same. Nothing contained in
this section of the article shall be construed to prohibit any expressive
activity protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United
States Constitution and Article I of the New Jersey Constitution. In
computing extraordinary costs, the City of Vineland shall not discriminate
on the basis of the content of the speech or the identity of the
speaker(s).238[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-71]
FIGHTING WORDS — Words that are likely to provoke the average person
to retaliation and thereby cause a breach of the peace. Fighting words shall
include direct personal insults and an initiation to exchange fisticuffs.
HANDBILLING — The activity of a person or persons in a place open
and accessible to the general public, distributing any circulars, advertising
or other printed, written or symbolic matter on any subject and for any
purpose.
PARK — Publicly owned land which has been set aside for the purpose
of providing a location for public gatherings, assemblies and recreation
which shall have designation as set forth in the State Plan Implementation
Inventory for Parks on file with the Office of the Business Administrator of
the City of Vineland.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PICKETING — The act of expressing a point of view with respect to any
subject of actual or potential dispute for the purpose of publicizing that
viewpoint and with the further purpose of inducing a specific response from
persons actually or likely to be found in the locality.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — A gathering of more than 10 persons for a common
purpose in a place open to the general public as a result of prior planning
or a spontaneous gathering for a common purpose in a place open to the
general public that continues in existence for more than 30 minutes.
238. Editor's Note: The definition of "Commission," which previously preceded this definition,
was deleted 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68. Refer to the definition of "Recreation
Commission," below.
§ 507-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-3
1:945
RECREATION COMMISSION — The City of Vineland Recreation
Commission.
SOLICITATION — The activity of a person or persons in a place open
and accessible to the general public who, by spoken language directed to
persons in the vicinity, attempts to disseminate facts or opinions regarding
any subject with the intent to induce a specific response from any
listener.239
SPECIAL EVENT — Any event which, by its length of time of said event,
number of people attending and intended use of the public park:
§ 507-4. Public parks designated. [Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No.
97-85; amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-71]
The following public parks within the City of Vineland are historically
public forums dedicated to, among other purposes, recreation and the
dissemination of information and opinion, public gatherings and assemblies
protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and the
New Jersey Constitution, Article I et seq. Each park shall have designated a
maximum capacity of persons so gathering so as to provide a safe location
for persons utilizing the park for its intended purpose. The maximum
capacity shall be based upon component, intended use, service area and
site characteristics, among other criteria, and maximum park occupancy
calculations for all parks in the City of Vineland shall be on file in the office
of the Business Administrator.
Community Parks
Cunningham Park (West and Wheat)
Fiocchi Park
Giampietro Park
Pagliughi Park (Magnolia Road)
West Side Park Recreation Area
South Vineland Park
Neighborhood Parks
Gittone Park (Northeast Park)
Landis Memorial Park
Unreasonably limits the availability of the park to other persons not
participating in said event.
A.
B. Makes use of the park for a purpose not intended.
C. Creates a temporary use of the park not permitted in its zone.
Causes or intends to cause an occurrence of one or more of the
prohibited acts.
D.
239. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 507-3 VINELAND CODE § 507-4
1:946
Normandie Lane Park
Clemente Park (Seventh and Humbert)
Mill and Walnut Park
Carl V. Arthur Recreation Area (Third and Plum)
Mercury Way Recreation Area
Gonzalez Park (Sixth and Almond)
West Earl Drive Minipark
South West Avenue Minipark (undeveloped)
§ 507-5. Handbilling, picketing and solicitation in public parks.
[Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-85]
§ 507-6. Regulations to be additional.
This article is in addition to and not in derogation of any ordinance involving
or affecting any of the subject matters contained in this article.
§ 507-7. Prohibited acts.
A. Handbilling, picketing and solicitation is permitted; provided, however,
that such handbilling, picketing and solicitation is performed in such a
manner that such act does not block the path of any pedestrian or halt
his movement for the purpose of rendering such pedestrian a captive
audience or to compel the acceptance of any leaflet or handout in
return for passage.
B. Other prohibited acts. Handbilling, picketing and solicitation shall not
be permitted in a manner and sufficient number that effectively
prevents other persons with a right to be in the vicinity of the
handbilling, picketing and solicitation from exercising their right to
utilize the area or facilities therein for the purposes for which it has
been dedicated either by physical domination of the area or by threats,
intimidation or coercion actually arousing or having a tendency to
arouse a fear of bodily harm with respect to any person who does not
accede to the will of the handbiller, picketer or solicitor.240
A. No person in a public park or recreation area shall:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
pavings or paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities or
240. Editor's Note: Original § 346-4, Adoption of regulations, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 507-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-7
1:947
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
(2) Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years
shall use the rest rooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex.
(3) Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants
or other wood or materials or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, except on special written permit
issued hereunder. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-71]
(5) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure the natural
beauty or usefulness of any area.
(6) Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(7) Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
(8) Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall he
remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal or
the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the
foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous or
deadly reptiles may be killed on sight.
(9) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park, or any tributary stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said
waters.
(10) Have brought in or dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or
refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof, but it shall be placed into proper receptacles
where these are provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all
such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
§ 507-7 VINELAND CODE § 507-7
1:948
(11) Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary areas by the Recreation Commission.
(12) Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking
area, and such shall be in accordance with posted directions
thereat and with the instruction of any attendant who may be
present.
(13) Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park areas.
(14) Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
(15) Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
(16) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against a tree
or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be
injured by it.
(17) Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided
therefor and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set
forth or as may be hereinafter adopted; nor shall any person
frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the
purpose of swimming or bathing or congregate thereat when such
activities are prohibited by the Recreation Commission upon a
finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise
inadvisable.
(18) Frequent any waters or places designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing or congregate thereat except between such
hours of the day as shall be designated by the Recreation
Commission for such purposes for each individual site.
(19) Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area
any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an
unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure from at least
two sides, nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension brace or
support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any
other structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof.
(20) Allow himself to be so covered with a bathing suit so as to
indecently expose his person.
(21) Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other
place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be
provided for that purpose.
(22) Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether
motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places
designated for boating by the Recreation Commission. Such
§ 507-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-7
1:949
activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are
now or may hereafter be adopted.
(23) Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the
occupant of any other boat.
(24) Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any water between
the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour of the
park the following morning, nor shall any person be on or remain
on or in any boat during said closed hours of the park.
(25) Fish in any waters, except in waters designated by the Recreation
Commission for that use and under such regulations and
restrictions as have or may be prescribed by the Recreation
Commission.
(26) Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
(27) Carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring
guns, bows and arrows, slings, paintball guns or any other forms of
weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human
safety or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank
cartridges or any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas
from beyond park boundaries is forbidden. [Amended 4-26-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-15]
(28) Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that
purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate those
activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and
to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all.
Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
(29) Violate the regulation that use of individual fireplaces, together
with tables and benches, follows the generally accepted rule of first
come, first served.
(30) Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(31) Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles, where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then trash
shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be
properly disposed of elsewhere.
(32) Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose
of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in park after
closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used
or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer,
§ 507-7 VINELAND CODE § 507-7
1:950
camp trailer, camp wagon or the like, except in those areas
designated by the Recreation Commission for those purposes.
(33) Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving propelled
objects such as paintballs, stones, arrows, javelins, horseshoes,
quoits or model airplanes, except in those areas set apart for such
forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively
dangerous games such as football, baseball and lacrosse is
prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided
therefor. Roller skating shall be confined to those areas specifically
designed for such pastime. [Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-15]
(34) Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails, where permitted.
Horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained and
ridden with due care and shall not be allowed to graze or go
unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
B. While in a public park or recreation areas, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular no person
shall:
(1) Bring alcoholic beverages into or drink the same at any time in a
park or City recreational facility. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-15]
(2) Have in his possession or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other
fireworks, firecrackers or explosives of flammable material or
discharge them or throw them into any such areas from lands or
highways adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any
substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with
any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of
the foregoing standpoints. At the discretion of the Recreation
Commission, permits may be given for conducting properly
supervised fireworks in designated park areas.
(3) Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into
areas clearly marked for the Recreation Commission by signs
bearing the words "Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area."
Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running of
dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are
permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes not
greater than six feet in length.
(4) Occupy any seat or bench or enter into or loiter or remain in any
pavilion or any other park structure or section thereof which may
be reserved and designated by the Recreation Commission for the
use of the opposite sex. Exception is made for children under six
years of age.
(5) Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.241
§ 507-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-7
1:951
(6) Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated by the Recreation Commission.
No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches,
burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable
material within any park or on any highways, roads or streets
abutting or contiguous thereto.
(7) Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person
use or abet in the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
(8) Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance, except in
such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Recreation Commission.
(9) Go onto the ice on any of the waters, except such areas as are
designated as skating fields, and provided that a safety signal is
displayed.
(10) Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas
or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior
tending to breach the public peace.
(11) Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Recreation
Commission he claims to have upon request of any authorized
person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of
enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule.
(12) Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
(13) Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or
place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of any such article or thing. Exception is hereby made as to
any licensed vendor licensed under the laws of the State of New
Jersey or the City of Vineland. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-71]
(14) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be
erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads
adjacent to a park.
C. No person shall handbill any material which contains any obscene
writing or picture. [Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-85]
D. No person shall utilize fighting words or gestures as defined herein.
[Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-85]
241. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(6), regarding soliciting alms or contributions for any
public or private purpose, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-71.
§ 507-7 VINELAND CODE § 507-7
1:952
§ 507-8. Park hours; closing.
§ 507-9. Permits for special events. [Amended 11-25-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-85; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-71]
In granting or denying permits for parks use, the Recreation Commission
will not discriminate on the basis of race, creed, religion, national origin, the
content of the speech or the identity of the speaker(s). Permits for special
events in parks shall be limited to one permit per day in each park and shall
be obtained by application to the Recreation Commission in accordance
with the following procedure:
E. No handbiller or solicitor shall possess an object or animal with an
apparent potential to cause physical injury to persons or damage to
property within the parks. [Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-85]
F. No public assembly shall utilize the property upon which it occurs in a
manner converse to the purpose the property is dedicated, nor shall
there be an interference with the normal use of such property by others
with an equal right of access thereto, excepting permitted events as
stated herein. Nothing contained in this section of the article shall be
construed to bar any expressive activity protected by the First and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and Article I
of the New Jersey Constitution. [Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No.
97-85; amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-71]
G. No person shall hamper, obstruct or interfere with any public assembly
within the parks. [Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-85]
H. No person shall promote the use or purchase of tobacco products to
persons under the age of 18 or promote the use or purchase of alcoholic
beverages to a person under the age of 21 in the parks and recreational
areas in the City of Vineland. [Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-85]
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during the designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted
therein for public information and shall be determined from time to
time by resolution of the Recreation Commission.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by
the Recreation Commission at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporary or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise)
and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Recreation
Commission shall find reasonably necessary.
A. Permit process.
(1) A person requesting a permit for a special event shall complete an
application, the form of which shall be approved by the Recreation
Commission. Such applications shall include but not be limited to
the following information:
§ 507-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-9
1:953
(a) The full legal name of the sponsoring person.
(b) The mailing address for each sponsoring person.
(c) If a corporation, the state of incorporation and name and
address of registering agent.
(d) The date and hours of said event.
(e) Anticipated number of persons who shall attend said event, if
known, and the basis for said estimate. If no estimate is made,
the reason why such estimate cannot be made.
(f) The park or portion thereof proposed as the location of the
event.
(g) All machinery, motor vehicles, rides and electrical equipment,
if any, the applicant intends to bring into the park.
(2) The Superintendent of Recreation shall submit the application to
all directors duly appointed within the City of Vineland. Each
department shall provide a written report to the Superintendent,
stating:
(a) Whether the special event can occur without unreasonably
restricting the use of the park by other persons not attending
the event.
(b) The anticipated extraordinary costs to the department. Such
costs shall include estimated overtime pay for employees and
extraordinary services required of that department.
(c) Whether the park has adequate facilities and size so as to
accommodate the anticipated number of persons attending the
event as well as the estimated average number of persons
utilizing the park not attending the event so as to protect the
health and safety of those persons utilizing the park.
(d) Whether the department can provide adequate municipal
services, including employees, equipment and facilities.
(e) Whether the special event involves the use of machinery, motor
vehicles, rides and electrical equipment not located within the
park for public use.
(3) Each department may request additional information of any
applicant which will aid in the completion of its report. Each
department shall utilize the information provided by the applicant
and the factual data available in assessing the application, and this
information shall be contained in its report. All reports shall be
submitted to the Superintendent of Recreation, who shall have
them delivered to the Recreation Commission. In the event that a
department fails to provide a report, this shall be deemed as having
§ 507-9 VINELAND CODE § 507-9
1:954
no effect upon that department and no extraordinary cost
associated with the event.
(4) Public gatherings and assemblies.
(a) An application for a permit for a special event for public
gatherings and assemblies protected by the First Amendment
to the United States Constitution and the New Jersey State
Constitution, Article I et seq., shall be granted or denied within
two business days of the receipt of a fully completed
application. Notice shall be in writing and mailed to the
address listed upon the application. The applicant shall also
receive a copy of the anticipated extraordinary costs
associated with the event.
(b) Applicants are requested to submit their applications at least
10 days in advance of the special event for which a permit is
requested. All applicants shall be permitted to provide to the
Recreation Commission a plan which would defray the
anticipated extraordinary costs as reported by each
department. The plan shall only be considered if received
within seven days of the date the Recreation Commission
decision is mailed to the applicant but not later than five days
before said event. If it is determined by the Recreation
Commission and said Director that the submitted plan can be
implemented without compromising the health and safety of
the participants and public, it shall allow the submitted plan to
be implemented by the applicant.
(5) Other applicants.
(a) All applicants for a permit for special events other than those
for public gatherings and assemblies protected by the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution and the New
Jersey State Constitution, Article I et seq., shall be submitted
not less than 30 days prior to the proposed commencement of
the event.
(b) The Recreation Commission shall determine whether a permit
shall be issued based on a simple majority of its voting
members. The application shall be granted or denied within 15
days of the receipt of a fully completed application.
(c) Notice shall be in writing and mailed to the address listed upon
the application. The applicant shall also receive a copy of the
anticipated extraordinary costs associated with the event.
(d) All applicants shall be permitted to provide to the Recreation
Commission a plan which would defray the anticipated
extraordinary costs as reported by each department. This plan
shall be submitted in writing for review by the Recreation
Commission and the Director of the affected department within
§ 507-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-9
1:955
five days of the date the Commission's decision is mailed to
the applicant. If it is determined by the Recreation Commission
and said Director that the submitted plan can be implemented
without compromising the health and safety of the participant
and public, the Recreation Commission may issue such permit
and allow the submitted plan to be implemented by the
applicant.
(e) In the event that the Recreation Commission shall not convene
so as to comply with the time requirements contained herein,
the Superintendent of Recreation shall act upon such
applications.
B. Insurance and reimbursements. The following requirements shall apply
to insurance and reimbursements:
(1) All applicants shall enter into an agreement with the City of
Vineland wherein they shall agree to reimburse the City of Vineland
for all extraordinary costs incurred by the City of Vineland for said
event.
(2) Any person or entity that provides a service to the public which
involves the performance of a prohibited act such as amusement
rides shall submit a policy of liability insurance naming the City of
Vineland as an additional insured in an amount of coverage not less
than $1,000,000 per incident and $3,000,000 aggregate.
(3) Those special events for public gatherings and assemblies
protected by the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution and the New Jersey State Constitution, Article I et
seq., shall be exempt from the insurance requirements of this
subsection.
(4) Sponsors of special events that include expressive activity shall not
themselves be required to obtain insurance but shall ensure that
the appropriate insurance certificates for associated services shall
be provided to the City of Vineland prior to the event as stated
hereinabove. In the event that the City of Vineland does not receive
an insurance certificate as required herein, then such service shall
be prohibited; however, the City of Vineland may not prohibit the
special event from taking place.
(5) All other applicants for a special event permit shall provide proof of
existence of liability insurance for the date or dates of the event
wherein the City of Vineland is named as an additional insured in
an amount of coverage not less than $1,000,000 per incident and
$3,000,000 aggregate. The policy may be in the name of any entity
providing a service on behalf of the applicant.
(6) At the conclusion of said event, each department shall report to the
Superintendent of Recreation the actual cost associated with said
event. The sponsoring person shall, within 30 days, reimburse the
§ 507-9 VINELAND CODE § 507-9
1:956
City of Vineland for all extraordinary costs associated with said
event. In the event that the sponsoring person fails to comply
with this section, the sponsoring person shall be required to post
surety in an amount equal to the anticipated extraordinary costs
associated with any future applications. The City of Vineland may
pursue collection of any sums due the City of Vineland under the
terms of the agreement hereinabove stated.
C. Appeals process.
(1) Special permit for public gatherings and assemblies protected by
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and the
New Jersey State Constitution, Article I et seq. In the event that the
Recreation Commission denies a special permit, it shall so notify
the applicant, in writing, including reasons for refusal of said
permit. Notice shall be mailed to the address set forth upon the
application. If the applicant accepts the refusal of said permit, he
shall acknowledge this acceptance in writing. If the applicant fails
to sign the acceptance or takes no action, in either of said events
the municipality shall apply for a judicial determination and final
hearing on the denial on the merits within two days of said denial.
The municipality may request a temporary restraining order and
permanent restraints.
(2) Other special permits. In the event that the Recreation Commission
denies a special permit, it shall so advise the applicant, in writing,
including reasons for refusal of said permit. The aggrieved person
shall have the right to appeal this decision to City Council by
serving written notice thereof on the City Clerk within five days of
said refusal. A copy of said notice shall also be served on the
Recreation Commission within the same time, and said Commission
shall immediately forward the application and the reasons for its
refusal to the City Council, which shall consider the application
under the standards set forth under Subsection A hereof and
sustain or overrule the Recreation Commission's decision within
five days from the receipt of the appeal by the City Clerk. The
decision of the City Council shall be final.
D. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
E. The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for
all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason
of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall
have been issued.
F. Revocation. The Recreation Commission shall have the authority to
revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or
upon good cause shown.242
§ 507-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-10
1:957
§ 507-10. Enforcement. [Amended 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-85]
§ 507-11. Vehicle parking.
No owner or driver shall cause or permit his vehicle to stand outside
designated parking spaces except for a reasonable time to take up or
discharge passengers or equipment. No motor vehicle shall be parked in
said park areas from 1/2 hour after sunset until sunrise, except as otherwise
permitted.
§ 507-12. Control and use of areas and facilities.
The City of Vineland reserves the right with respect to any or all of the
public park and recreation areas and any facilities located therein to enter
into any agreement with the Board of Education of the City of Vineland
concerning the control and use thereof, and, anything contained in this
article to the contrary notwithstanding, any use of said premises or said
facilities by the Board of Education pursuant to any agreement with the
City of Vineland or Recreation Commission heretofore or hereafter entered
into shall be free and exclusive from any control or supervision of or by the
Recreation Commission.
§ 507-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No.
90-79; 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-85243]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction, be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General
Penalty
A. The Recreation Commission and park attendants shall, in connection
with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of
this article.
B. The Recreation Commission and any park attendant shall have the
authority to eject from the park area any person or persons acting in
violation of this article.
C. The Recreation Commission and any park attendant shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the
park, or used therein, in violation of this article.
D. This article shall also be enforced by the Police Department of the City
of Vineland.
242. Editor's Note: Former § 346-8.1, Recreational reservation fees for organized leagues and
activities, added 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-24 and which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-34.
243. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 507-10 VINELAND CODE § 507-13
1:958
ARTICLE III
Tobacco-Free Tot-Lots
[Adopted 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-30 (Ch. 346, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 507-14. Unlawful activities. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-60]
It shall be unlawful to smoke, chew, inhale or otherwise use tobacco or
tobacco products in the bounds of any and all municipal parks within the
City of Vineland.
§ 507-15. Placement of signs. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-60]
The Department of Public Works shall cause signs to be placed at the usual
means of ingress and egress to each municipal park, as well as areas at
or near locations within the parks that people utilizing the parks generally
congregate.
§ 507-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The City of Vineland Health Department and
may be referred to in this article as the "Department."
HEALTH OFFICER — The administrative officer of the City of Vineland
Health Department and/or his or her authorized representative.
MUNICIPAL PARKS — Publicly owned land which has been set aside for
the purpose of providing a location for public gatherings, assemblies and
recreation which shall have designation as set forth in the State Plan
Implementation Inventory for Parks on file with the office of the Business
Administration of the City of Vineland.244[Added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-60]
RECREATION COMMISSION — The City of Vineland Recreation
Commission.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
§ 507-17. Enforcement.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Health Officer, the Police
Department and/or the Recreation Commission or any other person
charged with the enforcement of ordinances in the City of Vineland.
244. Editor's Note: The definition of "playground equipment," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68.
§ 507-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-17
1:959
§ 507-18. Severability; construal.
§ 507-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No.2009-68]
Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person violating
any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General
Penalty. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the City of
Vineland or before other judicial officers having authority under the laws of
the State of New Jersey.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer or a member of the
Recreation Commission or their designee executing their official duty in
a manner prescribed by law.
C. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article.
A. If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this article is
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in
part, by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section,
subsection or paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full force and effect
and no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate the remaining
chapters, sections, subsections or paragraphs of this article.
B. This article shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the City of Vineland.
§ 507-17 VINELAND CODE § 507-19
1:960
ARTICLE IV
Background Checks
[Adopted 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15]
§ 507-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL PANEL — A three-member panel consisting of the Chief of Police,
the Director of Public Safety and the Solicitor of the Recreation
Commission. The panel shall be charged with review of all appeals by any
employee or volunteer whose criminal history background check reveals a
disqualifying criminal conviction or offense.[Added 8-9-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-39]
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Identification Division, and/or the New Jersey State Bureau
of Identification in the Division of State Police.
NONSPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAM — Any youth program not sponsored
by the City of Vineland, but which utilizes municipal facilities or has an
affiliation with a City of Vineland sponsored youth program and has contact
with persons under the age of 18 years.
CITY-SPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAM — Any program sponsored by the
City of Vineland, including any and all leagues, boards or commissions,
falling within the purview of or acting for or on behalf of the City of Vineland
and having contact with persons under the age of 18 years.
YOUTH PROGRAMS — Any programs that allow for participation in
activities by those persons less than 18 years of age. Activities may include,
but are not limited to, sporting activities, passive recreation groups, clubs
or camps and trips or other activities whereby some control and
responsibility for children are assigned to some person acting for or on
behalf of the City of Vineland other than a parent or caregiver.
§ 507-21. Criminal background checks for nonsponsored youth
programs.
Prior to any club or organization, not defined as a City of Vineland
sponsored youth program, being authorized to use City of Vineland owned
or operated facilities for functions participated in by minor children, any
person 18 years of age or older, in any way assisting in the function,
including but not limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions,
must provide the City of Vineland Recreation Superintendent with findings
of a criminal background check obtained from the State Bureau of
Identification in the New Jersey State Police. The submission of background
check findings must be based upon a check performed within two years
of the start of use of the City of Vineland owned or operated facility.
§ 507-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-21
1:961
In the case of coaches performing duties as employees of the Vineland
School District, the policy of background checks adopted by the Vineland
Board of Education will be used to establish eligibility for use of City of
Vineland owned or operated facilities. In all cases the background check
must comply with the provisions of any applicable laws regarding the
same, but not less detailed than those performed by the City of Vineland
for individuals involved in administering City of Vineland sponsored youth
programs. The cost of background checks for individuals not administering
a City of Vineland sponsored program shall be borne by the individual or
program with which they are participating.
§ 507-22. Background checks for City of Vineland sponsored youth
programs.
§ 507-23. Qualification.
Individuals engaged in providing recreation opportunities for, or on behalf
of, the City of Vineland shall be issued identification cards with appropriate
expirations based upon the date of their individual background check.
Individuals issued identification cards are required to display their card
while in performance of their duty involving youth programs.
A. Any person 18 years of age or older, including but not limited to
coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions involved in educating,
directing or supervising youth, and in any way assisting in a City of
Vineland sponsored youth program function participated in by minor
children, shall submit sufficient information on forms supplied by the
City of Vineland Recreation Superintendent from the New Jersey State
Police, for the purpose of obtaining a criminal history background
check with the State Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State
Police. Applications for background checks shall be processed by the
City of Vineland Recreation Superintendent. The individual applying for
the background check shall authorize the City of Vineland Recreation
Superintendent to be the recipient of the affirmative or negative
response from the State Police based upon the findings of the
background check. The cost of background checks for individuals
administering a City of Vineland sponsored youth program shall be
borne by the individual or program with which they are participating.
B. All league officers and/or those individuals in charge of each recreation
program are required to ensure compliance with this article for that
league or program. The President or Director of each recreation
program shall file an annual roster of individuals that are required to
participate in the background check procedures of this article. The
roster shall be on forms supplied by the City of Vineland and shall
contain a certification as to the accuracy and completeness of the roster
and individual names. Any person who knowingly certifies a
background check roster that excludes an individual required to be
checked shall be in violation of this article and laws regarding false
swearing.
§ 507-21 VINELAND CODE § 507-24
1:962
§ 507-24. Disqualification. [Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-39;
5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18; 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-30]
A. Upon receipt of a completed background check conducted by the State
Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police and/or the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, the Recreation
Superintendent shall notify the applicant and the President or Director
of the recreation program of affirmative or negative results pursuant to
§ 507-24B of this article. Details in the background check that result in
a negative determination by the State Police are not afforded to the
Recreation Superintendent and are only available to the applicant upon
making a formal request to the State Bureau of Investigation.
B. In the event the criminal background check reveals any prior
convictions for crimes or offenses which negatively impact the health,
safety or welfare of children, the said person shall not be qualified to
participate in any official capacity in any function for persons under the
age of 18 years held at any City of Vineland owned or operated
facilities. Such offenses shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.
(i.e., criminal homicide; murder; manslaughter; death by
vehicular homicide; aiding suicide; leaving the scene of a
motor vehicle accident); N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq. (assault;
endangering an injured victim; recklessly endangering another
person; terroristic threats; stalking; disarming law
enforcement or corrections officer); N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq.
(i.e., kidnaping; criminal restraint; interference with custody;
criminal coercion; enticing a child into a motor vehicle,
structure or isolated area); N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq. (i.e., sexual
assault; criminal sexual contact; lewdness; juveniles in need of
supervision); N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq. (i.e., robbery; carjacking).
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:24-1 et seq. (i.e., bigamy; endangering the welfare of
children, incompetent persons, the elderly or disabled persons;
willful nonsupport; unlawful adoptions; employing a juvenile in
the commission of a crime).
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes (i.e., including theft of real or personal
property in excess of $200; receiving stolen property; fencing;
theft of services; shoplifting; computer-related theft).
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except Paragraph (4) of Subsection a of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
§ 507-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-24
1:963
§ 507-25. Frequency.
(e) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed
in New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in Subsection B(1) of this section.
(2) The list of crimes and violations contained in this section is for
illustrative purposes only and shall not be construed as a limitation
on those criminal activities or violations that would be grounds to
disqualify a person from assisting with youth-related activities as
indicated herein.
(3) Refusal by individuals required to submit to background checks
will result in an immediate dismissal of the individual from any City
of Vineland sponsored programs requiring background checks. In
addition, refusal to comply with this article by any individual falling
within the scope of requirements for nonsponsored youth programs
will forfeit that individual's ability to participate with the respective
program. Refusal of a non-City-sponsored youth program to
subscribe to the requirements of this article shall forfeit that
programs' ability to use municipal facilities.
A. All nonsponsored youth programs that have individuals subject to this
article shall supply background checks for all of their participants prior
to the individual being able to participate at any function at a City of
Vineland owned or operated facility to the extent covered by this
article. Thereafter, a new background check shall be submitted to the
Recreation Superintendent every three years.
B. Background check required prior to participation; interim approval.
(1) All City of Vineland sponsored Youth Programs that have
individuals subject to this article shall direct those individuals to
the Recreation Superintendent for background checks prior to the
individual being able to participate at any function sponsored by
the City of Vineland. Thereafter, every three years a new
background check shall be submitted to the Recreation
Superintendent.
(2) Individuals involved in City of Vineland sponsored youth programs
who are required to undergo background checks shall be given an
interim approval for participation only after submission to the
Division of State Police for a background check. Interim approvals
shall only be valid for the period of time that it takes to receive
background checks results. Such interim approval shall not be valid
for a period of time exceeding 45 days. One interim approval may
be granted per individual.
§ 507-24 VINELAND CODE § 507-26
1:964
§ 507-26. Privacy.
All criminal background checks supplied to the Recreation Superintendent
shall be filed and maintained in a secure and locked cabinet or room
and shall not be available to the public for inspection. The Recreation
Superintendent shall take appropriate steps to safeguard such records. The
records shall be exempt from public disclosure under the common law or
the New Jersey Right to Know Law.245 The records shall only be retained for
such period of time as is necessary to serve their intended and authorized
purpose.
§ 507-27. Violations and penalties.
§ 507-28. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the approval and publication
of notice of adoption as provided by law.
§ 507-29. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this article.
A. A person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof for a first offense, be punishable by a fine of not less than $250
nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not longer than 30 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
B. Upon a second offense, a person violating any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not longer than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court.
C. For any subsequent violations, a person violating any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not longer than 120 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
245. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 507-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-29
1:965
Chapter 511
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Obscene material — See Ch. 481.
Nuisance property — See Ch. 530.
§ 511-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 511-2. Adoption of statutory provisions. [Amended 1-23-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-1]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a preemption to Title 2C, New
Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, and the applicable provisions of Title 2A,
Chapters 169 and 170, of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 511-3. Gambling. [Added 2-14-1961 by Ord. No. 372]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deal, play or engage in faro, roulette
or other device or game of chance or to buy or sell what is commonly known
as a "pool" or any interest or share in any such pool or to make or take what
is commonly known as a "book" upon the running, pacing or trotting of any
horse, mare, gelding or other animal or any game, racing or contest or to
have in possession any ticket, slip or other writing or printing of an interest
or share or showing or indicating an interest, share, bet or pledge in any
A. Usage. The word "persons," "person," "his" or "her" as used in this
chapter shall be construed, wherever appropriate to the context, to
include corporations. The singular number as used herein shall include
the plural.
B. Words and terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any building or structure or any part thereof
which is used for gambling or which is frequented by prostitutes,
criminals, gamblers, vagrants or persons violating the law or in which
the law is habitually violated.
HOUSE OF ILL FAME — Any building or structure or any part thereof
in which prostitution, lewdness or other unlawful sexual acts are
permitted.
PUBLIC — Affecting or likely to affect persons in a place to which the
public or a substantial group has access; among the places included,
but not limited to, are highways, transport facilities, schools, apartment
houses, places of business or amusement or any neighborhood.[Added
1-23-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1]
§ 507-29 VINELAND CODE § 511-3
1:966
pool, lottery, racing contest or other game of chance or to keep or attend a
place to which persons may resort for engaging in any acts or for the betting
upon the event of any horse race or other race or contest or for gambling
in any form, and no person shall aid, abet, assist or participate in any such
pool, lottery, race or other contest or game of chance.
§ 511-4. Fireworks. [Amended 1-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-3]
The possession, sale, distribution or discharging of certain fireworks shall
be permitted, excepting therefrom those fireworks defined in N.J.S.A. 21:2-3
as "dangerous fireworks" which shall be strictly prohibited.
§ 511-5. Indecent exposure; lewd or indecent acts.
No person within the limits of said City shall appear on any street, road,
avenue, park or other public place in a state of nudity or make any indecent
exposure of his or her person or commit or do any lewd or indecent act or
behave in a lewd or indecent manner.
§ 511-6. Disrobing in vehicles.
No person within the limits of said City shall disrobe in any automobile,
truck or vehicle while the same is upon any parking place, street, road,
avenue, park or other public place.
§ 511-7. Indecent books, pictures and exhibitions. [Amended
9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-66]
Subject to the terms and conditions of Chapter 481, Article I, of the Code
of the City of Vineland, no person within the limits of said City shall sell,
rent or offer to sell or rent any indecent picture, book, video, movie or
thing or exhibit or perform any indecent, immoral or lewd play or other
representation.
§ 511-8. Disorderly houses or houses of ill fame.
No person within the limits of said City shall keep or maintain a disorderly
house or a house of ill fame or allow or permit any house, shop, store or
other building or structure owned and occupied by him or her to be used as
a disorderly house or house of ill fame.
§ 511-9. Harboring of disorderly persons.
No person within the limits of said City shall permit any house, shop,
store or other building or structure owned or occupied by him or her to
be frequented or resorted to by noisy, riotous or disorderly persons or by
prostitutes, gamblers or vagrants.
§ 511-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 511-10
1:967
§ 511-10. Other acts prohibited. [Amended 1-23-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-1]
Any act which offends the peace and good order of the City of Vineland
is prohibited. Said act shall include (but not be limited to) fighting,
threatening behavior and other act which causes alarm to the public order.
§ 511-11. Hours of operation for sexually oriented businesses.
[Added 8-22-1995 by Ord. No. 95-55; amended 1-9-1996 by Ord. No.
95-88]
A sexually oriented business, as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6, including adult
bookstores, may not be open for business before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00
p.m. Mondays through Saturdays or on any Sunday or legal holiday.
§ 511-12. Disposition of fines.
All fines imposed and collected under and by virtue of this chapter shall be
laid into the treasury of the City of Vineland.
Chapter 516
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 230. Transient merchants and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 676.
§ 516-1. Definitions.
A. When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
PEDDLER or HAWKER — Includes any person who goes from house
to house, from place to place or from street to street conveying or
transporting goods, wares or merchandise and offering or exposing the
same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
PERSON — Includes any partnership, corporation or other business
entity.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Includes any person who goes from
house to house, from place to place or from street to street soliciting or
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of services, goods, wares or
merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals, photographs or
personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery or for
services to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual
has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject for such order
or whether or not he is collecting advance payments of such orders.
§ 511-10 VINELAND CODE § 516-1
1:968
§ 516-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any hawkers, peddlers, canvassers or solicitors,
as defined in this chapter, to engage in any such business or operations
in the City of Vineland without having first obtained a license therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and, in any event, only in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
§ 516-3. Exceptions.
The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include the acts of persons
selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, and
nothing contained herein shall be held to prohibit any sale required by
statute or by order of any court.
§ 516-4. Application; information required; investigation. [Amended
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 95-83]
B. Any person who displays or sells from a fixed location or who otherwise
meets the definition of "transient merchant" or "itinerant vendor" shall
not be considered a "peddler" or "hawker" or "solicitor" or "canvasser."
A. Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Director of
the Department of Licenses and Inspections a sworn application, in
writing, which shall, without limitation, give the following information:
(1) The name and physical description of the applicant.
(2) The complete permanent home and local address of the applicant.
(3) A description of the nature of the business and goods or wares to be
sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired and
the days of the week and hours of the day within which said
business will be conducted.
(6) The source of supply of the goods or property or services proposed
to be sold, where such goods, services or products are located, and
the method of delivery.
(7) Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to
properly evaluate such character and business responsibility.
(8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance
other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
§ 516-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 516-4
1:969
(9) Any other pertinent information required by the Director of
Licenses and Inspections.
B. Fingerprinting and photo identification cards.
(1) The applicant shall be fingerprinted, and such fingerprint records
shall be immediately processed for classification and identification.
If said applicant has submitted his fingerprints to this municipality
or another municipality in this state within 180 days prior to his
application hereunder, then, in that event, appropriate
authentication of fingerprint clearance shall be sufficient, and a
new set of fingerprints shall not be required.
(2) Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall be
photographed by the City of Vineland for the issuance of a photo
identification card upon approval of the licensure. Said photo
identification card is to be carried by the licensee as evidence of
licensure.
(3) Photo identification cards shall be required for all original licenses
and every fourth year for renewal licenses.
(4) Licensees will be required to return their photo identification cards
to the Department of Licenses and Inspections at the end of the
year covered by said license.
C. Applications for partners shall be signed by all partners, with the
foregoing provisions of this section answered in detail as to each said
partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached thereto
individual statements, in accordance with all of the provisions of this
section, relating to each and every employee, agent or servant who
shall engage in any of the functions authorized by this chapter and shall
be signed by each such agent, servant or employee and in full
compliance herewith by each such individual.
D. At the time of filing the application, a nonrefundable fee of $65 shall be
paid to the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections for
the express purpose of covering the costs of investigation of the facts
stated in the application. A fee of $25 shall be charged for each
renewal.246
E. A fifteen-dollar fee to cover the cost of the photo identification cards
will be charged for all original licenses and every fourth year for
renewal licenses. Replacement photo identification cards will be
provided for a cost of $15.
F. No license shall be issued by the Director of the Department of Licenses
and Inspections until the applicant shall have been approved by the
Chief of Police, allowing adequate time for investigation of the facts set
246. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 516-4 VINELAND CODE § 516-4
1:970
§ 516-5. Nonprofit organizations. [Amended 9-27-1994 by Ord. No.
94-68]
§ 516-6. Investigation by Chief of Police; disapproval.
forth in the application, and the Chief of Police shall exercise due
diligence and dispatch in processing all such applications.
A. Any person, organization, society or association desiring to solicit or
have solicited in its name money, donations of money or property or
financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item
of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from
persons other than members of such organization, at any place or
places within the City of Vineland, for a charitable, religious, patriotic
or philanthropic purpose, shall be exempt from the provisions of § 516-4
of this chapter, provided that there is filed a sworn application, in
writing, with the Director of the Department of Licenses and
Inspections, which shall give the following information:
(1) The name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought.
(2) A copy of the current valid certificate of registration of the
charitable organization with the Attorney General of the State of
New Jersey, as required by Chapter 16 of P.L. 1994,247 unless
exempted from said registration requirements pursuant to Section
9 of said Act.248
(3) The names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
(4) The period during which solicitation is to be carried on.
(5) Whether or not any commission, fees, wages or emoluments are to
be expended in connection with such solicitation, and the amount
thereof.
B. A list of the names and addresses of each agent or representative who
will conduct solicitations and the length of time that said agent or
representative has been employed or affiliated with such organization,
society, association or corporation shall be made available upon request
by the Director.
C. Licenses issued to such individuals of these organizations by the
Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall be
temporary licenses, valid only for the period of the particular fundraising
campaign involved.
A. Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall
immediately institute such investigation of the applicant's business and
247. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:17A-18 et seq.
248. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:17A-26.
§ 516-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 516-6
1:971
§ 516-7. Restrictions.
§ 516-8. Report and record of violations.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Director of the Department of
Licenses and Inspections all convictions for violation of this chapter, and
moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public
good and shall endorse the application in the manner prescribed in this
section, within a reasonable period of time after it has been filed by the
applicant.
B. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or the product or
services are not free from fraud, the Chief of Police shall endorse on
such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same and
return said application to the Director of the Department of Licenses
and Inspections, who shall notify the applicant that his application is
disapproved and that no license will be issued.
A. All circulars, samples or other matter shall be handed to an occupant of
the property and not left on or about the same.
B. No person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall canvass, solicit
or distribute circulars or other matter or call from house to house
except during the hours from 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday.
C. No person subject to the terms of this chapter shall enter or attempt to
enter the lands or house of any resident in the City of Vineland if denied
an express invitation from the occupant of the house.
D. No person subject to this chapter shall conduct himself in such a
manner as to become objectionable to or annoy an occupant of the
house or place of business.
E. No licensee nor any person in his behalf shall shout, cry out, blow a
horn, ring a bell or use any sound-making or -amplifying device upon
any of the streets, parks or other public places of the City of Vineland or
upon private premises, where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or
produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the
streets, avenues, parks or other public places, for the purpose of
attracting attention to any goods, wares, merchandise or services which
said licensee proposes to sell.
F. No person, whether or not required to be licensed under this chapter,
shall park or stop a vehicle, cart, van or other means of transportation
and/or conveyance upon any public street, roadway or right-of-way, on
any sidewalk, on any public parking lot or on public property of any kind
for the purposes of or during the process of soliciting sales or business,
displaying goods for sale or selling or offering to sell goods,
merchandise or services.
§ 516-6 VINELAND CODE § 516-8
1:972
the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall maintain a
record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein.
§ 516-9. Revocation of license; hearing.
§ 516-10. Expiration of license.
All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
at 12:00 midnight on the 31st day of December in the year when issued.
§ 516-11. Business deliveries.
This chapter shall not affect any person engaged in delivering wares, goods
or merchandise or articles or things, in the regular course of business, to
the premises of the person ordering or entitled to receive the same.
§ 516-12. Violations and penalties.249
Any person violating the terms of this chapter, whether as principal or
agent or employee of another, shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court
of the City of Vineland, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Council of the City of Vineland, after notice and hearing, for any of
the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or a materially incorrect statement made
in the course of carrying on business as a solicitor, canvasser or
peddler.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or a materially incorrect statement
contained in the application for a license.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
(5) Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser or solicitor, as the
case may be, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by the
Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections, in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and
place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set
for hearing or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner
as a summons at least three days prior to the date set for the hearing.
249. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 516-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 516-12
1:973
Chapter 530
PROPERTY, VACANT, ABANDONED AND NUISANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development Corporation — See Ch. 29.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
§ 530-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any property, except as provided in N.J.S.A.
55:19-83, that has not been legally occupied for a period of six months and
which meets any one of the following additional criteria, as determined by
the Public Officer:
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE PROPERTY — The repair or elimination of the
conditions on a property that create the nuisance, including the demolition
of any or all structures thereon.
BUILDING — Any building structure or part thereof, whether used for
human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouses and apartments
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed herewith.
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days.[Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-40]
FORECLOSING — The process by which property, placed as security for
real estate or other loans, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the
borrower is in default under the terms of the loan.[Added 8-26-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-40]
The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment of
the Public Officer and no certificate of transfer of title has been issued
or extended. [Amended 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2017-97]
A.
Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued prior
to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy, and no
construction has taken place for at least six months as of the date of a
determination by the Public Officer pursuant to this section; and
B.
At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and delinquent
on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 54 of the Revised
Statutes as of the date of a determination by the Public Officer pursuant
to this section; or
C.
The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the Public
Officer in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-82.
D.
§ 516-12 VINELAND CODE § 530-1
1:974
INITIATION OF THE FORECLOSURE PROCESS — Any of the following
actions taken by a lienholder or mortgage holder or mortgagee.[Added
8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-40]
LIENHOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER or MORTGAGEE — The creditor,
including, but not limited to, service companies, lenders in a mortgage
agreement and any agent, servant or employee of the mortgagee, or any
successor in interest and/or assignee of the mortgagee's rights, interests or
obligations under a mortgage agreement, collectively herein referred to as
"creditor."[Amended 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-40]
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Vineland and shall include a qualified
rehabilitation entity that may be designated by the City pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-90 to act as its agent to exercise any of the City's rights pursuant
thereto.
NUISANCE PROPERTY — Any property, except as provided in N.J.S.A.
55:19-83, which meets any one of the following criteria:
OWNER — Every person, entity, service company, property manager or real
estate agency, who, alone or severally with others:[Amended 8-26-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-40]
A. Taking possession of the property.
Delivering a creditor's or mortgagee's notice of intention to foreclose to
the borrower.
B.
Commencing a foreclosure action or filing a lis pendens in the Superior
Court of New Jersey.
C.
The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3.
A.
The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the risk
of fire to the property and/or adjacent properties.
B.
The property is subject to unauthorized entry, leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable and
necessary measures to secure the property; or the City of Vineland had
secured the property in order to prevent such hazards after the owner
has failed to do so.
C.
The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut vegetation
or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds have created
potential health and safety hazards, and the owner has failed to take
reasonable and necessary measures to remove the hazards.
D.
The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare, of the
residents of the area in close proximity to the property, and the owners
have failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remedy the
conditions.
E.
§ 530-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-1
1:975
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a property and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PROPERTY — Any real estate, residential property, or portion thereof,
located in the City of Vineland, including buildings or structures situated
on the property. For the purpose of this section only, "property" does not
include property owned or subject to the control of the City or any of
its governmental bodies or agencies, including but not limited to property
owned or controlled by the Housing Authority of the City of Vineland,
Vineland Development Corporation or Vineland Downtown Improvement
District.[Amended 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-40]
PUBLIC OFFICER — The person designated by the Mayor of the City of
Vineland pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — An entity organized or authorized
to do business under the New Jersey Statutes, which shall have as one of its
purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential or nonresidential
buildings; the provision of affordable housing; the restoration of abandoned
property; the revitalization and improvement of urban neighborhoods, or
similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified by virtue of its staff,
professional consultants, financial resources, and prior activities set forth in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 to carry out the rehabilitation of vacant buildings in urban
areas.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property that contains one or more
dwelling units used, intended or designed to be occupied for living
purposes.[Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-40]
Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile
dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise; or
A.
Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or parcel
of land, vacant or otherwise, in any capacity, including but not limited
to agency, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or
guardian, of the estate of the holder of legal title; or
B.
C. Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property;
Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and vested
with possession or control of any such property; or
D.
Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of the
condominium. Each such person is bound to comply as if he were the
owner; or
E.
F. Every person who operates a rooming house; or
Is a trustee who holds, owns or controls mortgage loans for mortgagebacked
securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure
process.
G.
§ 530-1 VINELAND CODE § 530-1
1:976
SECURING — Taking measures that assist in making the property
inaccessible to unauthorized persons.[Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-40]
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be re-occupied without repair or
rehabilitation; provided, however, that any property that contains all
building systems in working order and is being actively marketed by its
owner for sale or rental should not be deemed vacant. Property determined
to be "abandoned property" in accordance with the meaning of such term
in the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.,
shall also be deemed to be vacant property for the purpose of this chapter.
Any property that has a valid, current continued certificate of occupancy or
an unexpired certificate of transfer of title shall not be considered a vacant
property.[Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-40; amended 1-16-2018
by Ord. No. 2017-97]
§ 530-2. Establishment of abandoned properties list.
§ 530-3. Notice of inclusion on list.
A. The Public Officer shall establish and maintain a list of abandoned
properties to be known as the "abandoned properties list." The Public
Officer may add properties to the list at any time when he finds that a
property meets the definition of an abandoned property and the Public
Officer may delete properties from the list at any time when he finds
that a property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned
property. The abandoned property list shall apply to the City of Vineland
as a whole.
B. The published list of notices shall identify the abandoned property,
setting forth the name of the owner or owners of record, if known, tax
lot and block numbers and the street address for the lot.
C. An interested party may request that a property be included on the
abandoned properties list, provided he follows procedures set forth in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-105.
D. A property shall not be included on the abandoned properties list if
rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as evidenced by
building permits issued and diligent pursuit of rehabilitation work
authorized by those permits. A property on which an entity other than
the City of Vineland has purchased or taken assignment from the City of
a tax sale certificate which has been placed on the abandoned
properties list may be removed in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
A. The Public Officer, within 10 days of the establishment of the
abandoned properties list, or any additions thereto, shall send a notice,
§ 530-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-3
1:977
§ 530-4. Right to appeal determination of Public Officer.
by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, to
the owner of record of every property included on the list and shall
cause the list to be published in the official newspaper of the City of
Vineland, which publication shall constitute public notice. The mailed
notice shall indicate the factual basis for the Public Officer's finding
that the property is abandoned property, as that term is defined herein
and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, specifying the
information relied upon in making such finding.
B. The published and mailed notices shall identify the property
determined to be abandoned by the Public Officer, setting forth the
owner of record, if known, the tax lot and block number and street
address.
C. When the owner of record is not known for a particular property and
cannot be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence by the
Tax Collector, notice shall not be mailed but instead shall be made by
posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the building
affected by the notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7.
D. The Public Officer, in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also send
out a notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing organization or
property tax processing organization that receives a duplicate copy of
the tax bill pursuant to subsection "d" of N.J.S.A. 54:4-64.
E. In all cases, a copy of the mailed or posted notice shall also be filed by
the Public Officer in the office of the Cumberland County Clerk. This
filing shall have the same force and effect as a lis pendens under
N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be indexed by the name of the
property owner as the defendant and the name of the City of Vineland
as plaintiff as though an action had been commenced by the City of
Vineland against the owner.
F. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the City of
Vineland shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect to
properties on the abandoned property list at such time as any one
property has been placed on the list in accordance with the provisions
herein, upon the expiration of the period for appeal with respect to the
property or upon the denial of any appeal brought by the property
owner.
A. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of the property on
the abandoned properties list determined by the Public Officer,
provided said appeal is received by the City of Vineland within 30 days
of the owner's receipt of the certified notice or within 40 days from the
date upon which the notice was sent. An owner whose identity was not
known to the Public Officer shall have 40 days from the date upon which
notice was published or posted, whichever is later, to challenge the
§ 530-3 VINELAND CODE § 530-4
1:978
§ 530-5. Designation of qualified rehabilitation entity.
The City of Vineland may exercise its rights under the Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act directly or the City of Vineland may designate
a qualified rehabilitation entity to act as its designee for the purpose of
exercising its rights under state law where the designation will further the
rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with municipal plans and
objectives. This designation shall be made by resolution of the City Council
of the City of Vineland.
§ 530-6. Notification to City Council.
The Public Officer shall provide a written report to the City Council of the
City of Vineland every six months which outlines the status of abandoned
properties within the City of Vineland, said report shall include but is not
limited to the following information:
inclusion of a property on the abandoned properties list. Upon good
cause shown, the Public Officer shall accept a late filing of an appeal.
B. Within 30 days of the request for an appeal of the findings contained in
the notice, the Public Officer shall schedule a hearing for
redetermination of the matter.
C. Any property included on the list shall be presumed to be abandoned
property unless the owner, through the submission of an affidavit or
certification by the property owner indicating that the property is not
abandoned and setting forth therein the reasons for such averment, can
demonstrate that the property was erroneously included on the list. The
affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by supporting
documentation, such as but not limited to photographs, repair invoices,
bills and construction contracts. The sole issue to be determined by the
Public Officer is whether the property is deemed to be abandoned as
that term is defined herein.250
D. The Public Officer shall decide any timely filed appeal within 10 days of
the hearing on the appeal and shall promptly, by certified mail, return
receipt requested and regular mail, notify the property owner of the
decision and the reasons therefor.
E. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the Pubic Officer pursuant to Subsection D of this section,
by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a
summary proceeding in the Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division,
Cumberland County. Such action shall be instituted within 20 days of
the date the notice of decision was mailed by the Public Officer
pursuant to Subsection D of this section. The sole issue to be presented
to the Superior Court of New Jersey is whether the property in question
is an abandoned property as that term is defined herein.
250. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 530-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-6
1:979
§ 530-7. Action to transfer property to the municipality.
§ 530-8. Municipal lien and tax sale.
A. Copy of the current abandoned properties list;
B. Status report on the property removed from the list since the date of the
last report and the reasons for the removal;
C. Status report on any legal proceedings pending in connection with any
properties appearing on the abandoned properties list;
D. Status report of any actions taken by any designated qualified
rehabilitation entity in connection with any properties appearing on the
list; and
E. Status report of any tax sale certificates purchased by or assigned to
any entity for vacant property.
A. City Council of the City of Vineland may adopt an ordinance authorizing
the transfer of possession and control of abandoned property in need of
rehabilitation to the City of Vineland. Said action shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.
B. Should the owner of the property fail to successfully defend against a
complaint filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84, any party in interest may
seek to be designated in possession of the property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-98 and 55:19-99.
A. With regards to any lien placed against any real property pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 or 40:48-2.5 the City of Vineland
shall have recourse with respect to the lien against any asset of the
owner of the property, if an individual; against any asset of any partner,
if a partnership; and against any asset of any owner of a ten-percent or
greater interest, if a corporation.
B. The City of Vineland may hold a special tax sale with respect to those
properties eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which are
also on an abandoned properties list established by the City Vineland
pursuant to this ordinance. Special tax sale shall be held in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 55:19-101.
C. Any person holding a tax sale certificate on a property that meets the
definition of abandoned property as set forth herein either at the time of
the tax sale or thereafter may enter upon the property at any time after
written notice to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested,
in order to make repairs or abate, remove or correct any condition
which exists as the reason or reasons it is on the abandoned property
list. Any sums incurred or advanced for such purpose may be added to
the unpaid balance due the holder of the tax sale certificate at the
statutory interest rate for subsequent liens.
§ 530-6 VINELAND CODE § 530-8
1:980
§ 530-9. Nuisance properties.
The Public Officer shall determine if a property is a nuisance property as
defined herein. He shall further evaluate the input the nuisance property
has on the welfare of the surrounding community including economic
welfare, the extent to which the condition of the property may increase
crime, drug or gang activity or the extent to which its condition may
decrease property values. Should the City of Vineland abate the nuisance
property, such action shall not be considered in determining whether the
property is a nuisance property.
D. When the City of Vineland is the purchaser of a tax sale certificate of
any property on the abandoned properties list, it may foreclose the
right of redemption in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-86.
A. Complaint and notice of hearing.
(1) Where the Public Officer or his designee determines that a
property meets the criteria of a nuisance property as is herein
defined, he shall file a report with the Solicitor of the City of
Vineland which identifies the property, its condition and its impact
on the neighboring community. Upon receipt of the report, the City
Solicitor shall prepare a complaint setting forth the location and
condition of the property and the remedy sought. He shall also
prepare a notice of hearing setting forth the date, time and place of
the hearing.
(2) The complaint and notice of hearing shall be served upon the
property owner and all parties in interest in accordance with the
notification procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3. Service shall
be made personally or by regular and certified mail, return receipt
requested, by mailing the complaint and notice of hearing to the
last known address of such persons. when the owner of record or
party in interest cannot be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence, then service of the notice of complaint shall
be made in the following manner:
(a) By publishing the complaint and notice of hearing once in the
official newspaper of the City of Vineland;
(b) By posting the complaint and notice of hearing in a
conspicuous place on the property which is the subject of the
complaint; and
(c) By recording the complaint and notice of hearing in the Clerk's
Office of Cumberland County.
(3) The hearing shall be scheduled before the City Council of the City
of Vineland at a place and time designated in the notice of hearing,
which time shall be fixed not less than seven days or more than 30
days from the date of service of the notice of hearing and
complaint.
§ 530-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-9
1:981
B. Hearing and determination.
(1) The Public Officer shall provide testimony and other evidence in
connection with the complaint. The property owners and any party
in interest shall have the right to appear and question any witness,
testify on their own behalf and produce witnesses. Said parties may
be represented by an attorney, at their discretion.
(2) After the hearing, the City Council shall determine if the property is
a nuisance property as defined herein and in so doing shall adopt a
resolution stating its findings.
(3) If the property is determined to be a nuisance property, the
resolution shall state the remedy required, including.
(a) The immediate abatement or removal of the condition causing
the property to be a nuisance property.
(b) The abatement or removal of the condition causing the
property to be a nuisance property within a reasonable time, as
set forth in the resolution, provided evidence has been
presented that substantial work is required to abate or remove
the condition and that reasonable steps have been taken
towards this goal.
(c) The demolition of any building or structure creating the
condition causing the property to be a nuisance property,
provided evidence has been presented that it is not
economically feasible to abate or remove the condition.
(4) A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the property owner
and all parties in interest, in a manner as is set forth for the service
of the notice of hearing and complaint herein above.
C. Failure to comply with resolution. In the event that the property owner
and/or all parties in interest fail to comply with the resolution of the
City Council, the Public Officer may proceed without further notice to
enforce the provisions of the resolution by such measures as are
necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of the resolution,
including but not limited to the abatement and removal of the condition
which caused the property to be a nuisance property. The cost of
abating or removing the condition shall constitute a municipal lien
against the property.
D. Cost as municipal liens.
(1) Any and all costs incurred by the City in the course of any
proceeding wherein it was determined that the property
constitutes a nuisance property, as well as any costs associated
with abating said condition, shall constitute a municipal lien
against the property. Said costs shall include but not be limited to
§ 530-9 VINELAND CODE § 530-9
1:982
§ 530-10. Registration of vacant and/or foreclosing properties; duty
to provide written notice. [Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-40]
legal fees, expert witness fees, search fees and advertising
expenses.
(2) The Public Officer shall prepare a detailed statement of said costs
and shall file it with the City Clerk. Thereafter, the City Council of
the City of Vineland shall consider a resolution certifying the
amount due to be a municipal lien. The resolution shall be filed with
the Tax Assessor and Collector, and a copy shall be forthwith mailed
to the property owner by regular and certified mail, return receipt
requested. The property owner or any party in interest may, within
30 days of the filing date of the municipal lien certificate, institute a
summary proceeding in the Superior Court, Law Division,
Cumberland County, contesting the accuracy or reasonableness of
the cost set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
E. Transfer of property prohibited. Except as provided herein, upon the
service of a complaint and notice of hearing on the property owners in
accordance herewith, the property owner shall be prohibited from
transferring any interest in the property until the final disposition of the
legal proceedings and compliance with any resolution issued by the City
Council. The filing of a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing or
resolution with the Cumberland County Clerk shall have the same force
and effect as a notice of lis pendens.
F. Other laws not affected. Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted
to impair or limit in any way the powers afforded the City of Vineland by
the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act nor is anything in this
ordinance intended to limit the authority of the enforcing agency or
Construction Official under the State Uniform Construction Code Act or
any rules or regulations adopted thereunder.
A. Effective September 1, 2014, the owner of any vacant property as
defined herein shall, within 30 days after the building becomes vacant
property or within 30 days after assuming ownership of the vacant
property, whichever is later, file a registration statement for each such
vacant property with the Public Officer, on forms provided by the City of
Vineland for such purposes. The registration shall remain valid for one
year from the date of registration. The owner shall be required to renew
the registration annually as long as the building remains vacant
property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount
prescribed herein for each vacant property registered. [Amended
1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2017-97]
B. Effective September 1, 2014, a lienholder, mortgage holder or
mortgagee (collectively "creditor"), serving a summons and complaint
in an action to foreclose on a mortgage on residential property, shall,
within 10 days of serving the summons and complaint, notify the
Municipal Clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
§ 530-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-10
1:983
on a mortgage has been filed against this property. The notice shall
contain the name and contact information for the representative of
the creditor who is responsible for receiving complaints of property
maintenance and code violations and shall be provided by mail, or
electronic communication, at the discretion of the Municipal Clerk. In
the event the creditor that has served a summons and complaint in
an action to foreclose on a residential property is located out of state,
the notice shall also contain the full name and contact information of
an in-state representative or agent, who shall be responsible for the
care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the property
if it becomes vacant and or abandoned. In the event that the property
being foreclosed upon is an affordable unit pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act, then the creditor shall identify that the property is subject to
the Fair Housing Act. The notice shall also include the street address,
lot and block number of the property and the full name and contact
information of an individual or entity located within the State of New
Jersey who was authorized to accept service on behalf of the creditor.
The notice shall be provided to the Municipal Clerk within 10 days
of service of a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage against the subject property. The Municipal Clerk shall
provide a copy of the notice to the public officer the creditor shall
further, and within 10 days of serving a summons and complaint in
an action to foreclose on a mortgage on residential property, file a
registration for each such property with the Public Officer on forms
provided by the Public Officer for such purposes. Any creditor that has
initiated a foreclosure proceeding on any residential property which
is pending in Superior Court shall, within 30 days of the initiation
of a foreclosure proceeding shall provide to the Municipal Clerk a
listing of all residential properties in the City of Vineland for which the
creditor has foreclosure action pending by street address and lot and
block number. The Municipal Clerk shall forward a copy of the notice
to the Public Officer. The registration shall remain valid for one year
from the date of registration. The creditor shall be required to renew
the registration annually as long as a foreclosure action is pending.
[Amended 8-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-22]
C. Any owner or creditor of any building that meets the definition of
"vacant property" prior to September 1, 2014, shall file a registration
statement for that property on or before September 30, 2014. The
registration statement shall include the information required herein, as
well as any additional information that the Public Officer may
reasonably require.
D. The owner or creditor shall notify the Public Officer within 30 days of
any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the Public Officer for such
purposes.
E. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained, and any administrative enforcement
§ 530-10 VINELAND CODE § 530-10
1:984
§ 530-11. Registration statement requirements; property
inspection. [Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-40]
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement,
the owner or creditor of any vacant property shall provide access to the City
to conduct an exterior and interior inspection of the building to determine
compliance with municipal code, following reasonable notice, during the
period covered by the initial registration or any subsequent renewal.
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner
or creditor of the building.
F. Any property previously deemed to be vacant, abandoned and/or
nuisance or in the foreclosure process shall no longer be required to
register the same upon presentation by the owner and/or lienholder or
their representatives of proof sufficient to determine that the property
no longer meets the definition which required the registration. [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2017-97]
A. The registration statement shall include the name, street address and
telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age or older,
designated by the owner or creditor as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process, in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf
of such parties in connection with the enforcement of any applicable
code. The person must maintain an office in the State of New Jersey or
reside within the State of New Jersey. The statement shall also include
the name of the person responsible for maintaining and securing the
property.
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner or creditor consents to allow any and all notices of code
violations concerning the registered vacant property or property upon
which the foreclosure process has been initiated and all process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner or creditor
who has designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this
section shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the Public Officer is
notified of a change of authorized agent. The designation of an
authorized agent in no way releases any party from any requirements
under this chapter. [Amended 8-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-22]
C. The owner of any non-owner-occupied residential property who takes
title to the property as the result of a sheriff's sale or deed in lieu of
foreclosure, other than an owner who has previously provided notice to
the municipality pursuant to this chapter, shall provide notice, within 10
business days, to the Municipal Clerk and to the Public Official of the
municipality where in the property is located, and to any association or
common interest community, of which the residential property is a part,
§ 530-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-11
1:985
§ 530-12. Registration fees. [Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-40;
amended 8-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-22; 1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
2017-97]
§ 530-13. Requirements for owners or creditors of vacant property.
[Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-40]
governed by the Horizontal Property Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq., the
Condominium Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq., or the Planned Real Estate
Development Full Disclosure Act N.J.S.A. 45:22A-21 et seq., providing
the name and address of the owner. If the owner is not located within
the State of New Jersey, then owner shall designate an agent within the
State of New Jersey, including the agent's address, who was authorized
to accept service of process on behalf of the property owner. [Added
8-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-22]
A. All properties deemed to be vacant, abandoned and/or nuisance as
defined herein and are required to be registered as such shall pay a
registration fee. The initial registration fee for each building shall be
$500. The fee for the first renewal year shall be $1,500. The fee for the
second renewal year shall be $3,000. The fee for the third and
subsequent renewal year shall be $5,000.
B. All properties required to be registered as being in the foreclosure
process but are not required to be registered as vacant, abandoned
and/or nuisance properties as defined herein shall pay a registration fee
of $200 per year and a like sum each year thereafter until the property
no longer has to be registered as a property in foreclosure.
A. The owner or creditor of any building that has become vacant property
and any person maintaining, operating, or collecting rent for any such
building that has become vacant shall, within 30 days:
(1) Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as
provided in the applicable provisions of the Code of the City of
Vineland, or as set forth in rules and regulations adopted by the
appropriate authority, including a redevelopment entity, to
supplement this Code;
(2) Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner or creditor, the authorized agent
for the purposes of service of process and the person responsible
for day-to-day supervision and management of the building. The
sign shall be of a size and placed in a location so as to be legible
from the nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but
shall be no smaller than 18 inches by 24 inches; and
(3) Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign
until the building is again legally occupied or demolished, or until
repair or rehabilitation of the building is complete.
§ 530-11 VINELAND CODE § 530-13
1:986
§ 530-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-9-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-22]
B. In the event the owner of a residential property vacates or abandons
any property on which a foreclosure proceeding has been initiated or if
a residential property becomes vacant at any point subsequent to the
creditors filing the summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage against the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in
the creditor or any other third party, and the property is found to be a
nuisance or in violation of any applicable state or local code, the Public
Officer, Municipal Clerk or other authorized municipal official shall
notify the creditor, which shall have the responsibility to abate the
nuisance or correct the violation in the same manner and to the same
extent as the title owner of the property, to such standard or
specification as may be required by state law or municipal code. The
Public Officer or other authorized municipal official shall include a
description of the conditions that gave rise to the violation with the
notice of violation and shall provide a period of not less than 30 days
from the creditor's receipt of the notice for the creditor to remedy the
violation. If the creditor fails to remedy the violation within that time,
the municipality may impose penalties allowed for the violation of
municipal ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
C. In the event the City of Vineland expends public funds in order to abate
a nuisance or correct a violation on a residential property in situations
in which the creditor was given notice pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection B hereinabove, but failed to abate the nuisance or correct
the violation as directed, the City of Vineland shall have the same
recourse against the creditor as it would have against the title owner of
the property, including but not limited to the recourse provided under
N.J.S.A. 55:19-100.
A. Any owner or creditor who is not in full compliance with this chapter, or
otherwise violates any provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a
fine of $1,500 for each day the violation continues. Fines assessed
under this chapter shall be recoverable from the owner or creditor, as
the case may be, and shall be a lien on the property.
B. An out-of-state creditor subject to this chapter who has been found by
the Municipal Court, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be
in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-state representative or
agent pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for
each day of the violation. Any fines imposed on a creditor for the failure
to appoint an in-state representative or agent shall commence on the
day after the ten-day period set forth herein for providing notice to the
municipal clerk capitalized that the summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
C. A creditor subject to the terms of this chapter found by the Municipal
Court, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of
the requirement to correct the care, maintenance, security, or upkeep
§ 530-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-14
1:987
Chapter 537
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Health — See Ch. 62.
Brush, weeds, plant life, solid waste and
debris — See Ch. 247.
Graffiti — See Ch. 400.
Littering — See Ch. 446.
Abandoned and nuisance property — See Ch.
530.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 609.
Solid waste — See Ch. 620.
§ 537-1. Standards adopted by reference. [Amended 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-63; 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-98]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, a certain document, three copies of which
are on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Vineland, being marked
and designated as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2006
Edition," as published by International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations of the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, are hereby
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein, except for
and subject to the deletions and modifications set forth in § 537-2 hereof.
The Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections ("Director")
and his designees are hereby authorized to exercise the powers and duties
prescribed by this chapter.
violation cited in a notice issued shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for
each day of the violation. A fine imposed pursuant to this subsection
shall commence 31 days following receipt of the notice, except if the
violation presents an imminent risk to public health and safety, in which
case any fines shall commence 11 days following receipt of the notice.
A fine issued under the terms of this chapter shall be in addition to any
other fines or penalties for violations of other sections of the municipal
code.
D. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide current and correct information on the
registration statement, and failure to comply with the provisions of any
portion of this chapter shall be deemed to be violations of this chapter.
E. Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall it be read, to conflict or
prevent the City of Vineland from taking action against buildings found
to be unfit for human habitation or unsafe structures as provided in the
applicable provisions of the municipal code.
§ 530-14 VINELAND CODE § 537-2
1:988
§ 537-2. Amendments to standards. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-63; 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-98]
The International Property Code/2006 adopted herein by reference is
adopted in its entirety, except for and subject to the following deletions and
modifications:
A. Sections from Chapter 1.
(1) Section 101.1, Title (page 1, second line). Insert: "City of Vineland."
(2) Section 102.3, Application of other codes. Add "Uniform
Construction Code." Delete last sentence.
(3) Section 103, Department of Property Maintenance Inspection.
Delete in its entirety.
(4) Section 104.2, Rule-Making Authority. Delete.
(5) Section 105, Approval. Delete in its entirety.
(6) Section 106.3, Prosecution of violation. Delete first sentence.
(7) Section 107.2, Form. Delete Subsection 5.
(8) Section 109.6, Hearing. Delete.
(9) Section 110, Demolition. Delete in its entirety.
(10) Section 111, Means of Appeal. Delete in its entirety.
B. Section 302.3 is amended and supplemented by adding the following:
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs,
driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper
state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. These
areas must be clearly designated by the property owner. Driveways
and parking spaces must be constructed with concrete, macadam or
crushed stone so as to not allow pooling of water or dust. Motor
vehicle parking shall be limited to designated parking areas. Parking
on or across a sidewalk or lawn area is prohibited. Sidewalks and
rights-of-way shall be maintained free and clear of all grass and other
vegetation overgrowth and shall not be obstructed by trees, bushes,
and/or hedges. Stairs shall comply with the requirements of Sections
304.10 and 306.1.
C. Sections 302.4, Weeds (page 9, second line). Insert: ”eight inches."
D. Section 302.4, Weeds, is amended and supplemented by adding the
following:
§ 537-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-2
1:989
302.4 1 Ground cover. All areas not designated as sidewalks,
driveways or parking areas must be covered with grass, approved
vegetation and/or landscaping material to prevent dust, stagnant
water or any other blighting condition to exist.
E. Section 302.8, Motor vehicles, is amended and supplemented by adding
the following:
302.8.1 No motor vehicle shall be parked, stored or displayed for sale
on a front or side yard lawn or grassy area.
F. Sections 304.3, Premise identification. Delete in its entirety.
G. Section 304.14, Insect screens (page 10, first and second lines). Insert:
"April 1 to December 1."
H. Sections 307.2, Disposal of Rubbish, through 307.3.2, Containers, are
deleted in their entirety from this chapter. The following sections are
hereby added:
307.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall
dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such
rubbish in approved containers that are stored in a screened enclosure
and in an area or manner not visible from the roadway.
307.3 Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in
operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises
without first removing the doors.
307.4. Containers. The operator of every establishment producing
garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved
leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage
of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
307.5. Responsibility of owner and occupant. On properties
containing no more than three dwelling units, it shall be the
responsibility of the occupant of each dwelling unit to furnish the
receptacles outside the dwelling unit as are needed for the storage
of garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises. In lodging
houses and in dwellings containing four or more dwelling units, it shall
be the responsibility of the owner to furnish such receptacles outside
the lodging units or dwelling units as are needed for the storage of
garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises. Every occupant
of a dwelling unit shall be responsible to comply with the applicable
municipal ordinances and/or regulations regarding collection of
garbage, rubbish, recyclables and other permitted collectibles.
I. Chapter 3 is amended and supplemented by addition of the following
section:
§ 537-2 VINELAND CODE § 537-2
1:990
SECTION 309.0
ADDITIONAL DUTIES
309.1 Discontinuance of service. No owner or occupant shall cause
any services, facilities, equipment or utilities which are required by
this code to be removed from, shut off or discontinued in any occupied
dwelling let or occupied by him, except for such repairs or alterations
in process or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of
service is authorized by the Director. In the event that any service or
utility which the owner has agreed to supply is discontinued, the owner
shall take immediate steps to cause the restoration of such service or
utility.
309.2 Laundry. At no time shall laundry be located on front or side
porches, deck railings, or any other appurtenances that can be viewed
from the roadway.
J. Sections 602.2, 602.2.1 and 602.2.2 are deleted in their entirety from
this chapter. Section 602.2 shall now read as follows:
602.2 Residential buildings. Every dwelling shall have heating
facilities which are properly installed, maintained in a good and safe
working condition and capable of safely and adequately heating all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and water-closet compartments located
therein to a temperature of at least 68° F. when the outside
temperature is 0° F. Every owner of a dwelling who permits to be
occupied any dwelling unit or lodging unit therein under any
agreement, expressed or implied, to supply or furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply heat adequate to maintain therein a
minimum inside temperature in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water-closet compartments of 68° F. between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. and 65° F. between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., from October 1 of each year to the next succeeding May 1.
K. Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces (page 17, third line). Insert:
"October 1 to May 1."
L. Section 602.0 is amended and supplemented by adding the following:
602.6 Dwellings containing two or more dwelling units. In
dwellings containing two or more dwelling units having a common
source of heat for domestic hot water, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner to make provision for the proper operation of such facilities
at all times.
602.7 Obligation of owner. In the absence of a contract or
agreement to the contrary, an owner shall be obliged to provide heat
wherever heating facilities are under the control of the owner or
whenever two or more dwelling units or lodging units are heated by a
common facility.
§ 537-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-2
1:991
§ 537-3. Determination that dwelling is unfit for human habitation.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Director may determine that a dwelling
is unfit for human habitation if he finds that conditions exist in such
dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings or
other residents of the City of Vineland. Such conditions may include the
following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light or other sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair;
structural defects; or uncleanliness.
§ 537-4. Filing of petition with Director; notice of hearing.251
Whenever a petition is filed with the Director by a public authority as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4 or by at least five residents of the municipality
charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation as herein defined
or whenever it appears to the Director that any dwelling is unfit for human
habitation as herein defined, he shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the Director, or his designated agent, at a place therein fixed not less
than seven days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint;
that the owners and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give
testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint; and that the rules
of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Director.
M. Chapter 8 is amended and supplemented by the addition of the
following additional standard references:
N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.1 et seq. — The Standards for the Construction of
Public Noncommunity Water Systems and Nonpublic Water Systems
From N.J.A.C. 7:10 — The Safe Drinking Water Act N.J.A.C. 7:18-1.1 et
seq.
General Provisions From N.J.A.C. 7:18 — Regulations Governing the
Certification of Laboratories and Environmental Measurements
N.J.A.C. 7:18-2.1 et seq. — Scope From N.J.A.C. 7:18-2 — Program
Procedures and Requirements
N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq. — Safe Drinking Water Act From Title 58 —
Waters and Water Supply.
251. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 537-2 VINELAND CODE § 537-5
1:992
§ 537-5. Order to repair, alter or improve; failure to comply; costs
to be lien against property.
If, after such notice and hearing, the Director determines that the dwelling
under consideration is unfit for human habitation as herein defined, he shall
state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of such determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in
interest an order requiring:
A. The repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be made by the
owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or to have said building
vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health
and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails to
repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order, that the owner remove or demolish said building within a
reasonable time as specified in said order of removal.
C. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building,
the Director may cause such building to be repaired, altered or
improved or to be vacated and closed and that the Director may cause
to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard
with the following words: "Condemned as unfit for human occupancy or
use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
D. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the Director may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement and receipt of bids. Furthermore, in the event that the
owner fails to comply with the Director's order within the time
specified, such failure shall be considered a violation of this chapter,
subjecting the owner to the penalties set forth in § 537-11 of this
chapter. Each day that the Director's order is not complied with shall be
considered a separate offense, subjecting the owner to penalties for
each day of noncompliance.
E. That the amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert
witnesses' fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the
course of any proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor
of the municipality and the cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements or vacating and closing or removal or demolition, if any,
or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the
sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof shall be
a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the Director, he
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against
the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
§ 537-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-5
1:993
§ 537-6. Service of complaints or orders.
Complaints or orders issued by the Director pursuant to this chapter shall
be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail, but if the
whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by said Director in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and
said Director shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such
complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same
once each week for three successive weeks in a newspaper circulating in
the City of Vineland. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order, and a
copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the county recording officer.
§ 537-7. Demolition of buildings. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-68]
If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened collapse
of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the Director may,
after taking such measures as may be necessary to make such building
temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary proceedings for the
demolition thereof.
§ 537-8. Applicability of Uniform Construction Code Act. [Amended
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the City to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal
or demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the
sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the Municipal Tax Assessor or the custodian of the records of tax
liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
certified mail. If the total of the credits exceeds the costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Director,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court
and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment
of such Court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement,
by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest
may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate,
proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the municipal lien certificate.252
252. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 537-5 VINELAND CODE § 537-8
1:994
or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor is anything in
this chapter intended to limit the authority of the enforcing agency or
Construction Official under the State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L.
1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or any rules or regulations
adopted thereunder.
§ 537-9. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise such powers
as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes
and provisions of this chapter, including the following, in addition to others
herein granted:
§ 537-10. Occupancy or rental for occupancy of nonconforming
dwelling unit; continued certification of occupancy or transfer of
title upon sale of premises. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-68; 1-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-6]
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the City of Vineland in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause
the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
A. No person shall occupy as owner/occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living
therein which does not conform to the provisions of the Property
Maintenance Code, referred to in § 537-1, established hereby as the
standard to be used in determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary,
and fit for human habitation.
B. No person shall convey title to any residential property in the City of
Vineland consisting of 15 dwelling units or less without first obtaining a
continued certification of occupancy for each unit in the manner herein
provided, certifying that said premises conforms to the provisions of
this Chapter; § 372-10, Certificate of smoke detector installation;
Chapter 425, Land Use; Chapter 485, Rental Property. This section shall
not apply to a transfer of a legal interest in the property to an existing
owner of record or a transfer of a legal interest in the property to an
immediate family member of the grantor or to a trust wherein the
beneficiaries are immediate family members. For purposes of this
§ 537-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-10
1:995
subsection, immediate family members are grandparents, spouses,
children and/or grandchildren.
(1) Issuance of certificates.
(a) Continued certification of occupancy (CCO). Prior to conveying
title to any premises described in the preceding subsection, an
owner or the legal representative of the owner shall apply to
the Department of Licenses and Inspections for a continued
certification of occupancy. Said application shall be on a form
approved by the Director of Licenses and Inspections, and shall
be submitted not less than 10 business days before scheduled
closing, without incurring additional costs as specified herein.
The Construction Official and Fire Official or their
representatives shall inspect the premises within five days of
said application and, upon determining that all provisions of
the Code of the City of Vineland have been complied with, shall
issue a continued certification of occupancy permitting
occupancy of said premises. Such continued certification of
occupancy shall indicate that compliance has been met. If,
upon inspection, the dwelling unit is not found to be in
compliance, the Construction Official and/or Fire Official or
their representatives shall notify the owner in writing of such
noncompliance, specifically setting forth those violations
requiring correction. Upon correction of the violation(s), the
owner shall notify the Construction Official and/or Fire Official
who shall, within five days, reinspect the required
correction(s). This procedure shall be followed until all
violations have been corrected, at which time a continued
certification of occupancy shall issue as above provided. Such
continued certification of occupancy shall be valid for a period
of 90 days from the date of its issuance, after which ninety-day
period it shall expire. Such expiration date shall be stated on
the certificate. The ninety-day period may be extended for up
to an additional period of 90 days, provided the owner certifies
in writing on forms provided by the Director of Licenses and
Inspections that no change in the condition of the unit(s) has
occurred from the time of the prior inspection.
(b) In the event the contract purchaser has engaged the services
of a New Jersey licensed and insured home inspection company
to provide a report of the condition of the residential unit and
structures located on the property upon which the unit is
located, the report is dated within 60 days of closing date and
contains all of the information necessary to determine if the
unit conforms to the provisions of the Property Maintenance
Code, the Construction Official shall accept the report in lieu of
an inspection as required in Subsection B(1)(a).
(c) Issuance of certificate of transfer of title (CTT).
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(1)(a) of this
§ 537-10 VINELAND CODE § 537-10
1:996
section, a contract purchaser of a residential unit(s) who, upon
acquisition of the premises, intends and does utilize the
premises for a residential use, may make application for a
certificate known as a "certificate of transfer of title," where
renovations to the residential premises are required to be
made so as to meet the standards for the issuance of a
certificate of continued occupancy. The application shall be
signed by the contract purchaser. The application for the
issuance of a certificate of transfer of title shall be made
not less than 10 days prior to the intended settlement date,
as set forth in the contract of sale. The contract purchaser
shall certify in writing on forms provided by the Director of
Licenses and Inspections that they acknowledge the residential
unit(s) are not habitable and further that they will perform
all necessary repairs/remediations to meet the requirements
set forth herein for the issuance of a continued certificate of
occupancy. Such certificate of transfer of title shall be valid
for a period of 120 days from the date of settlement on the
property between owner and contract purchaser. The
purchaser/owner of the premises may apply to extend the onehundred-
twenty-day period to complete the renovations, but
such application shall be filed prior to the expiration of the
initial one-hundred-twenty-day period. The Construction
Official may grant the extension, in his/her sole discretion, for
a period not to exceed 120 days, provided the purchaser/owner
has commenced and is actively renovating the premises. Prior
to the expiration of the one-hundred-twenty-day extension
period, should the repairs/remediation be substantially
completed and upon submitting proof necessary to the
Construction Official that unexpected/extraordinary
circumstances occurred during the renovations/remediation
which prohibited the completion of the same within the onehundred-
twenty-day extension period, the Construction Official
may grant one additional thirty-day extension in his/her sole
discretion.
[1] Upon notification to the Construction Official and Fire
Official that renovations have been completed, the
Construction Official and/or Fire Official or their
representatives shall inspect the premises within 10 days
of said notice. Upon finding that all renovations have been
completed and compliance with this section has occurred,
the Construction Official shall then take appropriate action
for the issuance of a continued certification of occupancy
in accordance with Subsection B(1)(a) of this section.
Provided no further inspection is required and a continued
certificate of occupancy is issued, the fee for an inspection
shall be charged in accordance with Subsection C below.
§ 537-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-10
1:997
§ 537-11. Violations and penalties.
(d) Should the property be deemed abandoned, vacant and/or a
nuisance as defined in § 530-1, no certificate of transfer of title
shall be issued to any purchaser/owner unless the owner is in
compliance with § 530-1 et seq. of the Code of the City of
Vineland.
(e) The owner or contract purchaser of any property subject to the
terms hereof which is serviced by a private potable water well
shall submit to the Construction Official copies of the well test
results required by N.J.S.A. 58:12A-26 prior to closing of title.
C. The owner making application for a continued certification of
occupancy shall be charged a fee of $125 per unit and an owner making
application for a certificate of transfer of title shall be charged a fee of
$25 per unit. A fee of $50 per unit will be charged for all reinspections
by the Construction Official. The fee charged in accordance with this
subsection for a continued certification of occupancy shall include the
fee set forth in § 372-10 for the certificate of smoke detector inspection
by the Fire Official. Should an application be made for the issuance of a
continued certification of occupancy or certificate of transfer of title
less than 10 days before closing, the fee for the continued certification
of occupancy shall be $200, and $100 for each reinspection, and $50 for
the certificate of transfer of title. No inspection shall take place if less
than three business days' notice is given. In the event the contract
purchaser submits a home inspection report as specified in Subsection
B(1)(b) and no inspection or reinspection is required, the charge for the
continued certification of occupancy, inclusive of the smoke detector
inspection, shall be $60.
D. Failure to comply with any portion hereof shall be punishable in
accordance with Article II, § 1-15 of the Code of the City of Vineland.
Further, each day in which a violation hereof is determined to exist shall
be considered a separate and subsequent offense punishable in
accordance with said Article II, § 1-15 of the Code of the City of
Vineland.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty. [Amended 10-27-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-68]
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the
same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
C. Unless another law is stated to the contrary, the Vineland Municipal
Court shall have jurisdiction over the violations and penalties set forth
in this section. [Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-63]
§ 537-10 VINELAND CODE § 537-12
1:998
§ 537-12. Civil remedies. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-63]
In addition to the fines and penalties set forth above, in case of any unlawful
acts, the Code Official shall institute an appropriate action or proceeding at
law for the purpose of ordering that person to:
§ 537-13. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the municipality or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of
its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and
the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental
to the powers conferred upon the City by any other law or ordinance.
Chapter 542
PROPERTY, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Graffiti — See Ch. 400.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 507.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 700.
§ 542-1. Hours for use and occupancy.
The Mayor of the City of Vineland may establish hours for the use and
occupancy of City-owned, -operated or -controlled buildings, grounds or
facilities. Any public board, agency, body or other authority owning,
operating or controlling any building, grounds or facility may likewise
establish hours for the use and occupancy thereof. Such hours and
regulations shall be determined with full consideration of the type of use
involved, lighting conditions, history of vandalism or other criminal
activities on the premises and availability of public safety personnel.
§ 542-2. Applicability; publication of hours for use and occupancy.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any public building, grounds
or facility where the hours of operation and use, established in accordance
with § 542-1, are initially published in the Vineland Times Journal, the
A. Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further
execution of work;
B. Restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance, repair or
alteration of such structure;
C. Require the removal of work in violation; or
D. Prevent the occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 537-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 542-2
1:999
official newspaper of the City of Vineland, posted on the official bulletin
board located in City Hall and posted conspicuously on the subject
premises.
§ 542-3. Persons and vehicles on property after hours.
§ 542-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 542-5. Adoption of resolution declaring emergency.
This chapter shall be accompanied by a companion resolution, as
established by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-181, which provides that, upon adoption
of an appropriate resolution declaring an emergency, an ordinance shall
become effective upon signature by the Mayor, having been published in the
manner provided by law.
A. Any person found on public grounds or in any public building or facility
after the hour of closing shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty. In the event that a
vehicle is found on public grounds after the regulated hours of closing
and in the event that the vehicle has more than one occupant, each
occupant shall be subject to the penalties provided herein.253
B. Any vehicle found on public grounds after the regulated hours of
closing shall be towed to a place of storage, said towing expense and
storage expense being the responsibility of the owner of the vehicle.
The City of Vineland or any other applicable public authority shall be
held harmless of any responsibility for said towing or storage charges.
If said vehicle is not claimed within the period prescribed by statute,
the vehicle shall be disposed of as prescribed by the statutes of the
State of New Jersey.
A. Any person found guilty of damaging, destroying, defacing or causing
public property to be unsanitary or unhealthful or otherwise
vandalizing any building, structure, personal property or property of
any kind owned, leased, controlled or operated by the City of Vineland
or any public body, agency, commission, board or authority of any kind,
upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, General Penalty; penalties being established in
relation to the amount of financial value to replace, repair or restore
any such building, structure, personal property or public property of
any kind. Said value shall be established by the Department of Public
Buildings and Grounds.254
B. The imposition of these penalties shall not preclude the City of Vineland
or any public authority having jurisdiction of the right to collect civil
damages as provided by law.
253. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 542-2 VINELAND CODE § 542-5
1:1000
Chapter 550
RECORDS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 350.
§ 550-1. Standards adopted by reference.
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., entitled "Open Public Records Act," as currently
promulgated and as may be amended, hereinafter referred to as the "Act,"
is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
§ 550-2. Access to records.
All government records which are made, maintained or kept on file by
any City of Vineland employee or officer shall be accessible to the public
pursuant to the Act, unless said record does not meet the definition of a
government record or is specifically excluded from public access by any
provision of the Act.
§ 550-3. Custodians of records.
The City Clerk shall be designated as the custodian of all government
records with the exception of records regularly distributed to the public
by other departments. To further the efficiency of municipal business and
to make records available as soon as possible, department directors shall
be designated as deputy custodians for their respective departments. In
addition, the following shall be designated as deputy custodians:
§ 550-4. Records request form.
When a government record is requested under the Act, the requestor shall
complete a records request form and submit said form to the appropriate
custodian during regular business hours. All requests shall be in writing
A. Police Chief.
B. Fire Chief.
C. City Engineer.
D. City Planner,
E. Tax Assessor.
F. Tax Collector.
G. Deputy Registrar.
§ 542-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:1001
and as specific as possible, including the type of record and date created, if
known.
§ 550-5. Inspecting, examining and copying records.
§ 550-6. Time limits for compliance.
Unless a shorter time period is provided by statute, regulation or executive
order, the custodian shall grant access to a government record or deny
a request for access to a record as soon as possible but not later than
seven business days after receiving the request, provided that the record
is currently available and not in storage or archived. Should the custodian
fail to respond within seven business days after receiving a request, the
failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the request, unless the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address, telephone number or
other means of contacting the requestor. If the requestor has elected not
A. The custodian shall promptly comply with a request to inspect,
examine, copy or provide a copy of a government record. If the
custodian is unable to comply with a request for access, he or she shall
indicate on the request form the specific basis for such inability to
comply and shall promptly return it to the requestor. The custodian
shall sign and date the form and provide the requestor with a copy
thereof.
B. Immediate access ordinarily shall be granted to budgets, bills,
vouchers, contracts, including collective bargaining agreements and
individual employment contracts, and public employee salary and
overtime information.
C. Should the custodian doubt whether or not the record requested is a
government record as defined by law or is a record exempt from
disclosure, the City Clerk shall request an opinion from the City
Solicitor. After legal review, the City Solicitor shall issue an opinion and
note such opinion on the request form and promptly return it to the City
Clerk.
D. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public access pursuant
to the Act, the custodian shall delete, redact or excise from a copy of the
record that portion which is exempt from access and shall promptly
permit access to the remainder of the record.
E. If the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or
storage, the custodian shall so advise the requestor and shall make
arrangements to promptly make available a copy of the record.
F. If a request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt municipal operations, the custodian may deny access to the
record after attempting to reach a reasonable solution with the
requestor that accommodates the interests of the requestor and the
City of Vineland.
§ 550-4 VINELAND CODE § 550-6
1:1002
to provide an address, telephone number or other means of contacting the
requestor, the custodian shall not be required to respond until the requestor
reappears before the custodian seeking a response to the original request.
If the government record is in storage or archived, the requestor shall be so
advised within seven business days after the custodian receives the request.
The requestor shall be advised by the custodian when the record can be
made available. If the record is not made available by that time, access shall
be deemed denied.
§ 550-7. Posting of appeals procedures.
The City Clerk's office shall conspicuously post in clear, concise and specific
terms the right to appeal a denial or failure to provide access to a
government record and the procedure for filing an appeal.
§ 550-8. Viewing of records; removal prohibited.
§ 550-9. Fees and procedures. [Amended 1-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-7; 6-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-43]
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law. If a fee
is not prescribed by law, the fee shall be the actual cost of duplicating the
records; provided, however, that, where the actual cost for duplication of a
record exceeds the rates below, the actual cost shall be imposed. The fees
for government records shall be as follows:
A. Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a
record, the record and the requestor shall remain in the presence of the
custodian at all times. Under no circumstance shall any government
record be removed from the office where it is normally kept unless
accompanied by the custodian or designee.
B. Should the custodian or other municipal employee be required to
observe or monitor the requestor while viewing a record for more than
one hour, the requestor shall be responsible for reimbursing the City of
Vineland for time spent by the custodian or other employee.
A. Standard-sized paper up to 8.5 inches in width and up to 14 inches in
length.
(1) First page to 10th page: $0.75 per page.
(2) Eleventh page to 20th page: $0.50 per page.
(3) All pages over 20: $0.25 per page.
B. Large-sized paper documents and maps.
(1) Black and white: $1 per square foot rounded up to the highest
dollar.
(2) Color: $8 per square foot rounded up to the highest dollar.
§ 550-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-9
1:1003
C. Preprinted documents.
(1) City of Vineland Code Book: $250.
(2) Municipal Land Use Ordinance Book: $80.
(3) Master Plan: same as Subsection A of this section.
D. Police and fire reports.
(1) Police and fire reports requested and picked up in person: same as
Subsection A of this section.
(2) Police and fire reports requested other than in person: same as
Subsection A of this section, plus an additional fee of $5 for the first
three pages and $1 per page.
E. Photographs. [Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-34]
(1) Black-and-white copy: same as Subsection A of this section.
(2) Color copy: $10.
(3) Photographs recorded on compact disc: $25 (includes costs of
compact disc and "conversion to medium" special service charge).
(4) Aerial photograph: $6 per square foot rounded up to the highest
dollar.
F. Electronic records. [Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-34]
(1) Floppy disc: $5.
(2) Compact disc: $5.
(3) Audio tape: $11.
(4) Information recorded to regular VHS tape: $25 (includes costs of
VHS tape and "conversion to medium" special service charge).
(5) Information recorded to digital video disc: $30 (includes costs of
digital video disc and "conversion to medium" special service
charge).
G. Mailing labels: $3 per sheet of labels up to 12 inches by 15 inches.
H. Special service charge.
(1) A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual
costs of duplicating the record, whenever the nature, format,
manner of collation or volume of a government record embodied in
the form of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time
and effort to accommodate the request. A special service charge
§ 550-9 VINELAND CODE § 550-9
1:1004
shall be applied when the custodian must change the medium in
which the record is normally kept in order to comply with the
request. The special service charge shall include the cost of labor
in addition to the cost of materials as well as any other actual
costs incurred by the City of Vineland. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior
to it being incurred.
(2) The special service charge for volume shall be as follows:
(a) Twenty-five dollars for 100 to 300 copies.
(b) Twenty-five dollars for every additional 200 copies or part
thereof.
(3) Conversion of records from one medium to another: cost of
duplication, plus cost of electronic record medium and special
service charge.
(4) Should a third-party vendor be required to fulfill a special service
request, the requestor shall be charged the fee as set by the thirdparty
vendor.
(5) A service charge in the amount of $50 per request or an annual fee
of $1,500 paid in advance shall be imposed for any electronic file
requested. The City Council of the City of Vineland authorizes the
Mayor and Clerk to execute any and all agreements for the annual
fee subject to the subsection. The appropriate municipal officer
shall collect such fee and deposit same with the Office of the
Comptroller of the City of Vineland. This fee shall not apply to
mortgage companies and mortgage servicing companies in
connection with the direct billing and payment of real estate taxes.
The fee charged herein is equivalent to the approximate amount of
the administration and related costs associated with said request.
I. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any anonymous request where it is
estimated that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to
produce. The deposit shall be the total estimated cost of producing the
request.
J. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any request where it is estimated
that the information requested will cost in excess of $25 to produce.
The deposit shall be 1/2 of the total estimated cost of producing the
request.
K. Postage shall be billed to the requestor for any record requested by
mail.
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-10
1:1005
§ 550-10. Forms of payment.
The approved forms of payment shall be cash, personal check, certified
check, cashier's check, money order or bank check. No third-party checks
shall be accepted. All checks shall be made payable to the City of Vineland.
Chapter 563
RESTAURANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Health - See Ch. 62. Transient merchants and itinerant vendors -
See Ch. 676.
§ 563-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, and it is enacted by
virtue of Title 26 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated and other statutes
and regulations of the State of New Jersey and the New Jersey State
Department of Health.
§ 563-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, wherever used in this chapter, the
following terms shall be taken to mean and include:
CONSUMER — A person who is a member of the public, takes possession
of food, is not functioning in the capacity of an operator of a retail food
establishment or food processing plant, and does not offer the food for
resale.
CRITICAL CONTROL POINT — A point or procedure in a specific food
system where loss of control may result in an unacceptable health risk.
CRITICAL ITEM — A violation of N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq., that, if in
noncompliance, is more likely than other violations to contribute to food
contamination, illness or environmental health hazard. A critical item is an
item that that falls within Items Number 1 through 24 of the Chapter 24
check sheet provided by the New Jersey Department of Health.
CRITICAL LIMIT — The maximum or minimum value to which a physical,
biological, or chemical parameter must be controlled at a critical control
point to minimize the risk that the identified food safety hazard may occur.
DISCLOSURE — A written statement that clearly identifies the animalderived
foods which are, or can be ordered, raw or undercooked, or without
otherwise being processed to eliminate pathogens, or items that contain an
ingredient that is raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being processed
to eliminate pathogens.
§ 550-10 VINELAND CODE § 563-2
1:1006
EQUIPMENT — An article that is used in the operation of a retail food
establishment such as a freezer, grinder, hood, ice maker, meat block, mixer,
oven, reach-in refrigerator, scale, sink, slicer, stove, table, temperature
measuring device for ambient air, vending machine or warewashing
machine. The term does not include items used for handling or storing large
quantities of packaged foods that are received from a supplier in a cased
or overwrapped lot, such as hand trucks, forklifts, dollies, pallets, racks and
skids.
FOOD — A raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption or chewing gum.
FOOD EMPLOYEE — An individual working with unpackaged food, food
equipment or utensils, or food contact surfaces.
FOOD PROCESSING PLANT — A commercial operation that manufactures
packages, labels, or stores food for human consumption and does not
provide food directly to a consumer. The term does not include a retail food
establishment.
HAZARD — A biological, chemical, or physical property that may cause an
unacceptable consumer health risk.
HAZARD ANALYSIS OF CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS (HACCP) PLAN —
A written document that delineates the formal procedures for following
the HACCP principles (July 2005) incorporated herein by reference, as
amended and supplemented, and available through the Division of
Cooperative Programs (HFS-625), Office of Compliance, Center for Food
Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and Drug Administration.
HEALTH OFFICER — The executive officer of the City of Vineland
Department of Health, or authorized representative, licensed by the State
of New Jersey.
HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION — Persons who are more likely than
other people in the general population to experience foodborne disease
because they are: [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD — A significant threat or danger to health
that is considered to exist when there is evidence sufficient to show that a
product, practice, circumstance, or event creates a situation that requires
immediate correction or cessation of operation to prevent injury based on
the number of potential injuries, and the nature, severity, and duration of
the anticipated injury.
JUICE — The aqueous liquid expressed or extracted from one or more
fruits or vegetables, purees of the edible portions of one or more fruits
A. Immunocompromised; preschool age children, or older adults; and
Obtaining food at a facility that provides services such as custodial
care, health care, or assisted living, such as a child or adult day-care
center, kidney dialysis center, hospital or nursing home, or nutritional
or socialization services such as a senior center.
B.
§ 563-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-2
1:1007
or vegetables, or any concentrates of such liquid or puree. Juice does not
include, for purposes of HACCP, liquids, purees, or concentrates that are
not used as beverages or ingredients of beverages. [Added 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-30]
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — My movable restaurant, truck,
van, trailer, cart, bicycle, watercraft, or other movable unit including handcarried,
portable containers in or on which food or beverage is transported,
stored, or prepared for retail sale or given away at temporary locations.
MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH — Any edible species of fresh or frozen oysters,
clams, mussels, and scallops or edible portions thereof, except when the
scallop product consists only of the shucked adductor muscle. [Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
OPERATOR — The entity that is legally responsible for the operation of the
retail food establishment such as the owner, the owner's agent, or other
person.
PACKAGED — Bottled, canned, cartoned, securely bagged, or securely
wrapped, whether packaged in a food establishment or a food processing
plant. Packaged does not include a wrapper, carry-out box, or other
nondurable container used to containerize food with the purpose of
facilitating food protection during service and receipt of the food by the
consumer.[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
PERSON — An individual, association, corporation, partnership, other legal
entity, government, or government subdivision or agency.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The individual present at a retail food
establishment who is responsible for the operation at the time of inspection.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD —
Food that is natural or synthetic and that requires temperature control
because it is in a form capable of supporting:
The rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic
microorganisms;
(1)
(2) The growth and toxin production of Clostridium botulinum; or
(3) In raw shell eggs, the growth of Salmonella enteritidis.
A.
Potentially hazardous food includes an animal food (a food of animal
origin) that is raw or heat-treated; a food of plant origin that is heattreated
or consists of raw seed sprouts; cut melons; and garlic and
oil mixtures that are not acidified or otherwise modified at a food
processing plant in a way that results in mixtures that do not support
growth as specified under Subsection A of this definition.
B.
Potentially hazardous food does not include:
(1) An air-cooled hard-boiled egg with shell intact;
(2) A food with an aw value of 0.85 or less;
C.
§ 563-2 VINELAND CODE § 563-2
1:1008
PREMISES —
READY-TO-EAT FOOD —
(3) A food with a pH level of 4.6 or below when measured at 75º F.;
A food, in an unopened hermetically sealed container, that is
commercially processed to achieve and maintain commercial
sterility under conditions of nonrefrigerated storage and
distribution;
(4)
A food for which laboratory evidence demonstrates that the rapid
and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms
or the growth of Salmonella enteritidis in eggs or C. botulinum
cannot occur, such as a food that has an aw and a pH that are
above the levels specified under Subsection C(2) and (3) above
and that may contain a preservative, other barrier to the growth
of microorganisms, or a combination of barriers that inhibit the
growth of microorganisms; or
(5)
A food that does not support the growth of microorganisms as
specified under Subsection A of this definition even though the food
may contain an infectious or toxigenic microorganism or chemical
or physical contaminant at a level sufficient to cause illness.
(6)
The physical facility, its contents, and the contiguous land or property
under the control of the operator; or
A.
The physical facility, its contents, and the land or property not
described under Subsection A above if its facilities and contents are
under the control of the operator and may impact retail food
establishment personnel, facilities, or operations, if a retail food
establishment is only one component of a larger operation such as a
health care facility, hotel, motel, school, recreational camp or prison.
B.
Food that is in a form that is edible without additional preparation to
achieve food safety, as specified under N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.4(a)1 through 3
or 8:24-3.4(b) or (d); or is a raw or partially cooked animal food and is
prepared in response to a consumer order and for immediate service
as specified under N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.4(a)3ii; Is prepared in accordance
with a specialized processing approval that is granted as specified
under N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.5(h); and May receive additional preparation for
palatability or aesthetic, epicurean, gastronomic, or culinary purposes.
A.
Ready-to-eat food includes:
Raw animal food that is cooked to safe cooking temperatures, or
frozen as specified under N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.4(d);
(1)
Raw fruits and vegetables that are washed as specified under
N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.3(g);
(2)
Fruits and vegetables that are cooked for hot holding as specified
under N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.4(c);
(3)
B.
§ 563-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-2
1:1009
REGULATORY AUTHORITY — The local, state or federal enforcement body
or authorized representative having jurisdiction over the retail food
establishment or food processing plant.
REMINDER — A written statement concerning the health risk of consuming
animal foods raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being processed to
eliminate pathogens.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT —
All potentially hazardous food that is cooked to the temperature
and time required for the specific food under N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.4 and
cooled as specified under N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.5(d);
(4)
Plant food for which further washing, cooking, or other processing
is not required for food safety, and from which rinds, peels, husks,
or shells, if naturally present, are removed;
(5)
Substances derived from plants such as spices, seasonings and
sugar;
(6)
Bakery items such as bread, cakes, pies, fillings or icing for which
further cooking is not required for food safety;
(7)
The following products that are produced in accordance with USDA
guidelines and that have received a lethality treatment for
pathogens: dry, fermented sausages, such as dry salami or
pepperoni; salt-cured meat and poultry products, such as
prosciutto ham, country-cured ham, and Parma ham; and dried
meat and poultry products, such as jerky or beef sticks; and
(8)
Foods manufactured according to Thermally Processed Low-Acid
Foods Packaged in Hermetically Sealed Containers, 21 CFR Part
113, incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented.
(9)
An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or
otherwise provides food for human consumption:
Such as a restaurant, or catering operation, if the operation
provides food directly to a consumer or to a conveyance used to
transport people; institution or food bank.
(1)
That relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or
indirectly through a delivery service such as home delivery of
grocery orders or restaurant take-out orders, or delivery service
that is provided by common carriers.
(2)
A.
Retail food establishment includes:
An element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or
a central preparation facility that supplies a vending location or
satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding location is
permitted by the health authority; or
(1)
B.
§ 563-2 VINELAND CODE § 563-2
1:1010
RISK — The likelihood that an adverse health effect will occur within a
population as a result of a hazard in a food.
RISK TYPE 1 ESTABLISHMENT — [Amended 7-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-31]
RISK TYPE 2 ESTABLISHMENT — [Amended 7-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-31]
An operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary,
or permanent facility or location, where consumption is on or off
the premises, and regardless of whether there is a charge for the
food.
(2)
Retail food establishment does not include:
A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and
vegetables;
(1)
(2) A food processing plant;
A kitchen in a private home if only food that is not potentially
hazardous is prepared for sale or service at a function such as
a religious or charitable organization's bake sale if the consumer
is informed by a clearly visible placard at the sales or service
location that the food is prepared in a kitchen that is not subject to
regulation and inspection by the health authority;
(3)
An area where food that is prepared as specified in Subsection C(3)
above is sold or offered for human consumption;
(4)
A kitchen in a private home, such as a family child-care home, as
defined at N.J.A.C. 10:126-1.2; or a bed-and-breakfast guesthouse
or bed-and-breakfast homestay as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.5, that
prepares and offers food to guests if the home is owner occupied,
and breakfast is the only meal offered; or
(5)
(6) A private home that receives catered or home-delivered food.
C.
Any retail food establishment that:
(1) Serves or sells only prepackaged, nonpotentially hazardous foods;
(2) Prepares only nonpotentially hazardous foods; or
Stores a limited amount of prepackaged potentially hazardous
foods.
(3)
A.
Such retail establishments may include, but are not limited to,
convenience store operations and coffee shops.
B.
Any retail food establishment that has a limited menu and:
(1) Prepares, cooks, and serves most products immediately;
A.
§ 563-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-2
1:1011
RISK TYPE 3 ESTABLISHMENT —
RISK TYPE 4 ESTABLISHMENT — A retail food establishment that conducts
specialized processes such as smoking, curing, canning, bottling, and
acidification designed to control pathogen proliferation, or any reduced
oxygen packaging intended for extended shelf-life where such activities may
require the assistance of a trained food technologist. Such establishments
include those establishments conducting specialized processing at retail.
SUPERMARKET — A self-service store, larger in size and with a wider
selection than a traditional grocery store, offering a variety of food
merchandise, organized into departments such as meat, produce, dairy, and
baked goods along with shelf space reserved for canned and packaged
goods as well as for various nonfood items such as household cleaners,
pharmacy products, and pet supplies.
TEMPORARY RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A retail food
establishment that operates for a period of no more than 14 consecutive
days in conjunction with a single event or celebration.
UTENSIL — A food-contact implement or container used in the storage,
preparation, transportation, dispensing, sale, or service of food, such as
kitchenware or tableware that is multiuse, single-service, or single-use;
Exercises hot and cold holding of potentially hazardous foods after
preparation or cooking;
(2)
Limits the complex preparation of potentially hazardous foods,
including the cooking, cooling, and reheating for hot holding, to
two or fewer items; or
(3)
Stores a significant amount of prepackaged potentially hazardous
foods.
(4)
Such retail establishments may include, but are not limited to, retail
food store operations, schools that do not serve a highly susceptible
population, and quick service operations, depending on the menu and
preparation procedures.
B.
Any retail food establishment that:
Has an extensive menu which requires the handling of raw
ingredients; and is involved in the complex preparation of menu
items that includes the cooking, cooling, and reheating of at least
three or more potentially hazardous foods; or
(1)
Prepares and serves potentially hazardous foods including the
extensive handling of raw ingredients, and whose primary service
population is a highly susceptible population.
(2)
A.
Such establishments may include, but are not limited to, full-service
restaurants, diners, commissaries, and catering operations; or
hospitals, nursing homes, and preschools preparing and serving
potentially hazardous foods.
B.
§ 563-2 VINELAND CODE § 563-2
1:1012
gloves used in contact with food; food temperature measuring devices; and
probe-type price or identification tags used in contact with food.
VENDING MACHINE — A self-service device that, upon insertion of a
coin, paper currency, token, card, or key, or by optional manual operation,
dispenses unit servings of food in bulk or in packages without the necessity
of replenishing the device between each vending operation.
§ 563-3. License required. [Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-30]
A. No person or persons, firm or corporation shall pursue the business or
occupation of keeping any restaurant, temporary retail food
establishment, bakery, mobile or temporary food-handling unit, liquor
store, retail food market, day-care center, educational facility, or shall
own or maintain a food and/or beverage vending machine until the
operator or operators thereof shall have first obtained from the Director
of the Department of Health, as hereto provided, a license to carry on
and conduct the same and shall pay the amount of license fee thereof as
herein fixed by the City of Vineland. Such license shall be placed in a
conspicuous place near the public entrance to the establishment along
with the evaluation placard. In the case of a food and/or beverage
vending machine, the operator having the responsibility to obtain said
license shall be the owner of the vending machine, provided that an
owner of a vending machine may, by written contract, delegate the
responsibility of obtaining the license to the owner or lessee of the
premises in which the vending machine is located; provided further,
however, that in such case the owner of the vending machine must
supply the Director of the Department of Health, prior to the date that
the license fee must be paid, with a list of all persons to whom the
responsibility of obtaining the licenses has been delegated, as well as
the location of each said machine, and shall also file with said
department a copy of each said agreement placing the burden of
obtaining the license upon the owner or lessee of the premises upon
which said vending machine has been placed, and, if the person other
than the owner of the vending machine fails to obtain said license, the
owner of the vending machine shall bear the responsibility for obtaining
the same and paying the fees therefor.
B. Upon acceptance of the license issued by the Department of Health, the
license holder in order to retain the license shall:
(1) If a food establishment is required under N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.5i or
§ 563-21 to operate under a HACPP plan, comply with the plan as
specified under § 563-21;
(2) Comply with directives of the regulatory authority including time
frames for corrective actions specified in inspection reports,
notices, orders, warnings, and other directives issued by the
regulatory authority in regard to the license holder’s food
establishment or in response to community emergencies; and
§ 563-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-3
1:1013
§ 563-4. Application; data.
Application for such license shall be made, in writing, to the Director of
the Department of Health and shall state the name of the applicant, the
address where said business is to be conducted and the name, address and
phone number of the owner of the premises in which the business is to be
conducted.
§ 563-5. License issuance; conditions warranting action;
suspensions and revocations.
(3) Accept notices issued and served by the regulatory authority
according to law.
A. Any applicant for a temporary retail food license intending on utilizing a
commercial food establishment owned by an entity other than the
applicant as its base of operation, as required by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq.,
must submit its completed application not less than two weeks before
the effective date of the license.
B. Mobile units requiring a valid license plate to operate shall provide the
vehicle's license plate number on the application.
A. All such licenses as specified herein, excepting therefrom temporary
retail food licenses, shall be ordered granted by City Council, but only
after being approved by the Director of the Department of Health, in his
or her discretion, bearing the date of issue, the name of the licensee,
the purpose for which the same is granted and the location wherein
such business is authorized to be conducted.
(1) Temporary retail food licenses shall be issued by the Director of the
Department of Health as is hereinafter set forth. The license shall
have thereon the date the license shall become effective and expire,
the name of the business, the purpose for which the same is
granted and the location in which food will be dispensed.
B. No such license shall be transferable, except by City Council after
approval of the Director of the Department of Health. No license shall
be valid for the licensee to carry on said business in any other place or
location than that specified in the license.
C. Suspension of license; discontinuance of operations. [Amended
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
(1) The regulatory authority may summarily suspend a license to
operate a food establishment if it determines through inspection, or
examination of employees, food, records, or other means as
specified in this chapter, that an imminent health hazard exists.
(2) If operations are discontinued as specified under N.J.A.C. 8:24-8.8
and § 563-5 or otherwise according to law, the license holder shall
§ 563-3 VINELAND CODE § 563-5
1:1014
§ 563-6. Fees; expiration of licenses.
obtain approval from the regulatory authority before resuming
operations.
D. The Council may, for good and sufficient reason, revoke any such
license; provided, however, that the licensee shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard and show cause why such revocation shall not
be taken.
E. All licenses requiring an established commercial base of operation,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq., shall, in addition to the completed
retail food license application, submit application in the form and
outline approved by the Directors of the Department of Health and
Department of Law, executed by the applicant and owner of the
commercial food establishment certifying the following:
(1) The applicant is aware of the state law requiring all temporary/
mobile retail food establishments to operate from a commissary or
other fixed wholesale or retail food establishment (base of
operation);
(2) The commercial food establishment shall permit the applicant to
utilize its establishment as the applicant's base of operation for the
duration of the license period.
A. The fees for licenses issued under this section shall be as follows. Phase
1 shall be effective upon enactment. Phase 2 shall take effect one year
after enactment and Phase 3 one year thereafter. [Amended
7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-31; 8-27-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-36]
Type Fee
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
(1) RC 1 $100 $140 $175
(2) RC 2 $180 $225 $275
(3) RC 3a/4a: $325 $400 $475
Bakeries
Restaurants (1 to 100
seats)
Long-term care/
assisted-living units
Child-care centers
Education facilities
Health-care facilities
(less than 5,000
square feet)
§ 563-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-6
1:1015
Type Fee
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
Other; grocery store,
deli, etc.
(4) RC 3b/4b: $800 $1,100 $1,450
Restaurants (101 or
more seats)
Health-care facilities
(5,000 square feet or
more)
Other
(5) Supermarkets
RC 2 $480 $560 $650
RC 3 $900 $1,250 $1,575
(6) Temporary retail food
operations:
First day of any event
in a calendar year
$55 $75 $100
Per day thereafter $5 $5 $5
Plan review $25 $25 $25
License is not valid for
more than seven
consecutive days associated
with any single event; nor
more than 14 total days in a
calendar year.
(7) Mobile units:
RC 1 Mobile $50 $65 $80
RC 2 Mobile $85 $100 $120
(8) The Director of the
Department of Health and
the Chief Financial Officer
shall review bi-annually the
cost accounting records for
services provided herein
and to adjust the fees
therefor.
(9) Reinspection fee:
(a) For a facility receiving a less than satisfactory inspection
rating, the following reinspection fees are established:
[1] First occurrence: $0.
§ 563-6 VINELAND CODE § 563-6
1:1016
§ 563-7. Payment of fees.
All required fees established by this chapter shall be paid by the applicant
upon submission of applications or other associated documentation for a
license, approval or certification or within 15 days of receipt of a statement
for other program services outlined in § 563-6 from the City of Vineland
Department of Health.
§ 563-8. (Reserved)256
[2] Second occurrence: $100.
[3] Third occurrence $200.
(b) The reinspection fee shall be paid within 10 working days
after receipt of notice. Fees for occurrences are cumulative
for a period of two years from the date of the first
occurrence. A transfer of ownership within the two-year
period will avoid all accumulated occurrences.
(10) Food establishment plan review (includes pre-open inspection).
Type Fee
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
(1) RC 1 $55 $65 $75
(2) RC 2 $125 $175 $275
(3) RC 3 and 4 $450 $600 $750
(4) HACCP plan
(R.O.P.) review
$250 $250 $250
(11) Food safety education classes.
(a) The fee for attending a Department of Health training class
is as follows: [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-41]
[1] $25 per person;
[2] Multiple registrants (two or more), from a single
establishment or operation shall be $20 per person.
(b) The fee for attending a nationally recognized food safety
exam after the completion of a Department of Health
training class shall be $50.
B. 255Licenses for food and beverage vending machines shall expire as of
March 31 of each year. Except as otherwise herein provided, all other
licenses issued in accordance with this chapter shall expire as of
December 31 of the year in which the same was issued.
255. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding exceptions to fees required under
Subsection A, was repealed 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-31. This ordinance also provided
for the redesignation of former Subsection C as Subsection B and the repeal of former
Subsection D, regarding the fee required for business commenced on after July 1.
256. Editor's Note: Former § 563-8, Late fee, was repealed 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-31.
§ 563-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-9
1:1017
§ 563-9. Failure to pay fees.
In the event that an applicant shall fail to pay the fees required by this
chapter, or in the event that any payment shall be dishonored, suspended or
cancelled, then any permit, approval, or certification that is the subject of
such fee or payment shall be deemed cancelled.
§ 563-10. Sample testing; unwholesome or adulterated products.
Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined
by the regulatory authority as often as may be deemed necessary for the
detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The Health Officer may
condemn and forbid the sale of or cause to be removed or destroyed any
food or drink which is deemed to be unwholesome or adulterated.
§ 563-11. Inspection of retail food establishment premises.
[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
§ 563-12. Retail food establishment sanitation requirements.
[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
A. As frequently as may be deemed necessary, the regulatory authority
may inspect or cause to be inspected any retail food establishment
located within the City of Vineland.
B. If a person denies access to the regulatory authority, the representative
of the regulatory authority shall:
(1) Inform the person that:
(a) The license holder is required to allow access to the regulatory
authority as specified under N.J.A.C. 8:24-8.2 and § 563-11;
(b) Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of a food
establishment license to operate as specified under § 563-11;
and
(c) If access is denied, an order issued by the appropriate
authority allowing access, hereinafter referred to as an
inspection order, may be obtained according to law; and
(2) Make a final request for access.
(3) If, after the regulatory authority presents credentials and provides
notice as specified under the above section, explains the authority
upon which access is requested, and makes a final request for
access as specified in the above-noted section, the person in charge
continues to refuse access, the regulatory authority shall provide
details of the denial of access on an inspection report form.
A. All retail food establishments licensed hereunder shall comply with all
regulations as promulgated in N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq. dealing with the
construction, operation and maintenance of retail food establishments.
§ 563-9 VINELAND CODE § 563-12
1:1018
§ 563-13. Consumer advisory.
A copy of N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq. is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text herein.
B. By January 1, 2011, at least one person in charge at all Risk Type 2
establishments shall have successfully completed a food safety
education program offered by the regulatory authority or other
equivalent provider.
C. Whole meat roasts, including beef, corned beef, lamb, pork, and cured
pork roasts such as ham shall be cooked in an oven that is preheated to
the temperature specified for the roast's weight in the following chart
and that is held at that temperature:
Oven Type Oven Temperature Based on Roast Weight
Less than 10
Pounds 10 Pounds or More
Still dry 350° F. or more 250° F. or more
Convection 325° F. or more 250° F. or more
High humidity1 250° F. or less 250° F. or less
NOTES:
1Relative humidity greater than 90% for at least one hour as measured
in the cooking chamber or exit of the oven; or in a moistureimpermeable
bag that provides 100% humidity.
D. Ceramic, china, and crystal utensils, and decorative utensils such as
hand-painted ceramic or china that are used in contact with food shall
be lead-free or contain levels of lead not exceeding the limits of the
following utensil categories:
Utensil Category
Ceramic Article
Description
Maximum Lead
(mg/L)
Beverage mugs, cups,
pitchers
Coffee mugs 0.5
Large hollowware
(excluding pitchers)
Bowls equal to or
greater than 1.1 liter
(1.16 quart)
1.0
Small hollowware
(excluding cups and
mugs)
Bowls less than 1.1
liter (1.16 quart)
2.0
Flat tableware Plates, saucers 3.0
A. Except as specified in N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq., if any animal food such as
beef, eggs, fish, lamb, milk, pork, poultry, or shellfish is served or sold
raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being processed to eliminate
§ 563-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-13
1:1019
§ 563-14. Date marking.
pathogens, either in ready-to-eat form or as an ingredient in another
ready-to-eat food, the operator shall inform consumers of the
significantly increased risk of consuming such foods by way of a
disclosure and reminder, as specified in Subsections B and C of this
section using brochure, deli case or menu advisories, label statements,
table tents, placards, or other effective written means.
B. Disclosure shall include:
(1) A description of the animal-derived foods, such as "oysters on the
half shell" (raw oysters), "raw-egg Caesar salad" and "hamburgers"
(can be cooked to order); or
(2) Identification of the animal-derived foods by asterisking them to a
footnote that states that the items are served raw or undercooked,
or contain (or may contain) raw or undercooked ingredients.
C. The reminder shall include asterisking the animal-derived foods
requiring disclosure to a footnote that states:
(1) Regarding the safety of these items, written information is
available upon request;
(2) Consuming raw or undercooked meats, poultry, seafood, shellfish,
or eggs may increase your risk of foodborne illness; or
(3) Consuming raw or undercooked meats, poultry, seafood, shellfish,
or eggs may increase your risk of foodborne illness, especially if
you have certain medical conditions.
D. If required by law, consumer warnings shall be provided. [Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
A. Except as specified in Subsection D of this section, refrigerated, readyto-
eat, potentially hazardous food prepared and held in a food
establishment for more than 24 hours shall be clearly marked to
indicate the date or day by which the food shall be consumed on the
premises, sold or discarded, based on the temperature and time
combinations specified below. The day of preparation shall be counted
as Day 1.
(1) Forty-one degrees Fahrenheit or less for a maximum of seven days;
or
(2) Forty-five degrees Fahrenheit or between 41° F. and 45° F. for a
maximum of four days in existing refrigeration equipment that is
not capable of maintaining the food at 41° F. or less.
B. Except as specified in subsections D and E of this section, refrigerated,
ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food prepared and packaged by a
food processing plant shall be clearly marked, at the time the original
§ 563-13 VINELAND CODE § 563-14
1:1020
container is opened in a retail food establishment and if the food is held
for more than 24 hours, to indicate the date or day by which the food
shall be consumed on the premises, sold, or discarded, based on the
temperature and time combinations specified in Subsection A of this
section and:
(1) The day the original container is opened in the retail food
establishment shall be counted as Day 1; and
(2) The day or date marked by the retail food establishment may not
exceed a manufacturer's use-by date if the manufacturer
determined the use-by date based on food safety.
C. A refrigerated, ready-to-eat potentially hazardous food that is
frequently rewrapped, such as lunch meat or a roast, or for which date
marking is impractical, such as soft-serve mix or milk in a dispensing
machine, may be marked as specified in Subsections A or B of this
section, or by an alternative method acceptable to the regulatory
authority.
D. Subsections A and B of this section do not apply to individual meal
portions served or repackaged for sale from a bulk container upon a
consumer's request.
E. Subsection B of this section does not apply to the following when the
face has been cut, but the remaining portion is whole and intact:
(1) Fermented sausages produced in a federally inspected food
processing plant that are not labeled "keep refrigerated" and which
retain the original casing on the product;
(2) Shelf-stable, dry, fermented sausages; and
(3) Shelf-stable salt-cured products such as prosciutto and Parma
(ham) produced in a federally inspected food processing plant that
are not labeled "keep refrigerated."
F. A refrigerated, ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food ingredient or a
portion of a refrigerated, ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food that
is subsequently combined with additional ingredients or portions of
food shall retain the date making of the earliest-prepared or firstprepared
ingredient.
G. Subsection B of this section does not apply to foods exempted under the
most current FDA Model Food Code 3-501.17E and F. [Added
7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-31]
H. A food subject to date marking under § 563-14A shall be discarded if it:
[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
(1) Exceeds the temperature and time combination specified in N.J.A.C.
8:24, except time that the product is frozen;
§ 563-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-14
1:1021
§ 563-15. Physical examinations/specimen submission.
The Health Officer may order any person who takes part in the actual
operation of the retail food establishment or any employee in the same
who is suspected of being ill or infected with a reportable or communicable
disease, or who has been exposed to a reportable or communicable disease,
to submit to a physical examination, X-ray studies, laboratory studies, and
such other diagnostic procedures as deemed necessary to determine
whether or not such person is communicable to others or is a carrier of
disease.
§ 563-16. Physician's report; measures required.
In case such physical examination and/or physician report shall indicate
that any of such persons are suffering from any reportable or communicable
disease, then in such case the Health Officer or the Director of the
Department of Health is then authorized to require either or both of the
following measures:
(2) Is in a container or package that does not bear a date or day; or
(3) Is appropriately marked with a date or day that exceeds a
temperature and time combination as specified in § 563-14A.
I. Food establishment or manufacturers’ dating information on foods may
not be concealed or altered. [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
A. The immediate exclusion of the owner, operator or employee from all
retail food establishments until pronounced recovered or cured by a
duly licensed New Jersey physician.
B. The immediate closing of the retail food establishment concerned until
no danger of disease outbreak exists, in the opinion of the Health
Officer.
C. The Health Officer or the Director of the Department of Health may
prohibit the sale or distribution of food which:
(1) Has been prepared by a person who is ill or infected with a
communicable disease which may be transmitted through food; or
(2) Is considered to be a possible vehicle for spread of disease.
D. Based on the findings of the investigation as specified in N.J.A.C.
8:24-8.8 and §§ 563-15 and 16, to control disease transmission, the
regulatory authority may issue an order of restriction or exclusion to a
suspected food employee or the permit holder without prior warning,
notice of a hearing, or a hearing if the order: [Added 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-30]
(1) States the reasons for the restriction or exclusion that is ordered;
§ 563-14 VINELAND CODE § 563-16
1:1022
§ 563-17. Confidentiality.
§ 563-18. Compliance and enforcement.
(2) States the evidence that the food employee or license holder shall
provide in order to demonstrate that the reasons for the restriction
or exclusion are eliminated;
(3) States that the suspected food employee or the license holder may
request an appeal hearing by submitting a timely request as
provided in law; and
(4) Provides the name and address of the regulatory authority
representative to whom a request for an appeal hearing may be
made.
A. The reports made pursuant to this section shall be used only by the City
of Vineland Department of Health, and such other agencies as may be
designated by the Health Officer to carry out mandated duties,
including the duty to control and suppress infectious diseases.
B. Medical and epidemiologic information which is gathered in connection
with an investigation of a reportable disease or infectious agent and
which identifies an individual is confidential and not open to public
inspection without that individual's consent, except as may be
necessary to carry out duties to protect the public health as determined
by the Health Officer.
C. Medical or epidemiologic information collected pursuant to this section
may be disclosed in statistical or other form which does not disclose the
identity of any individual.
A. Timely correction.
(1) Except as specified in Subsection A(2) of this section, a retail food
establishment license holder shall at the time of inspection correct
a violation of a critical item of N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq. and implement
corrective actions for a HACCP plan provision that is not in
compliance with its critical limit.
(2) Considering the nature of the potential hazard involved and the
complexity of the corrective action needed, the regulatory
authority may agree to or specify a longer time frame, not to
exceed 10 calendar days after the inspection, for the license holder
to correct violations of a critical item or HACCP plan deviations.
B. Verification and documentation of correction.
(1) After observing at the time of inspection a correction of a violation
of a critical item or deviation, the regulatory authority shall enter
the violation and information about the corrective action on the
inspection report.
§ 563-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-18
1:1023
(2) As specified in Subsection A of this section, after receiving
notification that the license holder has corrected a violation of a
critical item or HACCP plan deviation, or at the end of the specified
period of time, the regulatory Authority shall verify correction of
the violation, document the information on an inspection report,
and enter the report in the regulatory authority's records.
C. Time frame for correction. The license holder shall correct noncritical
violations by a date and time agreed to or specified by the regulatory
authority but no later than 90 calendar days after the inspection.
However, the regulatory authority may approve a compliance schedule
that extends beyond the aforesaid time limits if a written schedule of
compliance is submitted by the permit holder and no health hazard
exists or will result from allowing an extended schedule for compliance.
D. Response to notice of hearing or request for hearing; basis and time
frame.
(1) A person who receives a notice of hearing for an administrative
remedy and elects to respond to the notice shall file a response as
specified in Subsection E of this section within seven calendar days
after service.
(2) A license applicant may request a hearing regarding the disposition
of an application for a new or revised license if the regulatory
authority does not issue or denies the license.
(3) A license holder may request a hearing to address concerns about
the regulatory authority's denial of application for a retail food
license or compliance action.
(4) A person desiring a hearing in response to a denial of an
application for a retail food license or an adverse administrative
determination shall submit a hearing request to the regulatory
authority within 10 calendar days of the date of the denial,
inspection, or compliance action.
E. Response to a notice of hearing or request for hearing, required form
and contents. A response to an administrative hearing notice or a
request for a hearing, as specified in Subsection D of this section, shall
be in written form and contain the following:
(1) If a response to a notice of hearing:
(a) An admission or denial of each allegation of fact;
(b) A statement of defense, mitigation, or explanation concerning
any allegation of fact.
(2) If a request for a hearing.
(a) A statement of the issue of fact for which the hearing is
requested; and
§ 563-18 VINELAND CODE § 563-18
1:1024
(b) A statement of defense, mitigation, denial, or explanation
concerning each allegation of fact.
(3) If either a response to a notice of hearing or a request for a
hearing:
(a) A statement indication whether the presence of witnesses for
the regulatory authority is required; and
(b) The name and address of the respondent's or requester's legal
counsel, if any.
F. Provided upon request. The Director of the Department of Health or
Health Officer shall hold hearings according to N.J.S.A. 24:15-11 and
the provisions of this chapter:
(1) As determined necessary by the regulatory authority to accomplish
the purpose and intent of this chapter; and
(2) As requested by a license applicant or a license holder if:
(a) Requested as specified in Subsection E of this section; and
(b) The request demonstrates that there is a genuine and material
issue of fact that justifies that a hearing be held.
G. Embargo. [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
(1) According to time limits imposed by law, the regulatory authority
may place an embargo on a food that:
(a) Originated from an unapproved source;
(b) May not be honestly presented;
(c) Is not labeled according to law, or, if raw molluscan shellfish, is
not tagged or labeled according to law; or
(d) Is otherwise not in compliance with this Code.
(2) Should an embargo notice be issued, said notice shall:
(a) State that food subject to the order may not be used, sold,
moved from the food establishment, or destroyed without a
written release of the order from the regulatory authority;
(b) State the specific reasons for placing the food under embargo
with reference to the applicable provisions of this Code or
other applicable regulation and the hazard or adverse effect
created by the observed condition;
(c) Completely identify the food subject to the embargo by the
common name, the label information, a container description,
the quantity, regulatory authority's tag or identification
information, and location;
§ 563-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 563-18
1:1025
§ 563-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation or member of a partnership or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 and, upon
failure to pay said fine, may be committed to the county jail for a period not
exceeding 10 days. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense, which
penalty shall be sued for and recovered in an action before the City of
Vineland Municipal Court, by either summons or warrant, and shall be
prosecuted in the name of said city.
§ 563-20. Closing by Health Department.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 563-19 and the revocation
provisions of § 563-5, the Department of Health may temporarily close any
retail food establishment, temporary retail food establishment, mobile unit,
etc., if any defendant convicted of violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter twice within a period of six months, for a period of from five days
to 10 days, or until City Council acts upon a permanent revocation under
§ 563-5 hereof, and may cause a notice to be posted on the main entrance of
said restaurant or temporary retail food establishment reading "Closed by
the City of Vineland Department of Health."
§ 563-21. HACCP plans. [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-30]
(d) State that the license holder has the right to an appeal hearing
and may request a hearing by submitting a timely request as
specified in § 563-18;
(e) State that the regulatory authority may order the destruction
of the food if a timely request for an appeal hearing is not
received; and
(f) Provide the name and address of the regulatory authority
representative to whom a request for an appeal hearing may be
made.
(3) If the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to believe that the
embargo will be violated, or finds that the order is violated, the
regulatory authority may remove the food that is subject to the
order to a place of safekeeping.
A. If the regulatory authority approves a HACCP plan as required under
N.J.A.C. 8:24-3.5i or Ordinance No. 148, the license holder shall:
(1) Comply with the approved HACCP plans and procedures that are
submitted as specified under N.J.A.C. 8:24-9.1; and
(2) Maintain and provide to the regulatory authority, upon request,
records specified under N.J.A.C. 8:24-9.1 that demonstrate that the
following are routinely employed:
§ 563-18 VINELAND CODE § 563-21
1:1026
Chapter 568
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising — See Ch. 200.
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 230.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 516.
Transient merchants and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 676.
§ 568-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and words shall have
and shall be construed to have the following meanings:
CITY — The City of Vineland.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Safety of the City of Vineland.
DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LICENSES AND INSPECTIONS —
The Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections of the City of
Vineland.[Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1065]
GOVERNING BODY — The governing body of the City of Vineland.
PERSON — Includes the singular and plural and shall mean and include any
person, firm, partnership or corporation.
(a) Procedures for monitoring the critical control points;
(b) Monitoring of the critical control points;
(c) Verification of the effectiveness of the operation or process;
and
(d) Necessary corrective actions if there is failure at a critical
control point.
B. In a food establishment that serves a highly susceptible population, the
following criteria apply to juice:
(1) For the purposes of this Subsection B only, children who are age
nine or less and receive food in a school, day-care setting, or similar
facility that provides custodial care are included as highly
susceptible populations;
(2) Unpackaged juice that is prepared on the premises for service or
sale in a ready-to-eat form shall be processed under a HACCP plan
that contains the information specified under N.J.A.C. 8:24-9.1 and
as specified in 21 CFR 120, Hazard Analysis and Critical Control
Point (HACCP) Systems, Subpart B Pathogen Reduction, 120.24
Process controls.
§ 563-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 568-1
1:1027
PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT or ADVERTISING — Any and
all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention
to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, newspaper, advertisement,
magazine, handbill, written or printed notice, printed display, billboard,
display poster, radio announcement and any and all other means, oral or
written.
SALE — The sale of or the offer to sell to the public, goods, wares and
merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions, on hand and in stock,
in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising on the
part of the seller, that such sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing,
liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment
of the business in connection with such sale; it shall also include any
sale advertised to be fire sale, smoke sale, adjustment sale, creditor's
sale, alteration sale, executor's sale, insolvent sale, insurance salvage sale,
mortgage sale, assignee's sale, adjuster's sale, receiver's sale, loss-of-lease
sale, wholesaler's closeout sale, removal sale, creditor's committee sale,
forced-out-of-business sale and any and all sales advertised in such manner
as to reasonably convey to the public that, upon the disposal of the stock of
goods on hand, the business will cease to exist and be discontinued.
STOCK — Goods, wares and merchandise of all kinds and description
presently on hand.
§ 568-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to publish, announce or conduct any sale
of the type or kind herein defined without first obtaining a license therefor
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 568-3. Application for license. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No.
1065]
A. Applicants for a license shall, under this chapter, whether a person, firm
or corporation, file a written application with the Director of the
Department of Licenses and Inspections, signed by the applicant if an
individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a
corporation, showing:
(1) The name of the person having management or supervision of the
applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that the sale
will be conducted; the local address of such person while engaged
in the sale; the permanent address of such person; the capacity in
which such person will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or
otherwise); the name and address of the person for whose account
the sale will be carried on, if any; and, if a corporation, its full
corporate name under the laws of which state it is incorporated and
the name and address of its agent upon whom service of legal
process may be had.
(2) A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
§ 568-1 VINELAND CODE § 568-3
1:1028
§ 568-4. Issuance and term of license. [Amended 8-25-1964 by Ord.
No. 487; 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1065]
(3) The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or by sublease, the
commencement date and the effective date of termination of such
occupancy.
(4) A list of the merchandise on order.
(5) The means to be employed in publishing such sale, and all
advertising shall set forth the license number, and all merchandise
shall bear the City stamp. Also, the same shall be posted in the
store continually during the sale.
(6) An itemized inventory and list of the stock to be offered for sale,
together with a statement of the quality and cost or price thereof,
of any merchandise over $1 retail which cannot be stamped, said
stamping process as set forth herein.
(7) Any additional information which may be required or requested by
the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections or the
Director of Public Safety in connection with the application.
B. All prior personal property tax due and owing shall be paid.
C. The content of the application shall be verified under oath by the
applicant.
A. The Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall, upon
written approval of the Director of Public Safety endorsed upon such
application, issue a license for a period not exceeding 30 business days
(the term "business days" meaning the days on which the licensee has
been accustomed to doing business during the period of six months
preceding the issuance of the particular license), which license shall
not be transferable.
B. In addition thereto, the Director of the Department of Licenses and
Inspections is directed to produce rubber stamps, not to exceed 10 in
number, to be loaned to the applicant prior to the date of the sale and to
be returned to the Director of the Department of Licenses and
Inspections before the sale date. The applicant shall apply the stamp on
all goods and merchandise with sale value over $1 retail, in and upon
said merchandise and goods and not on any ticket, tag and the like
which is attached to the goods or merchandise.
C. On any goods or merchandise which cannot be stamped, the applicant
shall so comply with other provisions set forth in this chapter.
D. The size, type and inscription of said stamp shall be at the discretion of
the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections, and it shall
be unlawful for anyone to duplicate said stamp.
§ 568-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 568-5
1:1029
§ 568-5. Renewal of license.
§ 568-6. Rules and regulations.
§ 568-7. Revocation and suspension of license.
A. Upon satisfactory proof by the licensee that the stock, stamped as set
forth herein, in the original application has not been disposed of, said
license may be renewed for an additional ten-day period.
B. The application for renewal shall be made on a form furnished by the
Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections and shall
contain an itemized list of stock remaining on hand to be offered for
sale. This subsection shall pertain to jewelry and other merchandise
which cannot be stamped. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1065]
C. The content of the application for renewal shall be verified under oath
by the applicant.
D. The Director of Public Safety shall cause the application for renewal to
be examined and investigated, and, upon being satisfied as to the truth
of the statements therein contained, he may authorize the issuance of a
renewal license for a period not exceeding 10 days; provided, however,
that no further renewal may be granted for any such sale for the same
location within one year from the issuance of the original license.
A. The Director of Public Safety may make such rules and regulations for
the conduct and advertisement of such sales as may be necessary to
prevent deception and to protect the public interest and welfare.
B. The Director of Public Safety may, in his discretion, verify the details
contained in an application for a license or for a renewal thereof or
cause a check and verification to be made of the items of stock sold
during the sale, and it shall be unlawful for any person to whom a
license has been issued to fail or refuse to furnish the Director of Public
Safety or his designated representative with information concerning
goods sold, goods on hand or any other information that may be
required in order to make a complete investigation of all applications
for licenses and renewals thereof.
A. A license or renewal thereof issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the Director, after notice and hearing, for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application.
(2) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement as to the inventory,
stock sold or stock on hand.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
§ 568-5 VINELAND CODE § 568-7
1:1030
§ 568-8. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director with respect to the
denial of an application for a license or in connection with the revocation or
suspension of a license shall have the right to appeal to the governing body.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written statement of the grounds for
appeal with the governing body within 10 days after notice of the decision of
the Director has been duly mailed to the person's last known address. The
governing body shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal,
and notice of such hearing shall be given to such person in the same manner
as provided in § 568-7B of this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation.
The decision of the governing body on such appeal shall be final.
§ 568-9. Stock records and stock.
(4) Conviction of the license of any felony or misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and
place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing.
C. A license may be suspended for not more than five days by the Director
upon probable cause being shown that the license should be revoked.
D. The Director shall hold such hearings and make such investigation as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions and intent of this chapter.
A. A duplicate original of the application and stock list by virtue of which a
license is granted shall be made available by the licensee to the
Director or his designated representative to inspect and examine all
stock on the premises for comparison with the stock left.
B. Suitable books and records shall be kept by the licensee at the place of
sale and shall be made available for inspection by the Director or his
authorized representative where the goods and merchandise are
unstamped.
C. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale at any such sale
unstamped stock or to list on the inventory required by § 568-3 any
stock which is not the stock of the store or other place, the business of
which is to be closed out by such sale for which a license has been
granted, to replenish or add to such stock for the purpose of disposal at
such sale or to fail, neglect or refuse to keep accurate and true records
of the initial stock, stock sold and stock on hand.
§ 568-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 568-9
1:1031
§ 568-10. Fees. [Amended 8-28-1964 by Ord. No. 487; 1-11-1977 by
Ord. No. 1065]
Upon filing an application for an original license, as provided herein, the
applicant shall pay to the Director of the Department of Licenses and
Inspections a fee of $50. Upon filing an application for a renewal of such
license for a period of 10 days, as provided herein, the applicant shall pay to
the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections a fee of $25. If
any such application shall be disapproved, such payment shall be forfeited
to the City to defray the costs of investigating the application.
§ 568-11. Display of license.
Upon commencement of any such sale, the license issued therefor shall be
conspicuously displayed near the entrance to the premises where such sale
is conducted.
§ 568-12. Advertising.
All advertising shall specify the dates of the sale, license number and that
all merchandise shall bear a City of Vineland stamp as to all merchandise
of over $1 retail value. If goods or merchandise cannot be stamped, the
advertisement shall so specify.
§ 568-13. Exemptions.
The following persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
§ 568-14. Violations and penalties.257
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
General Penalty.
§ 568-15. Goods on order.
D. The licensee of a going-out-of-business sale shall not continue the
business beyond the date specified for such sale and shall not, upon
conclusion of such sale, continue the business under the same or any
other name in the same location or elsewhere in the City of Vineland for
a period of 30 days.
A. Persons acting pursuant to an order of the process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Sheriff's marshals and constables acting in accordance with their
powers and duties as public officers.
C. Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction.
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 568-9 VINELAND CODE § 568-15
1:1032
Chapter 574
SECONDHAND GOODS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Deceptive advertising — See Ch. 200.
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 230.
Firearms — See Ch. 358.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 516.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 676.
Purpose and intent: The purpose and intent of this chapter to assist law
enforcement officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious
materials, gems, gemstones and/or other articles by requiring minimum
reporting, maintenance and distribution criteria for secondhand dealers.
This section is to take effect on January 1, 2014. This chapter shall also
pertain to and include scrap yards or scrap metal businesses and shall
not lessen the mandatory requirements under New Jersey laws but shall
establish additional requirements for the operation of scrap yards and scrap
metal business in the City of Vineland to operate. This section shall take
effect immediately upon adoption. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-21]
§ 574-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — In reference to this chapter, "Chief of Police" will be
understood as the Chief of Police or his designee.
INDIVIDUAL, FIRM or CORPORATION — Any individual, partnership,
association, corporation or legal entity of any kind.
LICENSED COIN DEALERS — A person, firm or corporation primarily
engaged in the sale and transfer of coins or precious metals who is a
member of a numismatic association representative of professional coin
dealers on a national basis, including but not limited to the American
Numismatic Association, the Professional Numismatic Guild, Coin and
Bullion Dealers Accrediting Commission or the Industry Council for
Tangible Assets.
PLACE OF BUSINESS — Address specified on the dealer's license.
A. This section applies to merchandise which is on order prior to the sale
date but has not been received.
B. Upon receiving said merchandise, the applicant shall notify the
Director, who shall supervise the stamping of said merchandise.
C. Said goods and merchandise received shall be compared with the list as
set forth in § 568-3D.
§ 568-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 574-1
1:1033
PRECIOUS METALS — As defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-5, gold, silver, platinum,
palladium and alloys thereof.
SECONDHAND DEALERS — Any person, firm or corporation, coin dealer,
scrap yard, or other entity, whether permanent or itinerant, that buys
or sells or otherwise exchanges or trades in any secondhand goods
whatsoever, said dealers to be designated in the following classes, as set
forth below:
CLASS A DEALER — A person, firm or corporation engaged in
business practices of buying, selling, trading, exchanging or dealing
in secondhand property of any description, or as a result of having
received that secondhand goods in trade, or by repossession or as
part payment for new merchandise. This license excludes motor
vehicles.
A. Exemptions for Class A license:
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to licensed
coin dealers who deal strictly in their respective specialty.
Any of the aforesaid dealers who deal in any secondhand
items which are not their specialty are required to obtain
a license pursuant to this chapter and to abide by the
same.
(2) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to flea
market vendors except cash-for-gold merchants. The
provisions of this chapter also shall not apply to any
pawnbroker as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1. However, any
pawnbroker who deals in any secondhand items not for
the purpose of pawning or making loans thereon is
required to obtain a license, pursuant to this chapter, and
to abide by the same.
CLASS B DEALER — A charitable organization, as defined in Chapter
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and 1986, as
amended, which has donated to it, or receives on consignment,
secondhand personal property, other than motor vehicles, for the
purpose of resale.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Any article previously sold, acquired, exchanged,
conveyed, traded or otherwise formerly owned, including but not limited
to scrap metal, scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home electronics/audio
and visual equipment, telephones and mobile devices/equipment, scales,
computers, computer hardware and software, video game consoles and
games, coins, electronic tablets, cameras, scanners, sporting goods of all
kinds, household goods, antiques, platinum, all other precious and
nonprecious metals, tools of all kinds, television, DVRs, GPS, camcorders,
car stereos, gift cards, furniture, clothing or other valuable
articles.[Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-21]
§ 574-1 VINELAND CODE § 574-2
1:1034
§ 574-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of being a secondhand dealer as defined in this chapter without
first obtaining a license therefor from the City of Vineland Police
Department, as hereinafter provided. A separate license shall be required
for each location, place or premises used for the conduct of the business of
being a secondhand dealer. Each location, place or premises shall be limited
to a single secondhand license.
§ 574-3. License fee; expiration.
§ 574-4. Contents of license.
The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall state the name of the
person to whom issued, the place of business and the street number where
such business is located. Such license shall entitle the person receiving
it to conduct business at the location designated in the license and such
business shall not be carried on or conducted in any other location than that
designated in or by the license. No secondhand dealer shall be permitted
to solicit upon any street or public highway of the City of Vineland for the
purpose of secondhand good purchases, and no person, firm or corporation
shall conduct a house-to-house canvass for the purchase or sale of
secondhand or used watches, jewelry, precious stones, gold, silver,
platinum, wrought gold or any other precious metals and/or semiprecious
stones within the City.
§ 574-5. Requirements for Class A license applicants.
A. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall, on application, issue an
appropriate license to any secondhand dealer who complies with the
application and licensing requirements set forth in this chapter or
subsequent to any investigations deemed necessary by said Chief of
Police or his/her designee. All applicants shall pay to the City of
Vineland a nonrefundable application fee as follows:
(1) Class A: $750.
(2) Class B: $50.
B. All secondhand dealer licenses shall expire on December 31 of each
year.
A. Each applicant for a secondhand dealer's license and his employees
shall have their fingerprints taken in a manner prescribed by the
Vineland Police Department. Fingerprints so furnished shall become a
part of the application. In the event of a partnership or association, all
partners or members and, in the event of a corporation, all officers shall
be required to have their fingerprints taken by the Vineland Police
Department. Fingerprints so taken shall be submitted to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and to such further authorities as the Chief of
§ 574-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 574-5
1:1035
§ 574-6. Regulations, guidelines, and restrictions for Class A
dealers.
Every dealer within the City of Vineland shall, upon the purchase of any
precious metals, or secondhand goods from the public, be required to do as
follows:
Police may deem advisable for comparison and record. Employees of
businesses that primarily deal in new merchandise will only be required
to submit fingerprints if they will be participating in transactions of
secondhand goods. Exclusions to this chapter, if granted, shall be by the
Chief of Police or his designee on a case-by-case determination.
B. Proof the Class A applicant has obtained computer equipment, access
to any and all web-based applications, and software required in
§ 574-6B of this chapter, for purposes of reporting all transaction data
in electronic format to the Vineland Police Department. The applicant
shall agree to all user terms, conditions, rules, and additional service or
transaction fees of the Vineland Police Department and their syndicated
partners. All applicants will be made aware of any and all additional
fees prior to the approval of a license. Fees and services shall not
increase during the course of a license, unless the possibility of an
increase or increases is specified prior to the approval of a license.
C. Police-Department-approved secured storage for all secondhand goods.
A. Record on a numbered receipt the name of the purchaser; the name,
address, date of birth and valid telephone number of the seller or
sellers; the time and date of the transaction; the net weight in terms of
pounds Troy, pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams of the precious
metals; fineness in terms of karats for gold, and sterling or coin for
silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq., and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et
seq. This information is to be documented through use of an electronic
database software system as designated by the Chief of Police. These
records shall be subject to the inspection of any authorized police
officer.
B. Through the use of applicably required computer equipment, camera,
software, internet capabilities and using the electronic format approved
by the Chief of Police, enter all transaction into the electronic database
within 24 hours from the date of purchase. The information entered will
contain the information in § 574-6A above, plus the following:
(1) A physical description of the seller.
(2) The receipt number.
(3) A full description of the item or items purchased, including but not
limited to, marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials, values of
gift cards, monograms and serial/model numbers.
(4) The price paid for the item.
§ 574-5 VINELAND CODE § 574-6
1:1036
(5) The form must be signed by the buyer making the transaction and
seller.
(6) A color photograph or color image of the seller's presented
identification. ("Acceptable identification" shall mean acceptable
forms of identification which include: a current valid New Jersey
driver's license or photo identification card, a current valid photo
driver's license issued by another United States state, a valid
United States passport, or other verifiable US government-issued
identification with a photo.)
(7) An onsite facial photograph taken within a five foot range of the
seller, during the time of the purchase.
(8) A color photograph or color image of all items sold. When
photographing or imaging all items must be positioned in a manner
that makes them readily and easily identifiable.
(9) Items should not be grouped together when photographing or
imaging; each item will have its own color photograph or color
image.
C. In the event a database failure or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 48 hours. All photo
and image requirements must also be submitted and there will be no
transactions made without required photo/image documentation; there
will be no exception to these requirements. In the event that paper
forms are used, the dealer is responsible to enter all transaction
information into the database as soon as possible but no later than 24
hours upon the dealer's equipment being repaired or replaced, or the
database coming back into service. Failure by the dealer to properly
maintain computer equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the
dealer in replace faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer
being cited for a violation of this chapter each business day and
subsequently be subject to penalties for doing so.
D. Inspection/retention/seizure/detention of precious metals, secondhand
goods, and records. Property held pursuant to this section shall be kept
in the dealer's place of business and shall be kept separate and distinct
from all other property or merchandise in the dealer's place of business.
Length of time requirements, in this section and beyond, regarding all
inspection/retention/seizure detention of precious metals, secondhand
goods, and records, will not begin until a valid record of the transaction
is submitted to the police department. No secondhand dealer shall
make use of any property, private or public, not included within the
licensed premises for the storage, handling or displaying of any
secondhand article. All goods are to be kept without concealment for 15
business days.
(1) Every secondhand dealer, other than scrap yards, must keep on the
premises, for a period of 15 business days, subject to inspection by
§ 574-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 574-6
1:1037
any police officer, all secondhand goods, wares and merchandise
purchased or received in trade or repossession, unless the Chief
of Police or his designee gives written approval for such selling
prior to the 15 days. The precious metals shall remain in the same
condition as when purchased and shall not be changed, modified,
melted or disposed of by the purchaser until the fifteen-day period
has expired. Precious metals must be stored in the approved
storage area. (See § 574-5C.)
(2) It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in
the dealer's employ, in admit to the premises during business hours
any member of the Vineland Police Department to examine any
database, book, ledger, scales, inspection records, or any other
record on the premises relating to the purchase of precious metals
and secondhand goods from the public, as well as the articles
purchased or received, and to take possession of any article known
by the police officer or official to be missing or to have been stolen,
or where the officer or official has probable cause to believe the
article is missing or stolen. This access is to be granted upon
immediate request of the law enforcement officers. During all
hours of business, there will be an employee on site who has access
to all secondhand items whether secured or unsecured.
(3) Each Class A license dealer shall keep at his or her place of
business a record of each transaction involving used personal
property, recorded on a form approved by the Vineland Police
Department, setting forth the following:
(a) An accurate and complete description of the goods, articles or
things received in trade or part payment for other
merchandise.
(b) The date of receipt and transaction number.
(c) The name, sex, race, valid telephone number, and address of
the person from whom acquired.
(d) The name and address of the person, corporation or firm which
ultimately purchases or receives the property from the dealer.
(e) All records shall be maintained by the dealer at the dealer's
place of business for a period of not less than five years after
the date the property is sold or disposed of in any manner.
(4) It shall be a violation for any licensed secondhand dealer or any
agent, clerk or employee of any such dealer to molest, hinder or in
any manner prevent any official lawfully authorized or any member
of the Police Department from making an inspection of the
premises and taking into possession any articles known or believed
to have been unlawfully taken from the rightful owner or possessor
of said article or articles.
§ 574-6 VINELAND CODE § 574-6
1:1038
E. Prohibitions as to melted or altered goods; purchases for minors; hours
of operation.
(1) No dealer in secondhand goods shall purchase any piece or mass of
melted precious metal, ingot of amateur manufacture or any article
with serial number or jeweler's marks intentionally obliterated
unless payment for the article is withheld for a period of 24 hours
and the Chief of Police is notified.
(2) Purchases from minors. No dealer in secondhand goods shall
purchase or receive any article of secondhand personal property
from a minor unless the minor's parent or legal guardian is
physically present during the transaction and presents the
identification required by this chapter.
(3) Melting, wrecking and remodeling. No secondhand dealer shall
take apart or melt down any jewelry, watch, watch case or article
composed or manufactured, in all or in part, of gold, silver or
platinum until he shall have made a record of this intention to do
so, along with all other data recorded on the prescribed form, and
shall have reported the same to the Chief of Police in the same
manner as reports of purchase. The articles proposed to be taken
apart, melted down, wrecked or remodeled must be kept for a
period of 15 business days before such action is taken, unless the
articles have been inspected by the Chief of Police or his designee
and written permission has been given for such melting, wrecking
or remodeling prior to completion of the aforesaid period.258
F. Procedure for seizures.
(1) Upon taking possession of an article or articles, the authorized
official or police officer shall furnish the dealer with a physical or
digital receipt, which shall include the date, name of the officer
taking the article, his rank and a description of the article or
articles taken. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-21]
(2) Any article taken by an authorized official or police officer from a
dealer shall, as soon as possible, be delivered to the ID Section of
the Vineland Police Department, where it shall remain until such
time as ownership or the right to possession, or both, has been
determined according to law.
(3) In lieu of taking possession of secondhand goods pursuant to this
chapter, a member of the Vineland Police Department may place a
temporary detainer on the property for a period not to exceed 60
days.
258. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(4), regarding permitted hours for secondhand
transactions, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-8-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-27.
§ 574-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 574-6
1:1039
§ 574-7. (Reserved)
§ 574-8. (Reserved)
§ 574-9. Denial, suspension and revocation of license.
(4) During the period of detention, the property shall remain in the
custody of the dealer and shall be prohibited from selling, disposing
of in any manner or changing the identity of the property. The
police also have the authority to detain an item(s) by taking
possession for a period not to exceed 60 days. A sixty-day detention
is not relevant to items believed to be stolen.
(5) If the property is left in the custody of the dealer, he shall keep the
detained property separate and distinct from all other property in
the dealer's place of business where the transaction was made.
(6) It is the responsibility of the dealer, for items taken by the police for
the purpose of detention only, to contact the Police Department
once the sixty-day detention date approaches.
G. Class A Dealer payment.
(1) Dealer payments to the sellers in cash/coin shall be limited to two
transactions during a seven-day period for the same seller. The
seven-day period will commence on the day of the first transaction
and end seven days after the transaction, i.e., if transaction number
one occurs on Monday, the seven-day period ends on Sunday.
Furthermore, no cash payments shall be made to the same sellers
who make more than five transactions in any given thirty-day
period. Sellers making transactions over the number of prescribed
weekly and monthly periods will be paid by the dealer by means of
a bank check drawn from the dealer's business account.
(2) Exemptions far payment methods will be when the item is used as
store credit. This credit will be documented on a transaction
receipt and be stored in the same manner as all records referenced
in this chapter; also for scraps yards where the customer is a
certified business in the state of New Jersey.
A. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may deny, suspend or revoke any
secondhand dealer's license pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-2 for sufficient
cause, after notice and hearing sufficient cause to include but not be
limited to: [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-21]
(1) Violation of any provisions of the within chapter or other
ordinances of the City of Vineland by the dealer or an employee.
(2) Advertising of any kind by a dealer to purchase secondhand goods
without being licensed pursuant to the within chapter.
§ 574-6 VINELAND CODE § 574-9
1:1040
§ 574-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Vineland, be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General
Penalties.
Chapter 579
SECURITY GATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Licenses and
Inspections — See Ch. 92.
Fire prevention access — See Ch. 372.
Land use and redevelopment — See Ch. 425.
§ 579-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AESTHETIC SECURITY GATE — Any gate, movable tracked doors, screens
or fencing that roll up, fold or slide over the interior or exterior of the
(3) Failure of any person to state fully on his or her application for a
license an official place of business within the City of Vineland or
any material false representation.
(4) Dealer and/or employee who has been convicted of an offense or
crime in connection with Chapter 15, Robbery; Chapter 17, Arson,
Criminal Mischief and Other Property Destruction; Chapter 18,
Burglary and Other Criminal Intrusion; Chapter 20, Theft and
Related Offenses; and Chapter 21, Forgery and Fraudulent
Practices, of Title 2C, the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice or
conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense involving
moral turpitude.
(5) Utilization of the business for the disposal of stolen goods. A
business is to be held highly liable if they violated any provision of
this ordinance in the purchase of stolen goods, whether they knew
the items to be stolen or not at the time of purchase. A business
that knowingly purchases a stolen item, or an item they believe was
stolen, is also in violation of this section.
(6) Conduction of the business in such way as to make it a menace to
the health and welfare of the residents of the City of Vineland.
B. The secondhand dealer shall be liable and responsible for any of the
acts or omissions of the licensee's agents, clerks or employees.
§ 574-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-1
1:1041
storefront or commercial building which less than 25% of said gate,
movable tracked doors, screens or fencing is a solid material.
INDUSTRIAL ZONE — That meaning as defined in Chapter 425 of the Code
of the City of Vineland.
KNOX-BOX — A secured locking box of size and dimensions as specified
by the Department of License and Inspection in which shall be located all
keys necessary to unlock security gates. A master key to the Knox-Box shall
be made available to the Chief of the Fire Department, Chief of Police and
Chief of Emergency Management. The master key shall provide access to
all Knox-Boxes in the City.
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — A walkway or alleyway designed and utilized for
pedestrian traffic as a means of ingress and egress to the street or sidewalk
in the redevelopment area.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — That portion of the City of Vineland which
has been designated as an area in need of rehabilitation pursuant to the
Redevelopment Plan adopted by Ord. No. 2004-25.
SOLID SECURITY GATES — Any gate, movable tracked doors, screening or
fencing that roll up, fold or slide over the interior or exterior of a storefront
or commercial building which more than 25% of said gate, movable tracked
doors, screening or fencing is of a solid material. A "solid security gate"
shall also mean any gate, movable tracked door, screening or fencing which
has, as any part thereof, solid panels as part of the same.
§ 579-2. General provisions.
A. Redevelopment area.
(1) Aesthetic security gates and solid security gates which are
mounted on the exterior of storefronts on the street side or
pedestrian walkway side of any building, retail, commercial or
otherwise, in the redevelopment area are prohibited. Existing
security gates shall be removed within one year after the effective
date of this chapter.
(2) Aesthetic security gates as defined herein are permitted in the
redevelopment area, provided said aesthetic security gate is
mounted in/on the interior of the building. Solid security gates are
prohibited.
(3) Any building which has installed therein or thereon any type of
security gate shall have affixed on the front exterior wall a Knox-
Box. The Knox-Box shall be mounted in a manner and location as
specified by the Department of Licenses and Inspections.
B. Area other than the redevelopment area.
(1) Solid security gates are prohibited.
§ 579-1 VINELAND CODE § 579-2
1:1042
§ 579-3. Exceptions.
§ 579-4. License.
No security gate of any kind shall be built, erected, mounted or otherwise
placed upon, in, around or about any property in the City of Vineland
without first obtaining a permit for the same through the Department of
Licenses and Inspections.
§ 579-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Department of
Licenses and Inspections.
§ 579-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or legal entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to the general penalty provision of the Code of the City of
Vineland.259
(2) Aesthetic security gates are permitted either on the exterior or
interior of any building outside the redevelopment area.
(3) Any building which has installed therein or thereon any type of
security gate shall have affixed on the front exterior wall a Knox-
Box. The Knox-Box shall be mounted in a manner and location as
specified by the Department of Licenses and Inspections.
A. Aesthetic security gates or solid security gates are permitted in the
redevelopment area and areas other than the redevelopment area to
secure motor vehicle entrance to a building,
B. Aesthetic security gates or solid security gates are permitted on
storefronts or businesses located within the confines of indoor malls
where such gates are not visible from a public street, sidewalk or
parking lot.
C. Security gates other than aesthetic security gates located in areas other
than the redevelopment area which were installed prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall be permitted; provided, however, should any
preexisting solid security gate need to be replaced, it shall be replaced
with an aesthetic security gate and shall comply with this chapter.
259. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 579-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 579-6
1:1043
Chapter 585
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Health — See Ch. 62.
Landis Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 80.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 300.
Drainage system — See Ch. 320.
Water and sewage disposal system fees — See
Ch. 350, Art. II.
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
Water — See Ch. 710.
§ 579-6 VINELAND CODE § 579-6
1:1044
ARTICLE I
Cesspools
[Adopted by the Board of Health 4-7-1953 by Ord. No. 9 (Ch. 392,
Art. I, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 585-1. License required.260
All persons engaged in the business of cleaning cesspools shall first apply
to the Department of Health for a license to engage in such business.
§ 585-2. Application; fee. [Amended 11-27-1990 by Ord. No. 90-105]
The application for such license shall be accompanied by a fee of $50, and
such licenses shall be renewed annually and the sum of $50 paid for each
renewal.
§ 585-3. Equipment requirements.
No license shall be granted for the cleaning of cesspools unless the
applicant is properly equipped with a tank and other necessary
paraphernalia.
§ 585-4. Replacement of lid.
After the cleaning of any cesspool, the lid shall be properly replaced.
§ 585-5. Installation of new covers.261
In case the cover is gone or broken, the cleaner shall immediately notify the
Director of the Health Department, who shall immediately cause the owner
to install a new cover at least three inches in thickness, according to the
provisions of the current Plumbing Code of the City of Vineland.
§ 585-6. Monthly reports. [Added 9-25-1973 by Ord. No. 904]
All licensed cesspool cleaners shall submit monthly reports to the
Department of Health on forms provided by the Department. Said reports
shall contain such information as the Director of the Department of Health
deems necessary for the proper regulation of cesspool cleaning in the City,
including but not limited to the names of the property owners serviced, the
locations where effluent was pumped out and the locations where effluent
was deposited. Said monthly reports shall be submitted on or before the
10th day of the month for all activities for the immediately preceding month.
260. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
261. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 585-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 585-7
1:1045
§ 585-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-1986 by Ord. No.
86-26; 8-28-1990 by Ord. No. 90-79262]
Any person engaging in the business of cleaning cesspools without having
obtained such license or who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
262. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 585-7 VINELAND CODE § 585-7
1:1046
ARTICLE II
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 11-22-1960 by Ord. No. 67 (Ch. 392, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 585-8. Connections required.
All buildings of any type or nature which by their use and occupancy
shall for reasons of health and sanitation require sewerage facilities, now
located or hereafter constructed upon property fronting or abutting on any
street, highway or lane where sewers of the City of Vineland and of the
Landis Sewerage Authority have been or may be constructed, in the City of
Vineland, shall be required to be connected with the sewer mains.
§ 585-9. Supervision of connections.263
Said sewer connections shall be made in the manner required by and under
the general supervision of the Engineer or other official in charge of such
sewerage system, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Water-
Sewer Utility of the City of Vineland and/or the Landis Sewerage Authority.
§ 585-10. Neglect of notice of compliance.
If after the passage of this article the owners of any properties affected
hereby shall neglect, after notice given as hereinafter provided, to make any
such sewer connection, the governing body may cause such connection to
be made under the direction and supervision of the proper officers of the
City and/or the Landis Sewerage Authority.
§ 585-11. Notice of contemplated connection.
Before proceeding to make such connection, notice of such contemplated
connection shall be given to the owner of any properties affected thereby.
Said notice shall contain a description of the property affected, sufficiently
definite in terms to identify it, as well as a description of the required
connection and notice that, unless the connection shall be completed within
30 days after the service thereof, the governing body of the City will
proceed to make such connection or cause the same to be done pursuant to
the authority of the statute in such case made and provided.
§ 585-12. Service of notice.
Such notice shall be served in the manner provided by Chapter 63 of Title
40 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 585-13. Cost of connection; payment.
When any such sewer connection shall be made by and under the direction
of the governing body and/or the Landis Sewerage Authority, a true and
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 585-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 585-13
1:1047
accurate account of the cost and expense shall be kept and apportioned to
the property or properties thereby connected with the sewer, and a true
statement of such costs shall be filed with the Clerk of the City, who shall
make a record thereof in the same book and manner as other assessments.
After such sewer connection, it shall bear interest and penalties from the
same time and at the same rate as assessments for local improvements
in the municipality are made, and from the time of confirmation shall be
a first and paramount lien against the respective property or properties
so connected with the sewer to the same extent as assessments for local
improvements, and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner.
Every officer charged with the enforcement and collection of assessments
for local improvements is hereby charged with the same duties in regard
to the collection and enforcement of all charges for sewer connections
made by virtue of the provisions of this article. The governing body may
provide for the payment of the same in installments in the same manner as
assessments for local improvements are payable.
§ 585-13 VINELAND CODE § 585-13
1:1048
ARTICLE III
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-26 (Ch. 392, Art. III, of the
1990 Code)]
§ 585-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Vineland,
unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than
the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit No.
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Vineland or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
§ 585-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 585-14
1:1049
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 585-15. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
City of Vineland any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 585-16. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department
and/or the Division of Code Enforcement of the City of Vineland.
§ 585-17. Violations and penalties.264
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
264. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 585-14 VINELAND CODE § 585-17
1:1050
ARTICLE IV
Prohibited Disposal of Materials to Storm Sewer System
[Adopted 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-27 (Ch. 392, Art. IV, of the
1990 Code)]
§ 585-18. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Vineland or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 585-19. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Vineland
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 585-20. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
§ 585-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 585-20
1:1051
§ 585-21. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department
and/or Division of Code Enforcement of the City of Vineland.
§ 585-22. Violations and penalties.265
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes.
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
265. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 585-20 VINELAND CODE § 585-22
1:1052
Chapter 593
SEXUALLY CONTAGIOUS DISEASES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Department — See Ch. 62.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Nuisances — See Ch. 473.
§ 593-1. Findings.
The City Council of the City of Vineland finds as follows: That, within the
City of Vineland, commercial premises, buildings and structures or parts
thereof which, by reason of the design and use of such premises, buildings
or structures, are conducive to the spread of communicable disease are of
danger to persons frequenting such premises, buildings and structures, and
to the public health, safety and welfare of the community. The health, safety
and welfare of all persons in the City of Vineland must be protected through
the application and enforcement of standards regulating such premises,
buildings and structures in order to eliminate the possibility of the spread
of or infection by contagious disease. The sexually transmittable disease of
acquired immune deficiency syndrome, currently found to be irreversible
and uniformly fatal, is found to be of particular danger to persons in this
community. This incidence of this disease is found to occur in discernible
population groups. The risk factors for obtaining or spreading the disease
are associated with high-risk sexual conduct. The commercial premises,
buildings and structures where persons are found at risk of infection from
this disease or other communicable diseases facilitated by their design
or use for high-risk sexual conduct are in need of regulation and of
establishment of minimal standards for the prevention of the spread of this
disease and other communicable diseases for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the community.
§ 593-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
BOOTHS, STALLS OR PARTITIONED PORTIONS OF A ROOM OR
INDIVIDUAL ROOMS — Enclosures specifically offered to persons for a
fee or as an incident to performing high-risk sexual conduct or enclosures
which are part of a business operated on the premises which offers movies
or other entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure, including
enclosures wherein movies or other entertainment is dispensed for a fee.
The phrase "booth, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual
rooms" does not mean enclosures which are private offices used by the
owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for attending to
the tasks of their employment, and which are not held out to the public or
§ 585-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 593-2
1:1053
members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of
viewing movies or other entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any
persons other than employees.
DOORS, CURTAINS or PORTAL PARTITIONS — Full, complete,
nontransparent closure devices through which one cannot see or view
activity taking place within the enclosure.
HAZARDOUS SITE — Any commercial premises, building or structure, or
any part thereof, which is the site of high-risk sexual conduct.
HEALTH OFFICER — The executive officer of the Department of Health of
the City of Vineland, or his authorized representative, licensed by the State
of New Jersey.
HIGH-RISK SEXUAL CONDUCT —
§ 593-3. Building standards.
A. Fellatio.
B. Anal intercourse.
C. Vaginal intercourse.
A. No commercial building, structure, premises or part thereof, or
facilities therein, shall be so constructed, used, designed or operated
for the purpose of engaging in or permitting persons to engage in
sexual activities which include high-risk sexual conduct.
B. No person shall own, operate, manage, rent, lease or exercise control of
any commercial building, structure, premises or portion or part thereof
which contains:
(1) Partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a
building, structure or premises having an aperture which is
designed or constructed to facilitate sexual activity between
persons on either side of the partition.
(2) Booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms
used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of
entertainment having doors, curtains or portal partitions, unless
such booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room or individual
rooms so used shall have at least one side open to an adjacent
public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the
adjacent public room. Such areas shall be lighted in a manner that
the persons in the area used for viewing motion pictures or other
forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms,
but such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the
viewing of the motion pictures or other offered entertainment.
C. The standards as set forth in this section shall not apply to buildings,
structures and premises which are lawfully operating as hotels, motels,
apartment complexes, condominiums or rooming houses.
§ 593-2 VINELAND CODE § 593-4
1:1054
§ 593-4. Powers of Department of Health.
§ 593-5. Violations and penalties.266
Any person, corporation or member of a partnership or corporation
violating any provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General
Penalty. Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed and
taken to be a separate and distinct offense, which penalty shall be sued
for and recovered in an action before the Municipal Court of the City of
Vineland by either summons or warrant and shall be prosecuted in the name
of said City. Anyone convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter
shall also be subject to the penalties set forth in § 593-6 of this chapter.
§ 593-6. Closing by Health Department.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 593-5 of this chapter, the
Department of Health may temporarily close the hazardous site of any
A. In exercising powers conferred by this chapter relating to sexually
contagious diseases, the Department of Health and the Director of the
Department of Health shall be guided by the most recent instructions,
opinions and guidelines of the Center for Disease Control of the United
States Department of Health and Human Services which relate to the
spread of infectious diseases.
B. In order to ascertain the source of infection and reduce its spread, the
Director of the Department of Health and officers and employees under
the Director's direction and control shall have full authority to inspect
or cause to be inspected and to issue orders regarding any commercial
building, structure or premises, or any part thereof, which may be a site
of high-risk sexual conduct. If the Director of the Department of Health
determines that a hazardous site exists, the Director of the Department
of Health shall declare it to be a public health hazard and public health
nuisance and shall then:
(1) Issue a warning to the management, owner or tenant of the
premises stating the reasons for the Director's belief that the
premises, building or structure is a hazardous site and shall order
the management, owner or tenant of the premises constituting the
hazardous site to take corrective measures to prevent high-risk
sexual conduct from taking place within the premises;
(2) If, within 10 days from issuance of the orders to the management,
owner or tenant of the hazardous site, the Director determines that
such corrective measures have not been undertaken, then the
Director of the Department of Health, or his designee, shall issue a
summons alleging violations of the provisions of this chapter
returnable in the Municipal Court of the City of Vineland.
266. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 593-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 593-6
1:1055
defendant convicted of any provisions of this chapter twice within a period
of six months until the premises, building or structure is in compliance
with the standards set forth in this chapter and may cause a notice to
be posted on the main entrance of such premises, building or structure,
reading "CLOSED BY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH."
Chapter 597
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 597-1. Removal from premises.
No person shall remove a grocery or shopping cart from the premises of any
store, shop, market or supermarket.
§ 597-2. Notice of provisions.
The owner or person in charge of any store, shop, market or supermarket
supplying carts for the on-premises convenience of shoppers shall cause to
be prominently displayed at all exits therefrom a notice of the provisions
of this chapter relating to prohibition against removal of carts from the
premises and penalties for violation thereof.
§ 597-3. Violations and penalties.267
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 597-4. Abandoned carts without identification.
The City may impound a shopping cart that has been abandoned and does
not have a sign or notice identifying the owner of the cart, or the retailer
who has written consent from the owner to use the cart, and listing a
valid telephone number or address through which the owner or retailer
can be contacted. Any such shopping cart may be retrieved by the owner
or retailer within five business days of impoundment upon a payment not
to exceed $50 for each occurrence. An occurrence includes all shopping
carts impounded in accordance with this section during a twenty-four-hour
period. After such five business days, the City may sell or otherwise dispose
of such shopping cart.
§ 597-5. Abandoned carts with identification.
A. The City may impound a shopping cart that has a sign or notice
identifying the owner of the cart, or the retailer who has written
consent from the owner to use the cart, and listing a valid telephone
267. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 593-6 VINELAND CODE § 597-5
1:1056
§ 597-6. Disposition of fines and charges.
All fines imposed and charges collected under and by virtue of this chapter
shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Vineland.
number or address through which the owner or retailer can be
contacted, if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The shopping cart is located outside the premises or parking area
of a retail mercantile establishment.
(2) The City notifies the owner or retailer of the location of the cart and
allows three business days from the date of such notification for the
owner, retailer, or an authorized agent to retrieve the shopping
cart, unless the immediate removal is necessary to prevent a
danger to public safety.
(3) The City notifies the owner or retailer upon impoundment of a
shopping cart, and includes information as to how the cart may be
retrieved.
(4) The location that an impounded shopping cart is held is reasonably
convenient to the owner, retailer, or authorized agent, and is open
for business at least six hours of each business day.
(5) Any fine imposed upon the owner or retailer for an impounded
shopping cart does not exceed $50 for each occurrence for failure
to retrieve shopping carts. An occurrence includes all shopping
carts impounded in accordance with this section during a twentyfour-
hour period.
(6) The owner or retailer is allowed a minimum of five business days
following receipt of notice that a shopping cart has been
impounded to retrieve the cart before it may sell or otherwise
dispose of the cart.
B. The City may impound a shopping cart that has a sign or notice
identifying the owner of the cart, or the retailer who has written
consent from the owner to use the cart, and lists a valid telephone
number or address through which the owner or retailer can be
contacted, without meeting the conditions required by Subsection A(1)
through (5) of this section if the City:
(1) Notifies the owner or retailer within 24 hours of impounding the
shopping cart, and includes information on how the cart may be
retrieved;
(2) Releases the cart to the owner, retailer or authorized agent without
any charge or fine whatsoever, if the owner, retailer, or authorized
agent attempts to retrieve the cart within five business days of
notice.
§ 597-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 597-6
1:1057
Chapter 609
SMOKE DETECTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 372.
Occupancy permits — See Ch. 485.
§ 609-1. Standards incorporated by reference.
Smoke detectors for new construction shall be installed according to the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code268 and shall be maintained and
regulated according to the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.269
Chapter 620
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landis Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 80.
Brush, weeds, plant life, solid waste and
debris — See Ch. 247.
Littering — See Ch. 446.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
Public property — See Ch. 542.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 585.
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
268. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
269. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:70.
§ 597-6 VINELAND CODE § 609-1
1:1058
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 620-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future tense, words used in the plural number include the
singular number, and words used in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
discretionary.
BATTERY — Any device consisting of one or more electrically connected
electrochemical cells that is designed to receive, store and deliver
electric energy. An electrochemical cell is a system consisting of an
anode, cathode and electrolyte, plus such connections (electrical and
mechanical) as may be needed to allow the cell to deliver or receive
electrical energy. The term "battery" also includes an intact, unbroken
battery from which the electrolyte has been removed.
BULKY WASTE — Any large items of solid waste, which because of their
size or weight, require handling other than normally used for municipal
waste. Bulky waste includes, but is not limited to, such items as tree
trunks, auto bodies, construction and demolition waste, white goods,
furniture, mattresses and drums.
BRUSH — Any branches, woody plants and other like vegetative
material. Leaves and grass do not constitute brush.
COLLECTION or COLLECTING — The act of picking up solid waste at
its point of generation or storage.
COMMINGLED — Any combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Any waste building
material and rubble resulting from construction, renovation,
remodeling, repair or demolition operations on houses, commercial
buildings, pavements and other structures. The following materials may
be found in construction and demolition waste: treated and untreated
wood scrap; tree parts, tree stumps and brush; concrete, asphalt,
bricks, blocks and other masonry; plaster and wallboard; roofing
materials; corrugated cardboard and miscellaneous paper; ferrous and
nonferrous metal; nonasbestos building insulation; plastic scrap; dirt;
carpets and padding; glass (window and door); and other miscellaneous
materials; but shall not include other solid waste types.
CONTAINER — Any portable device in which a material is stored,
transported, treated, disposed of, or otherwise handled.
§ 620-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-1
1:1059
CONTAINERIZED YARD WASTE — The placement of yard waste in a
trash can, bucket, bag or other vessel, so as to prevent the yard waste
from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.
COVERED PROJECT — Any construction, renovation, remodeling,
repair or demolition project for which a building permit or a demolition
permit is required, and for which a dumpster or roll-off container shall
be placed on premises for the purpose of placement of solid waste
materials.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any materials designated
within the 2007 Cumberland County Solid Waste Management Plan
Update to be source separated for the purpose of recycling. These
materials include glass jars and bottles; aluminum beverage cans; steel,
tin, and bimetal food containers; PET#1 and HDPE#2 plastic
containers; newspaper; mixed paper/magazines; white goods; leaves
and branches; empty aerosol containers; and universal wastes (i.e.,
used oil; antifreeze; lead-acid batteries; asphalt; concrete, block, and
brick; and tires) for the residential sector. These materials further
include aluminum beverage cans; glass jars and bottles; PET#1 and
HDPE#2 plastic containers; high-grade paper; corrugated cardboard;
food waste; mixed paper/magazines; materials unique to an industry;
empty aerosol containers; electronic waste; and universal wastes (i.e.,
fluorescent light bulbs/ballasts; mercury switches/thermostats; used
oil; antifreeze; lead-acid batteries; asphalt; concrete, block and brick;
ferrous scrap; nonferrous scrap; tires; and white goods) for the
commercial, industrial and institutional sector.
ELECTRONIC WASTE — Any appliance used in a home or business
that utilizes circuitry, including but not limited to, any computer central
processing units and associated hardware, such as keyboards, modems,
printers, scanners, copiers and fax machines; VCRs; stereos; cathode
ray tubes, cathode ray tube devices, flat-panel displays or similar video
display devices with a screen that is greater than four inches measured
diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards (e.g.,
televisions); and telecommunication devices (e.g., cell phones).
FOOD WASTE — Any food processing by-products (food-processing
vegetative wastes and/or food-processing residuals generated from
food processing and packaging operations or similar industries that
process food products), vegetative waste (produce trimmings and overripe
produce generated by supermarkets, produce brokers and produce
distributors), off-spec food products, food product over-runs, and
similar food waste materials.
GARBAGE — Any meat and vegetable waste solids resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods. Garbage is
considered to originate primarily in kitchens and other places where
food is stored, cooked and consumed.
GENERATION — The act or process of producing solid waste.
§ 620-1 VINELAND CODE § 620-1
1:1060
GLASS — Any product made from silica or sand, soda ash and
limestone, the products being transparent or translucent and being
used for packaging or bottling of various matter, including clear, brown
and green glass food and beverage containers, and excluding blue and
flat glass and glass commonly known as "window glass."
LITTER — Any solid waste which, if thrown, deposited or carried by
wind or water, as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare and to contribute to an image of blight. Litter
includes any used or unconsumed substance or waste material that
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or any other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can; any top,
cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can; any cigarette, cigar,
chewing tobacco or matches, or parts thereof; handbills; newspapers
or magazines; glass, metal or paper containers or other packaging;
or construction materials. For purposes of this chapter, litter does
not include the waste of the primary processes of mining or other
extraction activities, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Any container suitable for the depositing of
litter.
METAL — Any metal food or beverage container, including aluminum,
steel, tin and bimetal containers.
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTY — For purposes of this chapter, any building
or structure, or complex of buildings, in which three or more dwelling
units are owner-occupied or are rented or leased, or are offered for
rental or lease, for residential purposes, and shall include hotels,
motels, or other guest houses serving transient or seasonal guests as
those terms are defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the governing body authorized to, among other things,
enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any rules, regulations or
policies that may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — Any solid waste
generated at residential, commercial, industrial or institutional
establishments within the boundaries of the City.
PERSON — Any individual, trust, firm, joint-stock company, corporation
(including a government corporation), corporate official, partnership,
association, commission, or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
PLASTICS — Any clear or green plastic (PET) soda containers or plastic
(HDPE) milk or water containers (jugs).
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE — Any waste liable to enter into a state of
putrefaction, the typically anaerobic splitting of proteins by bacteria
and fungi with the formation of foul-smelling, incompletely oxidized
products.
§ 620-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-1
1:1061
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any materials which would otherwise
become nonhazardous solid waste, which can be separated, collected,
and/or processed, and then returned to the economic mainstream in the
form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials, which would otherwise
become solid waste, are separated, collected and/or processed, and
then returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials
or products.
REFUSE — All broken crockery, glassware, household receptacles and
utensils, bottles, tin cans, lawn cuttings, hedge trimmings, garden
growth, old clothing and such similar waste materials, including paper,
cardboard or containers made of paper.
SCRAP METAL — Any bits and pieces of metal parts (e.g., bars,
turnings, rods, sheets, wire) or metal pieces that can be combined
together with bolts or soldering (e.g., radiators, scrap automobiles,
railroad box cars) which when worn or superfluous, can be recycled.
Materials not covered by this term include residues generated from
smelting and refining operations (e.g., drosses, slags, and sludges),
liquid wastes containing metals (e.g., spent acids, spent caustics, or
other liquid wastes with metals in solution), liquid metal wastes (e.g.,
liquid mercury), or metal-containing wastes with a significant liquid
component, such as spent batteries.
SHOPPING CENTER — For purposes of this chapter, any integrated
development of stores, shops, personal service establishments,
professional and business offices, banks, post offices, restaurants,
auditoriums and similar facilities, housed in an enclosed building or
buildings, and utilizing such common facilities as customer parking,
pedestrian walkways, truck-loading and -unloading space, utilities and
sanitary facilities.
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge or any other waste
material, as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:26-1.6, with the exception of the
following:
Source-separated food waste collected by livestock producers,
approved by the State Department of Agriculture, who collect,
prepare and feed such wastes to livestock on their own farms.
(1)
Recyclable materials that are exempted from regulation pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:26A.
(2)
Materials approved for beneficial use or categorically approved for
beneficial use pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26-1.7(g).
(3)
Spent sulfuric acid which is used to produce virgin sulfuric acid,
provided at least 75% of the amount accumulated is recycled in one
year.
(4)
Dredged material, from New Jersey's coastal or tidal waters, which
is regulated under the provisions of the Water Pollution Control Act
(5)
§ 620-1 VINELAND CODE § 620-1
1:1062
SOLID WASTE UTILITY — An administrative entity created to transact
the collection and disposal of eligible solid waste, including designated
recyclable materials, and related support services, as provided by law.
Said Solid Waste Utility is assigned as a function of the Subdivision
of Solid Waste Management under the Division of Public Works in the
Department of Public Works.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any recyclable
materials that are separated at the point of generation by the generator
thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Any process by which recyclable materials
are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from
solid waste for the purpose of recycling.
SPENT MATERIAL — Any material that has been used, and as a result
of contamination, can no longer serve the purpose for which it was
intended without being processed, reprocessed or reclaimed.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way that is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street (right-of-way) lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the
street (right-of-way) lines.
SURFACE WATER — Any water at or above the land's surface which
is neither groundwater nor contained within the unsaturated zone,
including, but not limited to, the ocean and its tributaries, all springs,
streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, wetlands and artificial waterbodies.
TIRES — All passenger car tires and noncommercial truck tires having
a rim diameter of 17 inches or less, exclusive of rims or other
attachments. The definition of tires that may be placed at the curbside
for collection pursuant to this chapter shall be as set forth in the rules
and regulations established by the Superintendent of Public Works in
accordance with the authorization provided under this chapter.
TRANSPORTATION or TRANSPORTING — The act of collecting and/or
moving of solid waste off site or to a solid or hazardous waste facility by
road, rail, water or air.
USED OIL — Any oil that has been refined from crude oil, or any
synthetic oil, that has been used, and as a result of such use, storage or
handling, is contaminated by physical or chemical impurities.
WASTEPAPER PRODUCTS — Any uncontaminated newspapers.
(N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.), Waterfront Development Law (N.J.S.A.
12:5-3 et seq.), Riparian Interests (N.J.S.A. 12:3-1 et seq. and
18:56-1 et seq.), Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 as
amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.),
Federal Coastal Zone Management Act (16 U.S.C. § 1451 et seq.)
and/or other relevant statutes and implementing regulations.
§ 620-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-1
1:1063
WHITE GOODS — Any and all large, residential (noncommercial)
appliances, limited to refrigerators, clothes washers and dryers,
ranges, dishwashers, water heaters, air conditioners, trash compactors,
freezers and dehumidifiers, and not including furnaces.
YARD WASTE — Any grass clippings, leaves or wood chips from tree
parts and brush.
§ 620-1 VINELAND CODE § 620-1
1:1064
ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Utility
§ 620-2. Creation of Solid Waste Utility.
§ 620-3. Properties subject to municipal collection.
§ 620-4. Solid Waste Utility budget.
A. A Solid Waste Utility, an administrative entity, is hereby created to
transact the collection and disposal of eligible solid waste, including
designated recyclable materials, and related support services, as
provided by law.
B. Said solid waste utility is assigned as a function of the Subdivision of
Solid Waste Management under the Division of Public Works in the
Department of Public Works.
A. The cost of collection and disposal of eligible solid waste, including
designated recyclable materials, and related support services shall be
raised, as herein provided, by billing only residential properties of 10 or
fewer dwelling units. To further explain, all property within the City
shall be subject to municipal collection, with the exception of the
following:
(1) Business properties.
(2) Commercial properties (e.g., restaurants, stores).
(3) Industrial properties (e.g., warehouses, factories).
(4) Residential properties of more than 10 dwelling units.
(5) Mobile home parks.
(6) Condominiums of more than 10 dwelling units.
(7) Mixed-use properties where the predominant use is one of the
above-listed uses. (For mixed-use properties, eligibility shall be
determined by the Tax Assessor, based in part on the New Jersey
Property Classification Codes as assigned in the current year
certified Tax List.)
(8) Vacant lots or vacant lands.
(9) Any and all other nonresidential properties (e.g., schools,
churches).
B. No solid waste shall be collected from the above-listed properties, nor
shall any part of the cost of collecting and disposing of solid waste be
billed to these properties.
A. The Solid Waste Utility shall be self-liquidating with a dedicated budget
as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:A4-34 through 40A:4-36.
§ 620-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-4
1:1065
§ 620-5. Solid waste service charge.
There shall be raised by levying and collections, in accordance with rules,
regulations and procedures promulgated by the Council of the City of
Vineland, a solid waste service charge, which shall be a fixed fee per
dwelling unit based upon a rate or rates determined by the Council of
the City of Vineland to be sufficient to provide funds for the payment
of the cost of collection and disposal of eligible solid waste, including
designated recyclable materials, from the residences of the City of Vineland,
and related support services.
§ 620-6. Payment of solid waste service charge.
B. The governing body shall annually adopt a dedicated budget for the
Solid Waste Utility that covers any and all anticipated costs associated
with the collection and disposal of eligible solid waste, including
designated recyclable materials and related support services.
A. Property owners subject to municipal collection shall be billed monthly
and in a like manner with other municipal utilities. Failure to make
payment of a solid waste service charge shall be deemed a delinquency
in a like manner with other municipal utilities. Any money collected
pursuant to this article is to be used solely to provide for the support of
the Solid Waste Utility.
B. Any delinquent balance of amounts billed pursuant to this article shall
be a lien upon the land against which they are billed in the same
manner that taxes are made a lien against land pursuant to Title 54 of
the Revised Statutes, and the payment thereof shall be enforced within
the same time and in the same manner and by the same proceedings as
the payment of taxes is otherwise enforced by the Division of Taxation
under Title 54.
§ 620-4 VINELAND CODE § 620-6
1:1066
ARTICLE III
Solid Waste Collection
§ 620-7. Responsibility for solid waste collection, removal and
disposal.
§ 620-8. Responsibility of solid waste generator.
A. Properties subject to municipal collection. The City shall provide for the
collection, removal and disposal of all eligible solid waste, including
designated recyclable materials, generated by properties subject to
municipal collection, as herein provided. City Council may provide by
contractor or otherwise for the collection, removal and disposal of
eligible solid waste, including designated recyclable materials, for
those properties subject to municipal collection. The City, in
cooperation with the Cumberland County Improvement Authority, may
provide for such collection, removal and disposal in the following
manner:
(1) Regularly scheduled curbside collection.
(2) Intermittently scheduled curbside collection.
(3) Permanently established dropoff locations.
(4) Intermittently scheduled dropoff locations.
B. The Director of Public Works may recommend rules and regulations
pertaining to the collection, removal and disposal of eligible solid
waste, including designated recyclable materials, to implement, and to
augment where necessary, the provisions of this chapter. City Council
shall establish annually, or amend as needed, rules and regulations by
resolution to implement, and to augment where necessary, the
provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Delineation of collection districts.
(2) Identification of eligible solid waste, including designated
recyclable materials, manner of disposal and schedule for regularly
scheduled curbside collection.
(3) Identification of eligible solid waste, including designated
recyclable materials, manner of disposal and schedule for
intermittently scheduled curbside collection.
(4) Identification of site(s), eligible solid waste, including designated
recyclable materials, manner of disposal and hours of operation of
established dropoff locations.
C. Properties not subject to municipal collection. For all properties not
subject to municipal collection, private arrangements shall be made for
the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste, including
designated recyclable materials.
§ 620-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-8
1:1067
§ 620-9. Approved containers.
A. Any person, as defined in Article I, who generates solid waste, shall be
responsible for proper handling and disposal of such waste, including
the proper separation, handling and disposal of designated recyclable
materials.
B. Solid waste, including designated recyclable materials, shall be
maintained on site and shall be regularly disposed of so as not to create
a nuisance.
C. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to permit open or
overflowing solid waste containers, including litter receptacles, on his
or her property.
D. It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner or tenant to store
household bulky waste in areas zoned residential, except in a fully
enclosed structure.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined in Article I, to keep on
streets, vacant lots or residential properties, except when properly
supported (i.e., on blocks) and covered, any motor vehicle, trailer or
semitrailer exhibiting any of the following:
(1) Is missing tires, wheels, engine or any essential parts.
(2) Displays extensive body damage or deterioration.
(3) Does not display a current, valid state license.
(4) Is wrecked, disassembled or partially disassembled.
F. For residential properties with three or fewer dwelling units, it shall be
the responsibility of the occupants of each dwelling unit to furnish
containers for and to properly dispose of eligible solid waste, including
designated recyclable materials. For residential properties with more
than three dwelling units and for commercial, industrial and
institutional properties, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
property to furnish containers for and to properly dispose of eligible
solid waste and designated recyclable materials.
G. Irrespective of any of the above, the property owner shall have ultimate
responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Properties subject to municipal collection. For all properties subject to
municipal collection, all eligible solid waste, including designated
recyclable materials, shall be placed in clean, covered containers
offering protection from weather (e.g., precipitation and wind) and
vermin/animals (e.g., insects, rats, cats, dogs and birds), with the
exception of commingled recyclable materials that can be placed in
open containers, branches that can be tied in bundles and leaves during
seasonal curbside collection. Containers shall be of such size as to be
handled by one man, shall be constructed so as to prevent spilling and/
§ 620-8 VINELAND CODE § 620-9
1:1068
§ 620-10. Placement of containers for collection.
or leakage of their contents, shall not be filled higher than three inches
below the tops of the containers, shall have external handles, shall not
weigh more than 60 pounds and shall be maintained in condition for
safe handling. Plastic bags may be used to put out normal household
refuse, provided that such plastic bags are manufactured from
polyethylene or ethylene copolymer resin. Trash cans and trash bags
available commercially and recycling containers provided by the City
shall be utilized, unless alternative containers are stipulated in annually
adopted rules and regulations.
B. Properties not subject to municipal collection. For all properties not
subject to municipal collection, all solid waste, including designated
recyclable materials, shall be placed in covered containers offering
protection from weather (e.g., precipitation and wind) and vermin/
animals (e.g. insects, rats, cats, dogs and birds), with the exception of
commingled recyclable materials that can be placed in open containers.
Containers shall also be of such design, or in the alternative be
collected at frequent enough internals, so as not to emit offensive
odors.
A. Properties subject to municipal collection.
(1) Containers shall not be placed or maintained in any front yard,
except at designated disposal times, as allowed for in this chapter.
(2) For properties with more than three dwelling units, all containers
placed outdoors shall be placed within four-sided enclosures so
that said containers are not visible from streets or adjoining
properties. No enclosure shall be permitted within any front yard.
(3) Containers shall be placed prior to collection between the curb and
sidewalk, or in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the
street as not to constitute a danger, where they shall be readily
accessible to the collector from the roadway.
(4) Containers shall not project into the roadway or sidewalk area so as
to interfere with vehicular traffic or pedestrians lawfully using said
roadway or sidewalk area.
(5) Containers shall be placed outside after 5:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00
a.m. of the day of collection.
(6) After collection, any empty containers shall be removed promptly,
but no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
B. Properties not subject to municipal collection. All containers placed
outdoors shall be placed within four-sided enclosures so that said
containers are not visible from streets or adjoining properties. No
enclosures shall be permitted within any front yard.
§ 620-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-11
1:1069
§ 620-11. Special provisions.
A. Construction and demolition waste. The provisions of this article shall
not apply to and shall not include the collection of construction and
demolition waste from any properties subject to municipal collection,
unless said materials can be tied into bundles not exceeding four feet in
length and 60 pounds in weight, not exceeding two bundles per
collection. Collection and disposal of any materials exceeding the above
restrictions for curbside collection shall be the responsibility of the
property owner.
B. White goods.
(1) On scheduled intermittent curbside collection days, refrigerators
with magnetic sealed doors can be put out intact. Refrigerators
with pull clasp release door handles must have the door completely
removed from the unit prior to placement outside a residence.
(2) White goods shall only be placed outside a residence for
intermittent curbside collection days designated for white goods,
subject to the placement, manner and time provisions listed for
containers. Additionally, white goods shall be placed separated
from other solid waste in an orderly manner and shall not be piled
one on top of another.
(3) Any seller of white goods, either new or used, shall be required to
take from the customer the unwanted unit being replaced. Said
seller must display, in a conspicuous location within the seller's
establishment, a sign which shall state thereon that "In accordance
with Ordinance No. 90-55, this establishment is required to accept
and dispose of used white goods replaced by purchases of new and/
or used equipment from this establishment."
C. Tires.
(1) Tires shall only be placed outside a residence for intermittent
curbside collection days designated for tires, subject to the
placement, manner and time provisions listed for containers.
Additionally, tires shall be placed separated from other solid waste.
There shall be a limit of 18 tires per collection per year per
dwelling unit.
(2) Any seller of tires, either new, used, retreaded or recapped, shall be
required to take from the customer the unwanted tires being
replaced. Said seller must display, in a conspicuous location within
the seller's establishment, a sign which shall state thereon that "In
accordance with Ordinance No. 90-55, this establishment is
required to accept and dispose of used tires replaced by purchases
from this establishment."
D. Yard waste.
§ 620-11 VINELAND CODE § 620-11
1:1070
(1) Persons occupying properties subject to municipal collection within
the City shall at all times source separate yard waste, including but
not limited to leaves, from solid waste generated at those premises
and, unless yard waste is stored or recycled for composting or
mulching by the generator, place the yard waste for collection in
the manner set forth in rules and regulations promulgated by the
City.
(2) No yard waste shall be placed at the curbline, except during the
collection periods and in the manner set forth in the rules and
regulations promulgated by the City. Sweeping, raking, blowing or
otherwise placing yard waste at the curbline or along the street is
only allowed during the seven days prior to a scheduled and
announced collection and shall not be placed closer than 10 feet to
any storm drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste at the curbline
or along the street at any other time or in any other manner is a
violation of this chapter. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove
the yard waste from the street, or said party shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter.
(3) Any resident may, as an option, transport yard waste, source
separated from solid waste, to a leaf-composting facility,
vegetative-waste-composting facility or recycling center approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection and identified in
the Cumberland County Solid Waste Management Plan for use by
the City.
§ 620-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-11
1:1071

ARTICLE IV
Recycling
§ 620-12. Mandatory source separation and exemption
requirements.
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
properties, including but not limited to commercial, industrial,
governmental, educational and institutional locations within the City,
(i.e., all properties subject to and not subject to municipal collection) to
separate designated recyclable materials from all solid waste.
Designated recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart
from other solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants
of such properties. For properties subject to municipal collection,
designated recyclable materials shall be placed separately at the curb
in a manner and on such days and times as may be established by
regulations promulgated by the City.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body
may exempt persons occupying properties not subject to municipal
collection, including but not limited to commercial, industrial or
institutional premises within the City, from the source separation
requirements of this chapter that require persons generating municipal
solid waste within the City to source separate from the municipal solid
waste stream the specified recyclable materials, if those persons have
otherwise provided for the recycling of all designated recyclable
materials. To be eligible for an exemption pursuant to this chapter, a
property not subject to municipal collection, including but not limited to
a commercial, industrial or institutional generator of solid waste, shall
file an application for exemption with the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator on a form to be provided for this purpose. The form shall
include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The name of the entity not subject to municipal collection.
(2) The street address and block and lot designation of the entity not
subject to municipal collection.
(3) The name, official title and phone number of the person making
application on behalf of the entity not subject to municipal
collection.
(4) The name, address, official contact person and telephone number
of the facility that provides recycling services for designated
recyclable materials.
(5) A certification that the designated recyclable materials will be
recycled, and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling
service provider for the generator not subject to municipal
collection shall provide written documentation to the Municipal
§ 620-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-12
1:1073
§ 620-13. Residential property compliance requirements.
The owner of any residential property shall be responsible for compliance
with this chapter. For multifamily properties, the owner or management is
responsible for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including
collection of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or
regulations established by the City. Violations and penalty notices will be
directed to the owner or management in those instances where the violator
is not easily identifiable. The owner or management shall issue notification
and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every six months
during their occupancy.
§ 620-14. Nonresidential property compliance requirements.
§ 620-15. New developments of multifamily properties or
commercial, industrial or institutional (i.e., nonresidential)
properties.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 13:1E-99.16c:
Recycling Coordinator of the total number of tons collected and
recycled for each designated recyclable material.
A. All commercial, industrial and institutional (i.e., nonresidential)
generators of solid waste shall be required to comply with the provision
of this chapter.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclable materials
hereunder shall be the responsibility of the commercial, industrial or
institutional (i.e., nonresidential) property owner or their designee,
unless the City provides for the collection of designated recyclable
materials.
C. Every commercial, industrial or institutional (i.e., nonresidential)
facility shall report on an annual basis to the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator, on such forms as may be prescribed, on recycling activities
at their premises, including the amount of recycled material, by
material type, collected and recycled and the vendor or vendors
providing recycling service.
D. All food-service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
A. Any application to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
for subdivision or site plan approval for the development of a
multifamily property with three or more dwelling units, a single-family
development of 50 or more dwelling units or any commercial, industrial
or institutional (i.e., nonresidential) property for the utilization of 1,000
§ 620-12 VINELAND CODE § 620-15
1:1074
§ 620-16. Marketing of recyclable materials by generator.
Nothing in this article precludes any generator of solid waste from source
separating recyclable materials from their waste stream and marketing
those materials at approved recycling facilities.
square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This plan
must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclable materials generated at the proposed
development.
(2) Locations, documented on the application's subdivision or site plan,
that provide for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners,
tenants, and occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient
size, convenient location and contain other attributes (signage,
lighting, fencing, etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator.
B. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the owner of any new
multifamily property or commercial, industrial or institutional (i.e.,
nonresidential) property must supply a copy of a duly executed contract
with a hauling company for the purposes of collection and recycling of
source-separated recyclable materials, in those instances where the
City does not otherwise provide the service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the City Engineer.
§ 620-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-16
1:1075

ARTICLE V
Construction and Demolition Waste
§ 620-17. Construction and demolition waste recovery plan.
A construction and demolition waste recovery plan shall be filed with the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator prior to the commencement of any activity
for a covered project, as defined in Article I. The plan shall identify the
types and estimated quantities of construction and demolition debris to
be generated from the project, how each material will be managed, and
the name of each facility or service provider that the applicant will use to
manage each material. The plan shall further detail how the applicant shall
ensure that a minimum of 50% of the materials to be generated will be
separated and recycled.
§ 620-18. Review of construction and demolition waste recovery
plan.
§ 620-19. Diversion requirement adjustment.
A. Approval. A construction and demolition waste recovery plan shall be
reviewed by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, and approved if it
provides for all of the information required by this article. An approved
plan shall be marked "Approved" and returned to the applicant. Notice
of approval shall be sent to the Department of Licenses and Inspections
by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
B. Denial. A construction and demolition waste recovery plan shall not be
approved if it does not provide all of the information required by this
article. If the plan is not approved, the applicant shall be notified in
writing that the plan has been rejected, including the reasons for the
rejection. In order to obtain the building or demolition permit sought,
the applicant shall make the required changes and resubmit the plan to
the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
A. Application. If the applicant carrying out a covered project experiences
circumstances that make it infeasible to comply with the diversion
requirement cited in this article, the applicant may apply for an
adjustment. The applicant shall indicate in writing why it is infeasible to
divert 50% of the materials being generated from the covered project
and specify what percentage of diversion could be achieved. Increased
cost to the owner of the covered project will not be an acceptable
justification for an adjustment.
B. Review. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the
information supplied by the applicant. If warranted, the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator shall attempt to contact the applicant to discuss
possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement.
C. Granting of an adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is infeasible for the owner of the covered project to
§ 620-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-19
1:1077
§ 620-20. Reporting requirements/documentation.
Upon completion of the covered project, but before final inspection, the
owner of the covered project shall submit in person or by certified mail
to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the documentation required to
demonstrate that the applicant has met the diversion requirement. The
required documentation shall include the following:
§ 620-21. Compliance with diversion requirement.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the information
submitted pursuant to this article and determine whether the owner of
the covered project has complied or failed to comply with the diversion
requirement. The determination regarding compliance will be provided to
the owner of the covered project in writing. The determination regarding
compliance shall also be sent to the Department of Licenses and Inspections
by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
§ 620-22. Appeal.
The owner of the covered project may appeal a determination of failure to
comply under this article to the Superintendent of Public Works within 30
days of the determination. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state the
facts and basis for the appeal. The decision by the Superintendent of Public
Works shall be final.
divert 50% of the generated construction and demolition debris from
the covered project, the percentage of diversion required shall be
adjusted. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the adjusted
diversion requirement. The owner of the covered project shall be
required to divert the percentage of construction and demolition debris
required by the adjustment.
D. Denial of adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is feasible for the owner of the covered project to
meet the diversion requirement cited in this article, the applicant shall
be notified in writing of the denial of the diversion adjustment.
A. A completed debris recovery report, signed by the owner of the covered
project, indicating the quantity of each material generated during the
covered project diverted or disposed.
B. Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert and
dispose of materials generated during the covered project.
C. Any additional information that the owner of the covered project
believes is relevant to determining compliance with the diversion
requirement.
§ 620-19 VINELAND CODE § 620-22
1:1078
ARTICLE VI
Transportation of Solid Waste
§ 620-23. Permit required to transport solid waste.
No person, as defined in Article I, shall provide commercial transport of
solid waste, including recyclable materials, through the streets or public
places of the City without the written authorization of a New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Solid Waste permit,
and when such permit is granted, it shall be upon the condition that the
same shall be transported in vehicles or receptacles that shall be covered
and watertight so that no odor or liquid shall escape therefrom.
§ 620-24. Prohibition of collection of solid waste mixed with
recyclable materials.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It shall also be unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove
for disposal those bags or containers of solid waste that visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this chapter and the local sanitary
code.
C. Once placed for collection in the location identified by this chapter, or
any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, no
person, other than those authorized by the City, shall tamper with,
collect, remove, or otherwise handle eligible solid waste or designated
recyclable materials. Any such action in violation hereof from one or
more residences shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 620-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-24
1:1079

ARTICLE VII
Litter
§ 620-25. Public obligation.
§ 620-26. Property owner obligation.
§ 620-27. Special provisions.
A. No person shall throw, lay, deposit, place, leave, sweep, dump or cause
to be carried by the elements (i.e., wind and water), in or upon any
portion of any street, avenue, roadway, sidewalk or public thoroughfare,
including in any gutters; or in or upon any publicly or privately owned
property; or in or upon any stream, river, pond, lake or other surface
water, any solid waste or litter of any kind whatsoever, other than in a
litter receptacle or container provided for such purpose. Where litter
receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried and
properly disposed of elsewhere by the persons responsible for its
generation.
B. Persons placing litter in litter receptacles shall do so in a manner so as
to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements (i.e., wind
and water).
C. No person, while a driver or a passenger in a vehicle, shall discard
litter, other than in a litter receptacle or container provided for such
purpose.
A. It shall be the obligation of all property owners, or tenants where
applicable (e.g., merchants), situate in the City to keep and maintain
their respective properties, including but not limited to all walkways,
driveways, parking areas and landscaped areas, free from litter. Such
owners, or tenants where applicable (e.g., merchants), shall also keep
and maintain the sidewalks abutting their properties free from litter at
all times.
B. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street, avenue, roadway,
sidewalk or public thoroughfare, including gutters, or in any other
public place, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from
any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
A. It shall be the obligation of the owners of all multifamily properties, as
defined in Article I; shopping centers, as also defined in Article I; fastfood
restaurants, as defined in Chapter 425, Article XV; convenience
stores, as also defined in Chapter 425, Article XV; as well as the owners
of any other store, office, bank or other business or commercial
property serving members of the general public, containing a parking
lot for 10 or more motor vehicles, situate in the City, to maintain
outdoor litter receptacles and containers for solid waste, including
recyclables, for public use. Irrespective of the above, all residential,
commercial, industrial or institutional properties that provide outdoor
§ 620-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-27
1:1081
§ 620-28. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish litter receptacles and containers adequate to accommodate
debris at convenient areas and to maintain the litter receptacles and
containers in such a manner and with such a frequency so as to prevent
spillage. Covered projects, as defined in Article I, shall also comply with the
provisions in Article V of this chapter.
§ 620-29. Loaded vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any loaded vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or
parked on any street unless said vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of its contents (e.g., glass) from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any of
its contents (e.g., glass) has dropped, sifted, leaked or otherwise escaped
therefrom, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle or otherwise
endanger travelers or public property, shall immediately cause the public
property to be cleaned and shall pay the cost thereof. For purposes of the
litter receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also
provide receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those
materials commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacles,
and shall provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
B. It shall further be the obligation of owners of buildings held out for use
by the public, including schools, government buildings and bus stations;
parks; drive-in restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service
refreshment areas; construction sites; gasoline service station islands;
parking lots; campgrounds and trailer parks; watercraft launching
areas; beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the
public is invited, including but not limited to sporting events, parades,
carnivals, circuses and festivals, to maintain and service outdoor litter
receptacles and containers for solid waste, including recyclables, for
public use.
C. It shall be the responsibility of any proprietors of the above-mentioned
places or any sponsors of the above-mentioned events, but ultimately
the property owner, for providing and servicing the litter receptacles
and receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited. It shall further be the responsibility of any
establishment listed above to prevent litter of any nature or description
from being blown from that establishment to neighboring properties or
streets. The owner of any establishment listed above who is informed
that any litter of any nature or description has blown from his premises
to that of a neighboring property owner or street shall, upon request,
cause the same to be removed at his expense.
§ 620-27 VINELAND CODE § 620-29
1:1082
City Code, this provision is applicable to any and all loaded vehicles, not just
those transporting solid waste.
§ 620-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-29
1:1083

ARTICLE VIII
Improper Solid Waste Disposal
§ 620-30. Disposal of solid waste in litter receptacles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard solid waste of any kind
whatsoever, other than that defined as litter, in any litter receptacle. Litter
receptacles shall be reserved for litter and not for solid waste subject to
municipal collection or privately contracted collection.
§ 620-31. Disposal of solid waste on another person's property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard solid waste of any kind
whatsoever, other than that defined as litter, in any container servicing
another person's property. For purposes of this chapter, this provision shall
not be applicable if said property is approved by the Cumberland County
Improvement Authority as a solid waste or recycling facility and disposal of
the solid waste is authorized in writing by the property owner.
§ 620-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-31
1:1085

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 620-32. Power to enforce provisions.
The Department of Public Works, the Department of Health, the Department
of Licenses and Inspections and the Police Department are hereby
individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated thereafter.
§ 620-33. Warning stickers; inspection.
The respective enforcing official may, in his or her discretion, post warning
stickers for a first offense. An inspection may consist of sorting through
containers and dumping and opening of solid waste bags or containers to
detect, by sound or sight, the presence of designated recyclable materials.
§ 620-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-33
1:1087

ARTICLE X
Penalties
§ 620-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person, as defined in Article I of this chapter, that violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this chapter, or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty. Each
day for which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a
separate offence. In addition, any person convicted of a violation of this
chapter shall pay all expenses that may have been incurred by the City in
the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 620-35. Municipal Recycling Trust Fund.
Fines levied and collected pursuant to the recycling provisions of this
chapter shall be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust
Fund. Monies in the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used only for
the expenses of the City's recycling program.
§ 620-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-35
1:1089
Chapter 626
STREET CLOSINGS, TEMPORARY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 630. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
§ 626-1. Authorization of Mayor to close streets. [Amended
12-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-104; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-14]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.9, the Mayor of the City of Vineland may
by regulation close any street in the City of Vineland or portion thereof
to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days or during specified hours on
any day or days whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 626-2. Use by emergency vehicles.
Regulations promulgated by the Mayor under this chapter shall provide for
the limited use of any closed streets by police, emergency and fire-fighting
vehicles.
§ 626-3. Use for public activities.
Regulations promulgated by the Mayor under this chapter may include
provisions for the use of any closed streets for any purpose or activity
which, in the judgment of the Mayor, will enhance the movement, safety,
convenience or enjoyment of pedestrians, including but not limited to
information booths, seating, refreshment stands and the display and sale of
merchandise.
§ 626-4. Posting of warning signs.
Proper warning signs of the closing of any streets pursuant to this chapter
and the regulations promulgated hereunder shall be conspicuously posted
during the time said streets are closed, and the regulations shall so provide.
§ 626-5. Violations and penalties.270
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted hereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
270. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-35 VINELAND CODE § 626-5
1:1090
Chapter 630
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 135.
Bicycles and similar vehicles — See Ch. 239.
Excavations — See Ch. 341.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 367.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Littering — See Ch. 446.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 491.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 516.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
Public property — See Ch. 542.
Temporary street closings — See Ch. 626.
Transient merchants and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 676.
Trees on public property — See Ch. 682, Art.
I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 700.
§ 626-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 626-5
1:1091

ARTICLE I
General Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 12-16-1952 by Ord. No. 51 (Ch. 413, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 630-1. Definitions. [Added 7-14-1959 by Ord. No. 317]
In the interpretation of this article, the following words and phrases, unless
the context shows another sense to be intended, shall be held to have the
meanings hereinafter stated:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public property or place dedicated to the public use.
SIDEWALK — That portion of the street or way intended for the use of the
public and pedestrians, comprising that portion of the pavement extending
from the curblines or the lateral lines of the roadway to the buildings or
building lines of the adjacent property, on both sides of Landis Avenue from
the west side of Myrtle Street to the east side of Delsea Drive and on both
sides of Seventh Street, Sixth Street, East Railroad Boulevard and West
Railroad Boulevard, from the south side of Wood Street to the north side
of Elmer Street. On all other streets in the City of Vineland, "sidewalk"
shall mean that portion of the dedicated property set aside for a way and
intended for the use of the public and pedestrians.
STREET, PUBLIC STREET or HIGHWAY — That portion of the street, public
street or highway set apart for the use of vehicular traffic or as a parkway
and which is included between the gutter curbline.
§ 630-2. Trailers prohibited. [Added 5-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-43]
No person, firm or corporation shall detach from any vehicle and place, or
cause, suffer or permit to be detached and placed or continued, any trailer
within the public right-of-way of any roadway in the City of Vineland.
§ 630-3. Obstruction prohibited; exception. [Amended 4-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-29]
No person, firm or corporation shall place or continue or cause to be placed
or continued any article of traffic or merchandise or any wares or any
case or box containing the same or any packing boxes, barrels or other
obstructions of any kind whatsoever upon any sidewalk or street or highway
of the City of Vineland or any part thereof, except for the purpose of transit
or delivery and for such time and in such manner as may be reasonably
necessary for such purposes, nor place or continue or cause to be placed
or continued any sign or other like structure upon any sidewalk, street or
highway in the City of Vineland. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to sidewalk sales, City functions and special events for which a permit
has been issued pursuant to Chapter 676, Article II, of this Code.
§ 630-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-4
1:1093
§ 630-4. Encumber sidewalks; render passage unsafe.
No person, firm or corporation shall place or permit to be placed on any
sidewalk any object or thing that shall in any manner encumber such
sidewalk or render travel upon such sidewalk dangerous or unsafe.
§ 630-5. Display of merchandise. [Amended 4-9-1991 by Ord. No.
91-27]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or cause,
suffer or permit to be placed or maintained any showcase or other
construction or device for the display of merchandise or any box, barrel,
can, package or thing whatsoever on or over any sidewalk, street or public
place or to display or cause, permit or suffer to be displayed upon or
over any sidewalk, street or public place any merchandise for sale or
advertisement in the City of Vineland, except as permitted under Chapter
676, Article II, of this Code.
§ 630-6. Posts and poles.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect or maintain or cause to be erected
or maintained any post or pole in any sidewalk, public street or public place
in the City of Vineland for any purpose of a permanent nature. This shall
in no way prohibit the use of and the insertions in the spaces provided for
along the curbs of flags attached to poles during occasions of celebration.
§ 630-7. Vehicles on sidewalks.
No person, firm or corporation shall cause, suffer or permit any horse, cart,
wagon, or motor or other vehicle, except construction equipment as may be
authorized by other ordinances of the City of Vineland, to stand or remain
upon any sidewalk or portion of a driveway occupying a sidewalk of any
street or public place in the City of Vineland.
§ 630-8. Enforcement by Director of Public Safety.
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety of the City of Vineland,
and he is hereby given full power and authority, to prevent the obstruction
of free passage along or over any part of any of the streets, alleys, footways,
sidewalks, pavements or crosswalks of the City of Vineland whenever such
obstruction is effected by the placing thereon or suspending thereover
of any box, basket, crate, barrel or other receptacle, whether empty or
otherwise, or of any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles of trade
or sale of any description, whether for convenience or for the purpose of
sale, advertisement or otherwise, for any length of time whatever, except as
herein provided.
§ 630-9. Applicability to garbage receptacles.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to receptacles placed on the
curbline for ashes, garbage or refuse.
§ 630-4 VINELAND CODE § 630-10
1:1094
§ 630-10. Permit required to move buildings; fee; bond.
No person shall move any building or structure across, along or through any
street or public place without obtaining a permit therefor from the Director
of Public Safety.
§ 630-11. Permit required for parades and public gatherings.
No person shall organize or conduct or assist in the organization or conduct
of any parade upon any of the public streets or public places without
obtaining a permit therefor from the Director of Public Safety. No person
shall hold any meetings or permit people to congregate on any street,
sidewalk or public place without obtaining a permit therefor from the
Director of Public Safety. The Director of Public Safety shall not issue any
such permit until authorized by the Mayor and Council.
§ 630-12. Interference with public signboards.
No person shall injure, deface, obliterate or remove, take down or disturb
or in any manner interfere with any signboard erected by public authority
containing the name of any street or public place or any bulletin board or
sign or notice erected, posted or placed by public authority bearing the
name of the Mayor and Council or of any officer or agent thereof or of any
public authority whatsoever.
§ 630-13. Responsibility for snow and ice on sidewalks. [Amended
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-9]
A. Fee. The fee for such permits shall be: [Amended 8-11-1953 by Ord.
No. 90]
(1) For buildings not more than 12 feet wide nor more than 16 feet
high: $10.
(2) All other buildings: $25.
B. Bond. In addition to such fees, the Mayor and Council may require a
bond to be filed in the sum of $5,000, conditioned for the proper
removal of any such building, the restoration of any injury that may
occur to the street or sidewalk or trees or for the payment of any
damages whatsoever that may accrue by reason of the removal of such
building. Such permit may contain conditions relating to the manner of
removal or the length of time that any street or public place may be
obstructed, either in whole or in part, and any other regulations for the
protection of the street or public place and the public safety or
convenience; provided, however, that, in the event that it becomes
necessary to remove any poles, electric wires or any other utility or
public property, the cost for such removal and replacement shall be
paid by the applicant obtaining such permit.
A. The owner of any premises abutting on any public sidewalk in the City
shall remove all snow and ice from the portion of the sidewalk abutting
§ 630-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-13
1:1095
§ 630-14. Sharp substances likely to damage automobile tires.
No person shall drop, deposit, throw or place or permit or aid the dropping,
depositing, throwing or placing of glass, tacks, nails or other sharp
his or her premises. The owners of premises used for business,
commercial or industrial purposes shall, in addition, remove all snow
and ice from parking lots, walkways and other areas used by their
customers or employees. Ice which is so frozen as to make removal
impractical shall either be treated with rock salt or other chemicals
which will thaw it sufficiently to permit removal or be thoroughly
covered with sand, ashes or cinders. Removal or covering shall be
accomplished within 24 hours of daylight after the snow or ice shall fall
or be formed.
B. At no time, whether a state of snow emergency has been declared or
not, no person, firm, corporation or entity shall deposit snow or ice on a
public street or sidewalk or cause same to be so deposited. It is the
intent and purpose of this section to prohibit all persons from throwing,
casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which accumulated within
the private property belonging to said persons upon the sidewalks or
streets of the City of Vineland.
C. In any case in which snow or ice shall not be removed from any
sidewalk as required in § 630-13(a), or shall be cast, deposited, thrown
or placed upon any sidewalk or street in violation of § 630-13(b), such
snow or ice shall be removed by and under the direction of the
Superintendent of Public Works. The cost thereof shall be certified by
the Superintendent of Public Works to the governing body, which shall
examine such certificate of cost and, if it finds said certificate to be
correct, shall cause such cost to be charged against the real estate
abutting upon such sidewalks or streets. The amount so charged shall
thereupon become a lien and tax upon said real estate and be added to
and be a part of the taxes next to be levied and assessed thereon, and
enforced and collected, with interest, by the same officers and in the
same manner as other taxes. The imposition and collection of any
penalty imposed by the provisions of § 630-13(d) shall not constitute
any bar to the right of the City of Vineland to collect such assessment of
costs as certified for the removal of said snow or ice in the manner
herein authorized.
D. Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates any provision of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by the payment
of a fine not less than $100 and not exceeding the sum of $2,000 or
imprisonment in the Cumberland County Jail for a period not exceeding
90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination thereof, as determined by the Municipal Court Judge. Each
day on which a violation of an ordinance exists shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation and shall be subject to imposition of a
separate penalty for each day of the violation as the Municipal Court
Judge may determine.
§ 630-13 VINELAND CODE § 630-14
1:1096
substances upon any public street or place likely to damage automobile
tires or to cause any other injury whatsoever.
§ 630-15. Danger signals.
No person shall remove, displace, break or change any sign or lights or
signals set up or placed in any street or public place as a warning of danger
or indicating an excavation or obstruction or showing that any street or
public place is closed to traffic, and no person shall, between the hours
of sunset and sunlight, extinguish any light used for any of the purposes
aforesaid.
§ 630-16. Guarding of open manholes.
No person shall open any manhole or remove the cover thereof, unless such
opening shall be guarded by a guardrail and shall be so marked by day
and lighted by night as to be plainly seen at a distance of 200 feet, which
guardrail shall be maintained so long as such manhole shall remain open
and uncovered.
§ 630-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-16
1:1097

ARTICLE II
Mandatory Sidewalk Repair
[Adopted 6-11-1963 by Ord. No. 441 (Ch. 413, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 630-17. Responsibility of property owner.
Any person, firm or corporation owning any building or structure or vacant
lot or any other property of any description fronting on any street or
highway in the City of Vineland on which a sidewalk or sidewalks have
been constructed prior to the passage of this article or on which a sidewalk
or sidewalks are constructed after the passage of this article, whether the
sidewalk or sidewalks are constructed on property owned by the City or
on property owned by the abutting owner, shall, at his or their charge and
expense, well and sufficiently maintain in good repair the sidewalk in front
of the property.
§ 630-18. Failure to comply; notice.
Upon failure of any owner to maintain the sidewalk or sidewalks as
provided, the City Clerk or his authorized representative shall serve a notice
upon said owner, describing the property affected and the improvement
or repairs required and stating the intention of the City of Vineland to
cause such improvement or repairs to be made within 30 days after service
of notice in the event that such owner shall fail to do so. Said service
may be made personally upon said owner or upon any member of his
household over the age of 14 years or, if said owner maintains as his
principal residence or, in the case of a firm or corporation, maintains as
its principal place of business a place outside of the limits of the City of
Vineland, said service may be made by registered mail or certified mail
addressed to said principal residence or principal place of business.
§ 630-19. Improvements made by City; cost to be assessed.
If, after service of any notice as provided for in the preceding section, the
owner of any lands affected thereby shall neglect to make improvements
directed by such notice, the Council of the City of Vineland shall cause such
improvement to be made, and the cost of the same shall be assessed against
the abutting property owner as provided for by law.
§ 630-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-19
1:1099

ARTICLE III
Municipal Consent for Use
[Adopted 6-25-1996 by Ord. No. 96-51 (Ch. 413, Art III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 630-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other
public place.
§ 630-21. Consent for use of street required.
The City of Vineland reserves for itself, its departments and agencies the
first right for use of any street within the municipality's jurisdiction, either
above, below or on the surface thereof. Any person or entity not part of the
municipal corporation shall be required to petition the City for its consent
to use or occupy any street or public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of
the municipality in the manner provided in this article.
§ 630-22. Procedure for consent.
A. No consent shall be granted by the City until a petition shall have been
filed with the City Clerk by the person desiring the same. The petition
shall specify the period for which the consent is asked and the uses in
detail for which the street or public right-of-way is desired, and whether
above, below or on the surface thereof. In the case of street railway or
traction companies, the petition shall further specify the character of
the road proposed to be constructed, operated and maintained, the
motive power to be used thereon and the streets through which the
same shall extend.
B. The petition shall not be considered by the City Council of the City of
Vineland until public notice shall be given by publication once a week
for at least two weeks in the newspaper designated by the City Council
as the official newspaper of the City and by posting the notice in five of
the most public places in the City for at least 14 days before the
meeting of the City Council at which the application shall be
considered.
C. The notice shall specify the name of the person or corporation
presenting the petition, the date and hour when the same will be
considered by the City Council, the date of filing the same, the
character of the use to which the street or public right-of-way is to be
put and the time for which permission or consent is sought. In the case
of street railway or traction companies, the notice shall further specify
the character of the road proposed to be constructed, operated and
maintained, the motive power to be used thereon and the street in the
municipality through which the same shall extend.
§ 630-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-22
1:1101
§ 630-23. Conditions of consent.
D. Upon the date fixed by the notice, or upon such subsequent date as the
hearing of the petition may be adjourned, the City Council may, by
ordinance and not otherwise, grant for a period not exceeding 20 years
the right to use the street petitioned for. The ordinance shall not be
acted upon by the City Council at the meeting at which the same is
introduced but shall be laid over for not less than 14 days and not
passed until a subsequent regular meeting of the City Council or an
adjourned meeting thereof.
E. The consent granted by the ordinance shall not become effective unless
an acceptance, in writing, of the ordinance shall be filed by the person
applying for consent with the City Clerk within 30 days after receiving
notice of the passage of the ordinance and upon approval of said
ordinance by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of
New Jersey.
A. As conditions to the granting of consent for the use of municipal streets
and public rights-of-way by the City of Vineland, the petitioner shall:
(1) Indemnify and hold the City harmless against all claims arising
from or relating to its use or occupancy of the street or public rightof-
way.
(2) Maintain insurance in such forms and in such amounts as may be
deemed by the City Council to be reasonable or appropriate, and
the policies for which shall name the City as an additional insured.
(3) Remove existing lines, systems or facilities which the user or its
predecessors have abandoned.
B. Any replacement of infrastructure within the public right-of-way for
which consent has been granted for initial installation shall be in
accordance with the original approved plan or the preexisting utility
construction procedures of the City Engineer with respect to utilization
of the public right-of-way.
§ 630-22 VINELAND CODE § 630-23
1:1102
ARTICLE IV
Assemblies, Processions, Parades, Handbilling, Picketing and
Soliciting
[Adopted 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-86 (Ch. 413, Art. IV, of the
1990 Code)]
§ 630-24. Definitions.
A. The following words as used herein shall have the meanings and
definitions set forth herein:
BLOCK — That portion of any street or sidewalk that falls between the
intersections with two other streets.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS — Costs associated with the performance
of prohibited acts and which are not anticipated expenditures in the
yearly budget of the City of Vineland. Such extraordinary costs shall
not include costs for police and fire protection, but shall include costs
for such services as temporary electric, cleanup, temporary sanitary
facilities and the related manpower, machinery and equipment for the
same. Nothing contained in this section of the article shall be construed
to prohibit any expressive activity protected by the First and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and Article
I of the New Jersey Constitution. In computing extraordinary costs, the
City of Vineland shall not discriminate on the basis of the content of
the speech or the identity of the speaker(s).[Amended 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-72]
FIGHTING WORDS — Words that are likely to provoke the average
person to retaliation and thereby cause a breach of the peace. Fighting
words shall include direct personal insults and an initiation to exchange
fisticuffs.
FUNERAL PROCESSION — The coordinated movement of two or more
vehicles upon the streets, roads or highways for the specific purpose of
moving the location of a public or private assembly to a predetermined
location in conjunction with a death or burial.
HANDBILLING — The activity of a person or persons in a place open
and accessible to the general public, distributing any circulars,
advertising or other printed, written or symbolic matter on any subject
and for any purpose.
MEDICAL/PROFESSIONAL BUILDING —
PARADE — A coordinated movement of two or more persons or vehicles
upon the streets, roads or highways within the City with an intent
to attract public attention that interferes with or has a tendency to
A building or location specifically designed to provide medical
services.
(1)
A building or location specifically designed to provide other
necessary services to persons.
(2)
§ 630-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-24
1:1103
§ 630-25. Public assemblies upon streets, roads and highways.
interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets,
roads or highways. Picketing shall not be deemed a parade.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PICKETING — The act of expressing a point of view with respect to any
subject of actual or potential dispute for the purpose of publicizing that
viewpoint and with the further purpose of inducing a specific response
from persons actually or likely to be found in the locality.
PROCESSION — A public assembly that moves as a unit in the streets,
sidewalks or parks with the specific purpose of moving from the point
of assembly to a predetermined destination.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — A gathering of more than 10 persons for a
common purpose in a place open to the general public as a result of
prior planning or a spontaneous gathering for a common purpose in a
place open to the general public that continues in existence for more
than 30 minutes.
SOLICITING — The activity of a person or persons in a place open
and accessible to the general public who, by spoken language directed
to persons in the vicinity, attempts to disseminate facts or opinions
regarding any subject with the intent to induce a specific response from
any listener.
B. Those costs incurred by the municipality for manpower, machinery and
equipment, utilities, temporary facilities and the like which are made
necessary by an unusual or unforeseen occurrence or activity. Those
costs shall include costs for which the municipality has not budgeted
funds for a specific occurrence or activity. Those costs shall include the
following:
(1) Costs for cleanup associated with an occurrence or activity.
(2) Costs for temporary sanitary facility.
(3) Overtime pay for municipal employees necessary so as to comply
with any federal, state, county or local law or ordinance associated
with an occurrence or activity.
C. Extraordinary costs shall not relate to any costs associated with the
content of the speech, message or information disseminated.
A. Public assemblies upon municipal streets, roads and highways are
prohibited inasmuch as the City of Vineland has a duty to prevent
violence, maintain order and the right of persons and property to move
upon public streets, roads and highways; to provide an environment
conducive to the effective administration of justice and governmental
functions; to protect the rights of public and private businesses to
§ 630-24 VINELAND CODE § 630-25
1:1104
function; and to protect the citizens from unreasonable invasion of their
right to privacy.
B. Exceptions. Government-sponsored parades in recognition of national,
state and municipally proclaimed holidays which are planned,
organized and executed by the City of Vineland. Public assemblies upon
municipal streets, roads and highways are permitted, provided that a
permit has been issued for a street closing pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1
et seq. and Ordinance No. 905271 of the City of Vineland. In granting or
denying a permit, the issuing authority will not discriminate on the
basis of race, creed, religion, national origin, the content of the speech
or the identity of the speaker(s). [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
98-72]
(1) Permit process.
(a) Any person requesting a permit for the closing of a street, road
or highway shall complete and submit an application, the form
of which shall be approved by City Council, not less than three
business days prior to the proposed commencement of the
event for which a street closing shall take place. Such
application shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
[1] The full legal name of the sponsoring person.
[2] The mailing address for each sponsoring person.
[3] If a corporation, the state of incorporation and name and
address of registering agent.
[4] The date and hours of said event.
[5] Anticipated number of persons who shall attend said
event, if known, and the basis for said estimate. If no
estimate is made, the reason why such estimate cannot be
made.
[6] The location, street or portion thereof to be closed,
including the two closest intersecting streets.
(b) The Business Administrator shall submit the application to all
directors duly appointed within the City of Vineland as well as
to the Administrator of the Vineland Downtown Improvement
District (VDID). Each department and the VDID shall provide a
written report to the Business Administrator, stating:
[1] Whether said street closing shall unreasonably restrict the
flow of traffic through the municipality.
271. Editor's Note: See Ch. 626, Street Closings, Temporary.
§ 630-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-25
1:1105
[2] Whether said street closing shall unreasonably restrict
access to any municipal building.
[3] Whether said street closing shall unreasonably restrict
access to any business.
[4] Whether said street closing shall restrict access to any
hospital or medical/professional building.
[5] Whether said street closing shall unreasonably restrict
access to any place of worship.
[6] Whether the department can provide adequate municipal
services, including employees, equipment and facilities.
[7] The anticipated extraordinary cost to the department.
Such costs shall include estimated overtime pay for
employees and extraordinary services required of that
department.
(c) Each department may request additional information of any
applicant which will aid in the completion of its report. Each
department shall utilize the information provided by the
applicant and the factual data available in assessing the
application, and this information shall be contained in its
report. All reports shall be submitted to the Business
Administrator, who shall have them delivered to the Mayor. In
the event that a department fails to provide a report, this shall
be deemed as having no effect upon that department and no
extraordinary cost associated with the event. The permit for a
street closing shall be granted or denied within two business
days of the receipt of a fully completed application. Notice
shall be in writing and mailed to the address listed upon the
application. The applicant shall also receive a copy of the
anticipated extraordinary costs associated with the event. All
applicants are requested to submit their applications at least
10 days in advance of the event for which a street closing is
requested. All applicants shall be permitted to provide to the
Mayor a plan which would defray the anticipated extraordinary
costs as reported by each department. The plan shall only be
considered if received within seven days of the date the
Mayor's decision is mailed to the applicant but not later than
five days before said event. If it is determined by the Mayor
and said Director that the submitted plan can be implemented
without compromising the health and safety of the participants
and public, the Mayor shall allow the submitted plan to be
implemented by the applicant. All applicants shall enter into an
agreement with the City of Vineland wherein they shall agree
to reimburse the City of Vineland for all extraordinary costs
incurred by the City of Vineland for said event. At the
conclusion of said event, each department shall report to the
§ 630-25 VINELAND CODE § 630-25
1:1106
§ 630-26. Public assemblies and processions upon sidewalks.
Public assemblies upon sidewalks shall be permitted so as to provide
ordinary citizens a forum in which to communicate their ideas, beliefs
and opinions to the public at large. Processions upon sidewalks shall be
permitted.
§ 630-27. Handbilling, picketing and solicitation upon streets,
roads, highways and sidewalks.
§ 630-28. Parades.
Business Administrator the actual extraordinary costs
associated with said event. The sponsoring person shall within
30 days reimburse the City of Vineland for all extraordinary
costs associated with said event. In the event that the
sponsoring person fails to comply with this section, the
sponsoring person shall be required to post surety in an
amount equal to the anticipated extraordinary costs associated
with any future applications. The City of Vineland may pursue
collection of any sums due the City of Vineland under the terms
of the agreement herein above stated.
A. Handbilling, picketing and solicitation upon the streets, roads and
highways within the control of the municipality is permitted; provided,
however, that such handbilling, picketing and solicitation is performed
in such a manner that such act does not block the path of any vehicle or
compel such vehicle to halt its movement or to operate in any manner in
violation of any state statute or municipal ordinance.
B. Handbilling, picketing and solicitation upon sidewalks is permitted;
provided, however, that such handbilling, picketing and solicitation is
performed in such a manner that such act does not block the path of any
pedestrian to halt his movement for the purpose of rendering such
pedestrian a captive audience or to compel the acceptance of any leaflet
or handout in return for passage.
C. Other prohibited acts. Handbilling, picketing and solicitation shall not
be permitted in a manner and sufficient number that effectively
prevents other persons with a right to be in the vicinity of the
handbilling, picketing and solicitation from exercising their right to
utilize the area or facilities therein for the purposes for which it has
been dedicated either by physical domination of the area or by threats,
intimidation or coercion actually arousing or having a tendency to
arouse a fear of bodily harm with respect to any person who does not
accede to the will of the handbiller, picketer or solicitor.
A. No person shall hold, conduct or engage in any parade unless a parade
permit shall have been lawfully issued.
B. Exceptions.
§ 630-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-28
1:1107
(1) Funeral processions are permitted.
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
(3) A government agency activity within the scope of its functions.
(4) Government-sponsored parades in recognition of national, state
and municipally proclaimed holidays.
(5) Those persons who shall have received a lawfully issued parade
permit.
C. Permit process.
(1) Any person requesting a permit for a parade shall complete an
application, the form of which shall be approved by City Council,
not less than three business days prior to the proposed
commencement of the event. In granting or denying a permit, the
issuing authority shall not discriminate on the basis of race, creed,
religion, national origin, the content of the speech or the identity of
the speaker(s). Such application shall include, but not be limited to,
the following information: [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
98-72]
(a) The full legal name of each sponsoring person.
(b) The mailing address for each sponsoring person.
(c) If a corporation, the state of incorporation, name and address
of registering agent.
(d) The date and hours of said event.
(e) Anticipated number of persons, animals, vehicles and floats
participating in the parade.
(f) The streets or portions thereof and the exact parade route,
including the location from which the parade shall commence
and end.
(2) The Business Administrator shall submit the application to all
directors duly appointed within the City of Vineland as well as to
the Administrator of the Vineland Downtown Improvement District
(VDID). Each department and the VDID shall provide a written
report to the Business Administrator, stating:
(a) Whether said parade shall unreasonably restrict the flow of
traffic through the municipality.
(b) Whether said parade shall unreasonably restrict access to any
municipal building.
§ 630-28 VINELAND CODE § 630-28
1:1108
(c) Whether said parade shall unreasonably restrict access to any
business.
(d) Whether said parade shall restrict access to any hospital or
medical/professional building.
(e) Whether said parade shall unreasonably restrict access to any
place of worship.
(f) Whether the department can provide adequate municipal
services, including employees, equipment and facilities.
(g) The anticipated extraordinary cost to the department. Such
costs shall include estimated overtime pay for employees and
extraordinary services required of that department.
(3) Each department may request additional information of any
applicant which will aid in the completion of its report. Each
department shall utilize the information provided by the applicant
and the factual data available in assessing the application and this
information shall be contained in its report. (All reports shall be
submitted to the Business Administrator who shall have them
delivered to the Mayor.) In the event that a department fails to
provide a report, this shall be deemed as having no effect upon that
department and no extraordinary cost associated with the event.
The permit for a street closing shall be granted or denied within
two business days of the receipt of a fully completed application.
Notice shall be in writing and mailed to the address listed upon the
application. The applicant shall also receive a copy of the
anticipated extraordinary costs associated with the event. All
applicants are requested to submit their applications at least 10
days in advance of the event for which a street closing is requested.
All applicants shall be permitted to provide to the Mayor a plan
which would defray the anticipated extraordinary costs as reported
by each department. The plan shall only be considered if received
within seven days of the date the Mayor's decision is mailed to the
applicant but not later than five days before said event. If it is
determined by the Mayor and said Director that the submitted plan
can be implemented without compromising the health and safety of
the participants and public, the Mayor shall allow the submitted
plan to be implemented by the applicant. All applicants shall enter
into an agreement with the City of Vineland wherein they shall
agree to reimburse the City of Vineland for all extraordinary costs
incurred by the City of Vineland for said event. At the conclusion of
said event, each department shall report to the Business
Administrator the actual extraordinary costs associated with said
event. The sponsoring person shall within 30 days reimburse the
City of Vineland for all extraordinary costs associated with said
event. In the event that the sponsoring person fails to comply with
this section, the sponsoring person shall be required to post surety
in an amount equal to the anticipated extraordinary costs
§ 630-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-28
1:1109
§ 630-29. Processions.
associated with any future applications. The City of Vineland may
pursue collection of any sums due the City of Vineland under the
terms of the agreement herein above stated.
D. Prohibited acts.
(1) Events during school year.
(a) Permits to close any street for an event to occur during the
school year on weekdays shall not issue for the following
hourly period:
[1] 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.
[2] 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
[3] 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(b) This prohibition shall not apply on those weekdays on which
schools within the municipality are closed for regular
educational classes.
(2) No permit shall issue to close a street within the municipality on
any date upon which, for such date, a government-sponsored
activity in recognition of a national, state or municipally proclaimed
holiday or a government agency activity within the scope of its
functions is to take place.
A. No permit is required for any procession.
B. Any procession unaccompanied by a City of Vineland police escort must
comply with all traffic laws and ordinances irrespective of the impact
such compliance has upon the continuity or regularity of that
procession. A nonescorted procession must be in continuous motion,
except for traffic lights and signs, and must not obstruct the entrances
or exits of any establishment of any kind or interfere with free passage
upon any road, sidewalk, alley, driveway or other passageway. Should a
pedestrian procession unlawfully cease its motion on a public street or
sidewalk or passageway, it ceases to be a procession and becomes a
public assembly subject to regulations enumerated herein.
C. A police-escorted procession may continue without break through
traffic lights and signs so long as each vehicle maintains a close but safe
distance with the immediately preceding vehicle and maintains its
headlights on to indicate its participation.
D. A police escort will be provided to any procession for a lawful purpose
upon completion of an application containing information identical to
that for a parade permit. Said application shall be completed and
provided to the Business Administrator and Director of Public Safety
§ 630-28 VINELAND CODE § 630-29
1:1110
§ 630-30. Prohibited acts.
not earlier than 24 hours prior to the designated commencement of said
procession.
E. Prohibited acts.
(1) A pedestrian procession upon the streets and roads may not consist
of more than two files of 10 persons per file, except after two files of
10 persons per file followed by a distance of 20 feet, another two
files of 10 persons per file may follow and a like grouping of
persons thereafter until the entire procession is accommodated.
(2) Disorderly pedestrian processions are not permitted as interfering
with the rights of others to use the public streets, roads and
sidewalks.
(3) Any procession that engages in loud, boisterous conduct will no
longer be deemed a procession but shall be a parade and subject to
the regulations governing parades herein.
A. Notwithstanding those acts prohibited herein, the following acts shall
also be prohibited:
(1) No person shall handbill any material which contains any obscene
writing or picture.
(2) No person shall utilize fighting words or gestures, as defined
herein.
(3) No person shall promote the use or purchase of tobacco products to
persons under the age of 18 or promote the use of alcoholic
beverages to a person under the age of 21.
(4) No handbiller or solicitor shall possess an object or animal with an
apparent potential to cause physical injury to persons or damage to
property.
(5) No public assembly, parade, procession or picket shall conduct
itself in a fashion as will establish a purpose or likelihood of causing
or encouraging imminent violence or a purpose of intimidation or
coercion directed at any person.
(6) No public assembly shall utilize the property upon which it occurs
in a manner converse to the purpose that the property is dedicated
nor shall there be an interference with the normal use of such
property by others with an equal right of access thereto, excepting
permitted events as stated herein.
(7) No person or persons shall engage in any activity enumerated
herein in such a manner as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere
with free ingress or egress to any public premises, state property,
municipal courthouse, City Hall, public office building or any other
§ 630-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 630-30
1:1111
§ 630-31. Appeals process.
In the event that the Mayor denies a permit for a street closing or parade,
he shall so notify the applicant, in writing, including reasons for refusal
of said permit. Notice shall be mailed to the address set forth upon the
application. If the applicant accepts the refusal of said permit, he shall
acknowledge this acceptance in writing. If the applicant fails to sign the
acceptance or takes no action, in either of said events, the municipality
shall apply for a judicial determination and final hearing on the denial on
the merits within two business days of said denial. The municipality may
request a temporary restraining order and permanent restraints.
§ 630-32. Violations and penalties.272
Any person violating any provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
General Penalty. The court of jurisdiction shall be the Municipal Court of the
City of Vineland.
public building or facility owned by the United States, the State
of New Jersey, the County of Cumberland or the City of Vineland
or with the transaction of public business or administration of
justice conducted therein or thereon or to obstruct or unreasonably
interfere with the free use of public streets, roads, highways,
sidewalks or other public ways adjacent thereto.
(8) No person with the intent to interfere with, obstruct or impede the
administration of justice or with the intent to influence any judge,
juror, witness or officer of the court in the discharge of his duty
shall picket or parade in or near a building housing a court of the
City of Vineland or any other duly constituted governmental
agency.
(9) No person shall hamper, obstruct or interfere with any parade,
picket line or public assembly being conducted under the authority
of a permit duly issued pursuant to this article.
272. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 630-30 VINELAND CODE § 630-32
1:1112
Chapter 635
STRUCTURES, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 300.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Vacant, abandoned and nuisance
property — See Ch. 530.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 537.
Solid waste — See Ch. 620.
§ 635-1. Permit required.
The demolition of any structure or building within the City of Vineland
shall require a permit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.17, or other applicable
regulation which shall be issued by the Construction Official. For purposes
of this chapter, the term "demolition" shall be defined as the removal,
destruction or demolition of any building and/or structure. For purposes of
this chapter, "structure" shall not include a structure of a nonpermanent
nature but shall include all structures defined in the State Uniform
Construction Code, such as in-ground pools and underground storage tanks
(UST). The demolition of residential USTs and/or in-ground pools shall only
be required to comply with §§ 635-2, 635-6 and 635-7 hereof but shall be
required to comply with any other applicable statute and/or Code section.
§ 635-2. Requirements for issuance of permit.
A. A person, firm or entity seeking a permit to demolish a building or
structure in accordance with this chapter shall first apply for such
permit, at the office of Licenses and Inspections, and shall complete an
application on the form provided by the Construction Official. The
application shall require the following information:
(1) Name and address of the owner of the building or structure.
(2) Name and address of the person, firm or entity performing the
demolition.
(3) A copy of the certificate of liability insurance of the person, firm or
entity performing the demolition which shall be in the amount of
not less than $300,000 per occurrence.
B. Submission with the application of the following information and/or
documents.
(1) Written consent of the owner of the building or structure, and any
mortgagees who may hold a mortgage on the property, buildings or
structures.
§ 630-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 635-2
1:1113
(2) Proof that all municipal taxes on the property are paid or satisfied
and current.
(3) Posting of surety in the form of cash, certified check, a revocable
letter of credit or a surety bond issued by a surety company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey in an amount
of $10,000 for the demolition of one- or two-family homes and/or
their accessory buildings over 1,400 square feet of floor space.
Surety for the demolition of one- and two-family homes and/or their
accessory buildings fewer than 1,400 square feet of floor space
shall not be required. Surety in the amount of $50,000 shall be
posted for all other building or structures. The purpose of surety is
to assure that the terms and obligations contained in this chapter,
including the completion of the demolition, adequate topsoil and
seeding, where applicable and final rodent extermination, are
completed in a proper workmanlike manner.
(4) A certificate of extermination from a recognized or acceptable
licensed extermination contractor, indicating that the building or
structure to be demolished is rodent and vermin exterminated
within one week prior to the demolition.
(5) In the event the structure to be demolished is serviced by City
water, a fee of $175 shall be paid with the application for the
disconnection of a water service line from the City water main.
Only City employees or their assignees may perform a
disconnection of a water service line from a City water main.
Statements from all utilities servicing the property shall be
provided indicating that the utilities have been disconnected from
the building or structure at the curb/street line. [Amended
11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-70]
(6) Proof satisfactory to the Construction Official and Fire Marshal
indicating that the building or structure to be demolished has been
inspected not more than 24 hours prior to demolition and that all
flammable, explosive, toxic, or other hazardous materials have
been removed from buildings or structures, and the surrounding
property upon which the building or structure to be demolished is
located and that the building is vacant of persons.
(7) Proof satisfactory to the Construction Official that provisions have
been made to remove all debris and fill any below grade level
excavation with clean fill.
(8) Proof of compliance with Chapter 620, §§ 620-17 through 620-19,
inclusive of the Code of the City of Vineland from the Recycling
Coordinator.
C. Notices. Upon receipt of an approved application for demolition and not
less than seven days from the date scheduled for the demolition, the
§ 635-2 VINELAND CODE § 635-2
1:1114
§ 635-3. Responsibility of applicant/owner.
§ 635-4. Disposition and security.
Upon the issuance of a certification of completion within the terms of this
chapter, recommendation of the Construction Official and upon the adoption
of a resolution by City Council approving the same, surety shall be released.
owner of the buildings, structures or property, or their representative,
shall notify each owner of adjoining lots of the following:
(1) Date of the approval of the permit.
(2) Contact information of the owner of the building, structure or
property and person or entity performing the demolition, including
the name, address and contact phone number.
(3) Estimated date of demolition. The notice shall be given personally
or by certified mail, serving a copy thereof on the adjoining
property owners as reflected in the current records of the Tax
Assessor. An affidavit of proof of service shall be filed with the
Construction Official not less than three days prior to demolition.
A. During the demolition process, the person, firm or entity performing
the demolition shall keep the site sufficiently wet so as to keep dust
exposure to a minimum.
B. In the event of the demolition of the structure or structures of primary
use for the property, all signage, impervious materials and accessory
structures or buildings remaining on the premises shall comply with
applicable land use regulations of the City of Vineland.
C. Within 10 business days subsequent to the completion of the demolition
all debris shall be removed and the owner or applicant shall cause to be
filed with the Recycling Coordinator a municipal recycling tonnage
report and accompanying documentation in accordance with Chapter
620, §§ 620-20 and 620-21 of the Code of the City of Vineland.
D. Within 10 business days subsequent to the completion of the
demolition, materials shall be removed from the site and any excavation
resulting shall be filled with clean fill and covered with topsoil. As soon
as practical, considering the season and weather, grass shall be seeded
thereon. Notwithstanding the terms of this Subsection C, topsoil and
seeding shall not be required should there be a redeveloper's
agreement executed, which terms shall take precedence.
E. A certificate of continued extermination of rodents and vermin within a
perimeter of 50 feet from the demolition site or perimeter of the
property boundary lines, whichever is closer to the demolition site. The
extermination shall continue until all debris and recyclable materials
have been removed and the property covered with topsoil.
§ 635-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 635-5
1:1115
§ 635-5. Exceptions.
In the event of emergencies where there is a present danger to persons or
property due to the condition of a structure or building, the Construction
Official shall have the authority to order the demolition, provided said
official is satisfied that a bona fide emergency exists and that the structure
or building to be demolished has been disconnected from all utility services
as required by this chapter and that no hazards exist within the building
which would render it dangerous to demolish. The City shall be exempt from
the requirements of obtaining a permit under this chapter for the demolition
of any building or structure, but shall comply with all safety requirements
of this chapter.
§ 635-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or entity demolishing a building or structure or causing the
demolition of any building or structure within the City of Vineland without
first having obtained a permit therefor or having demolished a building or
structure and failing to remove the debris and/or recyclable materials in
accordance herewith, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. In the
event of such violation, the Construction Official shall cause a summons
and/or complaint to be issued returnable in the Vineland Municipal Court
or any other Court of competent jurisdiction, charging violations of this
chapter. The penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $1,000, no more than 30 days in jail, or both. Each day that such an
offense continues shall be considered a separate offense. Any fines penalties
associated with a violation of this chapter shall be in addition to any other
fines and penalties for violations of other sections of the Code of the City of
Vineland, state statutes or federal regulations.
§ 635-7. Incorporation of State Uniform Construction Code.
A. All provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code relating to the
demolition process are hereby incorporated into this chapter by
reference.
B. Should any conflict or inconsistency arise between the provisions of this
chapter and the minimum provisions mandated by the State Uniform
Construction Code adopted by the City of Vineland, then the more
stringent provisions of this chapter, to the extent not prohibited by the
State Uniform Construction Code or statute shall govern.
§ 635-5 VINELAND CODE § 635-7
1:1116
Chapter 639
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Health — See Ch. 62.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 300.
Excavations — See Ch. 341.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 507.
Water — See Ch. 710.
§ 635-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 635-7
1:1117

ARTICLE I
Public Pools
[Adopted 10-22-1991 by Ord. No. 91-76 (Ch. 421, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 639-1. Incorporation of standards by reference.
Chapter IX of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, N.J.A.C. 8:26-1 et seq.,
entitled "Public Recreational Bathing," as currently promulgated and
hereafter amended, be and the same is hereby incorporated herein by
reference. The Director of the Department of Health (Health Authority),
hereinafter referred to as the "Director," and his designees are hereby
authorized to exercise the powers and duties prescribed by this article.
§ 639-2. Approval required for construction or alteration.
A recreational bathing place shall not be located and constructed or altered
by any person until the Director has given formal approval therefor by
issuance of a license.273 The procedure for obtaining approval to locate and
construct or to alter recreational bathing places shall be as set forth under
N.J.A.C. 8:26-1 et seq.
§ 639-3. License required.
A recreational bathing place shall not be operated by any person until
the Director has given formal approval therefor by the issuance of an
appropriate license certifying that the facility meets the applicable
provisions of this article. This license shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place on the premises where it may be readily observed by all patrons. No
person shall operate a recreational bathing place whose license therefor is
suspended.
§ 639-4. Application for license.
Licenses to operate a recreational bathing place shall not be issued until
a properly executed application containing information as requested on a
form supplied by the Director has been submitted and approved by him.
§ 639-5. License and application fees. [Amended 9-12-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-75; 5-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-22]
A. License and application fees are as follows:
273. Editor's Note: In this section and throughout this article, the phrase "license or permit"
was amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68 to delete the reference to "or permit" so
that all references are to "license" only.
§ 639-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 639-5
1:1119
§ 639-6. Denial of license.
Persons denied a license shall be notified, in writing, accordingly by the
Director. Such notice shall specify the reason for such action and the
remedial action necessary to obtain approval for the issuance of a license.
§ 639-7. Suspension of license.
§ 639-8. Hearings.
Type of Fee Amount of Fee
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
Annual license fee for each unit $275 $450 $625
Plan review application fee $400 $600 $750
Each additional unit fee: review
application
$120 $180 $225
Alteration/minor remodeling $50 $75 $100
B. Cash or certified check shall accompany the annual license fee
application. The review fee shall accompany the request for review of
all applications for recreational bathing place construction or
renovation.
C. The Director of the Department of Health and the Chief Financial
Officer shall review biannually the cost accounting records for services
provided herein and to adjust the fees therefor.
D. Phase 1 shall be effective upon enactment. Phase 2 shall take effect one
year after enactment and Phase 3 one year thereafter.
A. The license of any person to operate a recreational bathing place may
be suspended at any time when, in the opinion of the Director or his
authorized agent, such action is necessary to abate a present or
threatened menace to public health.
B. The person whose license has been suspended or his representative in
charge of the recreational bathing place shall, at the time such license
is suspended, be informed that the license to operate the recreational
bathing place is suspended, the reason for such action and the remedial
action to be taken before the suspension may be lifted. Thereafter and
within 24 hours, written notice of suspension containing the same
information given at the time a license is suspended shall be forwarded
by registered mail to the last known address of the person whose
license is suspended.
A. Persons whose licenses have been suspended shall be afforded a
hearing before the Director within three days after such suspension or
thereafter, at such person's option, to show cause why the suspension
should be lifted. The Director shall, within seven days after such
§ 639-5 VINELAND CODE § 639-8
1:1120
§ 639-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article, or
who shall refuse to comply with a lawful order or directive of the Director,
shall, upon conviction, be liable for penalties as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 639-10. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power of
the municipality or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and
the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and supplemental
to the powers conferred upon the City by any other law or ordinance.
hearing, render a written decision confirming or rescinding the
suspension and shall notify the person whose license has been
suspended, in writing, of his action and the reasons therefor.
B. Persons whose licenses have been denied shall be afforded a hearing
before the Director within seven days after such denial or thereafter, at
such person's option, to show cause why a license should be granted.
The Director shall, within seven days after such hearing, render a
written decision confirming or rescinding the denial of a license and
shall notify the person whose license has been denied, in writing, of his
action and reasons therefor.
§ 639-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 639-10
1:1121
Chapter 643
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Department — See Ch. 62. Public health nuisances — See Ch. 473.
§ 643-1. Incorporation of standards by reference.
N.J.A.C. 8:27, entitled "Body Art Procedures," as currently promulgated
and hereafter amended, is hereby incorporated herein by reference. The
Department of Health is hereby authorized to exercise the powers and
duties prescribed by this chapter.
§ 643-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment in permitted
establishments by operators utilizing, but not limited to, tattooing, body
piercing and permanent cosmetics.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises, whether public or
private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practice
of body art, whether or not for profit, is performed.
BODY PIERCING — The puncturing or penetration of the skin of a person
using presterilized single-use needles and the insertion of presterilized or
disinfected jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening. This includes
piercing of the trailing edge of the ear.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The City of Vineland Department of Health.
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the ear lobe or trailing edge of the
ear using a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system
following manufacturer's instructions.
OPERATOR — The owner or owner's designee having ownership, control or
custody of any place of business or employment and who manages the daily
operations of the body art establishment.
PERMANENT COSMETICS — The implanting of inert pigments, colors or
dyes intradermally which results in permanent alteration of tissue to gain a
cosmetic effect.
PRACTITIONER — Any person who performs the act of tattooing,
permanent cosmetics, body piercing or ear piercing.
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other inert pigment into or
under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument
§ 639-10 VINELAND CODE § 643-2
1:1122
used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or
mucosa. This includes permanent cosmetics.
§ 643-3. License required.
No person shall own, construct, expand, alter or operate a body art
establishment without first having applied for and received a body art
establishment license from the Department of Health. No person shall
perform the act of tattooing, permanent cosmetics, body piercing or ear
piercing without having applied for and received a practitioner license,
except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. These licenses shall be
renewed annually. Applications for licenses shall be made in writing, upon
forms provided by the City of Vineland, signed by the applicant in the
presence of a designated Department of Health employee.
§ 643-4. License denial or suspension.
§ 643-5. Fees and requirements. [Amended 9-12-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-76]
A. Applicants who are denied a license shall be notified in writing by the
Department of Health. Said notice shall specify the reason for the
denial and shall give the applicant an opportunity for a hearing with the
Department of Health within 15 business days from the date of denial.
B. Any license may be suspended at any time when, in the opinion of the
Department of Health, such suspension is necessary to abate a present
or impending danger to public health.
A. The nonrefundable fee for licenses herein shall be as follows:
[Amended 5-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-23274]
Type of License Fee
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
Initial body art establishment plan
review (includes preopen
inspection) and license
$550 $650 $800
Body art establishment license
renewal
Without body piercing $250 $350 $500
With body piercing $350 $550 $800
Practitioner license
Initial $60 $60 $60
Renewal $25 $25 $25
274. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that Phase 1 would be effective upon enactment,
Phase 2 would take effect one year after enactment, and Phase 3 would take effect one
year thereafter.
§ 643-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 643-5
1:1123
§ 643-6. License term.
A new license issued under this chapter shall be valid from its date of
issuance until December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, a renewal license
shall be valid for one year from January 1 until December 31.
§ 643-7. Prohibitions.
Any body art establishment or practitioner licensed under this chapter shall
adhere to the following prohibitions, which shall be displayed conspicuously
in the body art establishment and readily observed by all clients:
Type of License Fee
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
Temporary body art establishment
license
$50 $50 $50
Ear-piercing establishment license $50 $50 $50
B. A statement of approval from the Zoning Officer shall be required prior
to the issuance of any body art establishment license.
C. The Director of the Department of Health and the Chief Financial
Officer shall review biannually the cost accounting records for services
provided herein and to adjust the fees therefor. [Added 5-8-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-23]
A. Implants under the skin shall not be performed in a body art
establishment.
B. Scarification such as branding and cutting shall not be performed in a
body art establishment.
C. No tattoo or body-piercing procedure shall be performed upon a person
under 18 years of age without the presence, written consent and proper
identification of a parent or legal guardian. An emancipated minor
providing legal proof of said emancipation shall be exempt from this
subsection.
D. No genital piercing shall be performed upon a person under 18 years of
age regardless of parental consent.
E. No person shall practice or attempt to practice body art in a
nonlicensed establishment.
F. A body art establishment shall at all times be under the direct
supervision of an operator.
G. No person shall advertise or purport to be a body art practitioner or to
be engaged in the business of body art without first obtaining a body art
establishment license from the Department of Health.
§ 643-5 VINELAND CODE § 643-7
1:1124
§ 643-8. Temporary establishments.
Temporary body art establishments shall be governed by all rules of
permanent establishments as set forth in this chapter and applicable law.
No person shall own or operate a temporary body art establishment without
first having applied for and received a temporary body art establishment
license from the Department of Health in accordance with the following
conditions:
§ 643-9. Insurance.
Each practitioner shall maintain current professional malpractice liability
insurance. A copy of said insurance shall be kept on file at the body art
establishment and shall be made available for inspection by the Department
of Health.
§ 643-10. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from this chapter:
§ 643-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-68]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who refuses
to comply with a lawful order or directive of the Department of Health,
upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, General Penalty. Each offense shall be pursued in the
Municipal Court of Vineland or any other court of competent jurisdiction.
Any penalty recovered shall be paid to the municipal treasury.
H. No person shall practice body art procedures without obtaining the
necessary training and certifications as required by law.
A. An application shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to an event for
which body art will be practiced.
B. Events shall only be for product demonstration, industry trade shows or
educational reasons.
C. Events shall not exceed 14 calendar days without reapplication for a
temporary license.
A. Persons or businesses that pierce exclusively the ear lobe.
B. Physicians authorized by the State Board of Medical Examiners to
practice permanent cosmetics pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:9-6.
§ 643-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 643-11
1:1125
Chapter 647
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 50.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 362.
Land use — See Ch. 425.
Refusal, revocation or suspension of licenses
and permits for delinquent property
taxes — See Ch. 437, Art. I.
§ 643-11 VINELAND CODE § 643-11
1:1126
ARTICLE I
Collection of Certain Tangible Property Taxes
[Adopted 1-20-1953 by Ord. No. 57 (Ch. 424, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 647-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes individuals, companies, firms, societies, copartners,
corporations, associations and joint-stock companies.
PROPERTY — Includes only tangible personal property.
TRUCKMAN — Includes all persons, firms, corporations and associations
who shall transport or remove tangible personal property, whether for hire
or otherwise, and whether or not regularly engaged in such business.
§ 647-2. Application.
Every person owning or claiming to own any tangible personal property
located in or on any premises in the City of Vineland, except a warehouse,
or any person engaged in the business of storing goods for hire and who
desires to transport or remove the same or cause the same to be
transported or removed, so that the whole or a substantial part of such
property will be removed or transported from such premises in or on
which it is located, shall, in person or by agent duly appointed for such
purpose, first make written application to the Collector of Taxes of the
City of Vineland on a form to be provided by the Collector of Taxes, which
application shall contain the following information:
§ 647-3. Time of making application.
The application required by § 647-2 shall be made between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day, except holidays, Sundays, and
Saturdays; provided, however, that in case of a bona fide emergency such
application may be made at any time in the convenience of the Collector of
Taxes.
A. The name and address of the person owning or claiming to own such
property.
B. The address of the premises from which and the address of the
premises to which such property is to be transported or removed, and if
either or both such premises are not designated by an address, then, in
lieu thereof, such premises shall be clearly identified.
C. The name and address of the trucker who is to transport or remove such
property.
D. The approximate date on which such property is intended to be
removed.
§ 647-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-4
1:1127
§ 647-4. Duty of Collector.
Upon the filing of such application as aforesaid, it shall be the duty of
the Collector of Taxes to ascertain forthwith the total amount of personal
taxes due that have been charged or assessed against the person owning or
claiming to own the tangible personal property sought to be transported or
removed and which have not been paid at the time of the making of such
application, together with the interest and other charges thereon, and to
insert the itemized statement thereof on the application form, showing the
total amount due for such taxes, interest and costs to date thereof.
§ 647-5. Tax rate; appeal.
§ 647-6. Permit; payment of taxes; bond.
Upon the payment of the taxes, interest and other charges specified in
§ 647-5 of this article or if no taxes are owing as aforesaid, the Collector
of Taxes shall forthwith and without cost or charge therefor issue a permit
for the transportation or removal of such tangible personal property, and no
such permit shall be issued unless and until such taxes, interest and other
charges are paid in full; provided, however, that if the person owning or
claiming to own the tangible personal property sought to be transported or
removed has a right to appeal the assessment of the taxes for any year or
years included in the amount owed, as determined by the method provided
in §§ 647-4 and 647-5, and files with the Collector of Taxes a notice, in
writing, duly verified under oath, that he intends to appeal the same, then
in lieu of paying the taxes, interest and other charges for the year or years
to be appealed, the person owning or claiming to own the tangible personal
property sought to be removed or transported shall furnish to the Collector
of Taxes a bond entered into by a surety or fidelity company having a
certificate of authority from the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance to
do business in this state, which bond shall be in quintuple the amount of the
taxes, interest and other charges determined as aforesaid for the year or
A. When such application is made during or after the period provided by
statute for the assessment of taxes for any year, the person owning or
claiming to own the tangible personal property sought to be removed or
transported shall be liable to pay not only the taxes priorly assessed and
unpaid as aforesaid but shall also be liable to pay the taxes for the year
for which assessment is being made at the time of such application.
Should the tax rate for the City for the year for which assessment is
being made at the time of the application not have been determined,
then the tax rate used to determine the taxes for the year prior to that
for which assessment is being made as aforesaid shall, for the purpose
of this article, be the rate used to determine the taxes for which
assessment is being made as aforesaid.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed to deprive any taxpayer of his
right to appeal any assessment as provided for in Title 54 of the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 647-4 VINELAND CODE § 647-6
1:1128
years to be appealed, but in no case for less than the amount of $100, and
which bond shall be conditioned for the payment within two years from the
date of the bond of the taxes, interest and other charges found to be due
as of the date actual payment is made thereof; provided, further, that taxes,
interest and costs as to which no right of appeal as aforesaid exists must be
paid forthwith.
§ 647-7. Disposition of permit copies.
The permit shall be made up in quadruplicate and distributed as follows:
§ 647-8. Construal of provisions.
A. The original shall be delivered to the applicant
B. The first copy shall be delivered to the Police Department of this City.
C. The second copy shall be forwarded to the Collector of Taxes of the
taxing district to which such tangible personal property is to be
transported or removed, if such taxing district is in this state.
D. The third copy shall be retained by the Collector of Taxes of the City and
shall be filed in the office as a public record.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as to require any
owner of tangible personal property held for the purpose of
manufacture in the ordinary course of his business or held for the
purpose of processing in the ordinary course of his business or held for
use in the ordinary course of his business to obtain any such permit to
transport or remove tangible personal property from any store or
warehouse or owner's usual place of business to any other storehouse
or warehouse or to the owner's usual place of business for the purpose
of manufacturing, processing, selling or utilizing in the ordinary course
of such business.
B. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as to require any
transient guest temporarily residing at any hotel, hostelry, inn, lodging
house or rooming house to obtain any such permit to transport or
remove such tangible personal property which he has brought with him
to such hotel, hostelry, inn, lodging house or rooming house for his use
while such transient guest, nor shall this article be construed to apply
to the tangible personal property of any public utility as defined in
N.J.S.A. 48:2-13 or to require a permit to transport or remove any such
property from the premises in or on which it is or shall be located.
C. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require the
truckman to obtain such permit nor to have the same in his possession,
but the duty to obtain the permit shall in all cases be upon the person
owning or claiming to own the property to be removed, nor shall the
provisions of this article be construed to make the truckman the agent
of the person owning or claiming to own the property to be removed or
transported under this article.
§ 647-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-9
1:1129
§ 647-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No.
90-79; 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, General Penalty, and the Judge of the Municipal Court
of the City of Vineland before whom such conviction is had may impose such
punishment by fine, by imprisonment, or both, as aforesaid, as he may see
fit, but not exceeding the maximums herein set forth.
§ 647-9 VINELAND CODE § 647-9
1:1130
ARTICLE II
Personal Property Exemption
[Adopted 9-12-1961 by Ord. No. 394 (Ch. 424, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 647-10. Exclusion of personal property.
All tangible household personal property and personal effects located within
the City of Vineland shall not be assessed and taxed.275
§ 647-11. Filing with state.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Division of Taxation
in the Department of the Treasury of the State of New Jersey and with the
County Board of Taxation of Cumberland County.
275. Editor's Note: Original § 424-11, Commencement date; prior taxes still valid, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68.
§ 647-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-11
1:1131

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Senior Citizens and Disabled Persons
[Adopted 9-12-1961 by Ord. No. 395; amended in its entirety
4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-35 (Ch. 424, Art. III, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 647-12. Authorization to grant exemption.
The Tax Assessor of the City of Vineland is hereby authorized to grant
exemptions from taxation of real property in the City of Vineland, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40 et seq.
§ 647-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-12
1:1133

ARTICLE IV
Exemptions for Residential Improvements
[Adopted 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10276]
§ 647-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSESSOR — The officer of the City of Vineland charged with the duty of
assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
EXEMPTION — That portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any
improvement, conversion, alteration or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of the property pursuant to this article.
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — A property submitted to a horizontal
property regime pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168
(N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.).
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration
or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or
structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness of
the building or structure as a place for human habitation and which does
not change its use as a residential dwelling. In no case shall it include the
repair of fire or other damage to a property for which claim was received
by any person from an insurance company at any time during the three-year
period immediately preceding the filing of an application pursuant to this
article.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — A building or part of a building used, to be
used or held for use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings
located on the same premises, together with the land upon which such
building or buildings are erected and which may be necessary for the fair
enjoyment thereof, including multiple dwellings of no more than two units.
A "dwelling" shall include, as they are separately conveyed to individual
owners, individual residences within a cooperative, if purchased separately
by the occupants thereof, and individual residences within a horizontal
property regime or a condominium, but shall not include "general common
elements" or "common elements" of such horizontal property regime or
condominium as defined pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963,
c. 168 (N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.), or the Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c. 257
(N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.), or of a cooperative, if the residential units are
owned separately.
§ 647-14. Exemptions permitted.
The Tax Assessor of the City of Vineland is hereby authorized to grant
exemptions from taxation of improvements to dwellings more than 20 years
old. In determining the value of real property, the Tax Assessor shall regard
276. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. IV, Exemptions for Residential
Improvements, adopted 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-16.
§ 647-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-14
1:1135
the first $25,000 in Assessor's full and true value of improvements for
each dwelling unit primarily and directly affected by the improvement
as not increasing the value of the property for a period of five years,
notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the improvements
are made is increased thereby. During the exemption period, the
assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment thereon
existing immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is damage
to the dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction.
§ 647-15. Determination of tax.
The Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement, the true taxable value thereof. The
amount of tax to be paid for the first full tax year following completion
shall be based on the assessed valuation of the property for the previous
year plus any portion of the assessed valuation of the improvement not
allowed an exemption pursuant to this article. The property shall continue
to be treated in the appropriate manner for each of the five full tax years
subsequent to the original determination by the Assessor.
§ 647-16. Eligibility.
No exemption shall be granted pursuant to this article with respect to any
property for which property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid or for
which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 647-17. Application; filing; approval; recording.
No exemption shall be granted pursuant to this article except upon written
application therefor filed with and approved by the Assessor. Every
application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director of the Division
of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and provided for the use
of claimants by the City of Vineland and shall be filed with the Assessor
within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the completion
of the improvement. Every application for exemption which is filed within
the time specified shall be approved and allowed by the Assessor to the
degree that the application is consistent with the provisions of this article,
provided that the improvement for which the application is made qualifies
as an improvement pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
The granting of an exemption shall be recorded and made a permanent part
of the official tax records of the taxing district, which record shall contain a
notice of the termination date thereof.
§ 647-18. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 2009-16 and Ordinance No. 93-39, as amended, be and the
same are hereby repealed. No exemption granted pursuant to Ordinance
No. 2009-16, Ordinance No. 93-38 or prior ordinance No. 1218 shall be
affected or terminated by virtue of this repeal, but shall remain in effect for
§ 647-14 VINELAND CODE § 647-18
1:1136
the time and under the terms granted as if the ordinance authorizing the
exemption had not been so repealed.
§ 647-19. Notice to taxpayers.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-20, notice of the adoption of this article shall
be included in the mailing of annual property tax bills to each owner of
a dwelling located in the City of Vineland during the first year following
adoption of this article.
§ 647-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-19
1:1137

ARTICLE V
Exemptions for Industrial and Commercial Improvements
[Adopted 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-11277]
§ 647-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATEMENT — That portion of the assessed value of a property as it
existed prior to construction of a building or structure thereon which is
exempted from taxation pursuant to this article.
ASSESSOR — The officer of the City of Vineland charged with the duty of
assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof
used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of material or
manufactured products or for research, office, industrial, commercial,
retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities or warehousing purposes or for
any combination thereof which the governing body determines will tend to
maintain or provide gainful employment within the municipality, assist in
the economic development of the municipality, maintain or increase the tax
base of the municipality and maintain or diversify and expand commerce
within the municipality. It shall not include any structure or part thereof
used or to be used by any business relocated from another qualifying
municipality.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.
CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a commercial or industrial structure,
or the enlargement of the volume of an existing commercial or industrial
structure by more than 30%, but shall not mean the conversion of an
existing building or structure to another use.
EXEMPTION — That portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any
improvement, conversion, alteration or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to this article.
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration
or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or
structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness of
the building or structure as a place for human habitation and which does
not change its permitted use. In the case of a commercial or industrial
structure, it shall not include ordinary painting, repairs and replacement of
maintenance items or an enlargement of the volume of an existing structure
by more than 30%. In no case shall it include the repair of fire or other
damage to a property for which claim was received by any person from an
277. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. V, Exemptions for Industrial and
Commercial Improvements, adopted 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-15.
§ 647-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-20
1:1139
insurance company at any time during the three-year period immediately
preceding the filing of an application pursuant to this article.
§ 647-21. Grant of exemptions for improvements to commercial or
industrial structures.
Exemptions from taxation for improvements to commercial or industrial
structures may be granted upon review, evaluation and approval of each
application on an individual basis by the governing body. In determining the
value of real property, the City of Vineland shall regard up to the Assessor's
full and true value of the improvements as not increasing the value of the
property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the
property to which the improvements are made is increased thereby. During
the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than
the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements,
unless there is damage to the structure through action of the elements
sufficient to warrant a reduction.
§ 647-22. Additional improvement, conversion or construction;
eligibility for exemption and abatement.
An additional improvement, conversion or construction, completed on a
property granted a previous exemption or abatement pursuant to this
article during the period in which such previous exemption or abatement is
in effect shall be qualified for an exemption, or exemption and abatement,
just as if such property had not received a previous exemption or
abatement. In such case, the additional improvement, conversion or
construction shall be considered as separate for the purposes of calculating
exemptions and abatements pursuant to this article, except that the
assessed value of any previous improvement, conversion or construction
shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to that improvement,
conversion, alteration or construction for the purpose of determining the
assessed valuation of the property from which any additional abatement is
to be subtracted.
§ 647-23. Application for tax exemption for construction of
commercial or industrial structures.
Applicants for tax exemption for new construction of commercial or
industrial structures shall provide the governing body with an application
setting forth:
A. A general description of a project for which an exemption is sought.
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project.
C. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the project.
§ 647-20 VINELAND CODE § 647-23
1:1140
§ 647-24. Project tax exemption agreements; schedule of payment.
§ 647-25. Term of agreements; applicability of other regulations;
valuation for county tax apportionment.
D. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project.
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption on the project and
a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant if a tax
agreement is granted.
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project.
G. A statement showing the real property taxes currently being assessed
at the project site; estimated tax payments that would be made annually
by the applicant on the project during the period of the agreement; and
estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first full year following the termination of the tax
agreement.
H. A description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the project and a history and description of the users'
businesses.
I. Such other pertinent information as the governing body may require.
A. Upon adoption of an ordinance authorizing an agreement or
agreements for tax exemptions for a particular project or projects, the
City of Vineland may enter into written agreements with the applicants
for the exemption of local real property taxes. An agreement shall
provide for the applicant to pay to the municipality in lieu of full
property tax payments an amount annually to be computed by one, but
in no case a combination, of the following formulas as described in
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10:
(1) Cost basis.
(2) Gross revenue basis.
(3) Tax phase-in basis.
B. Payments made in lieu of taxes pursuant to one of the above methods
shall become a part of the City of Vineland General Fund or such other
fund or account maintained by or on behalf of the City of Vineland as
may be designated by City Council in the ordinance authorizing a tax
agreement for a particular project.
A. All tax exemption agreements entered into pursuant to this article shall
be in effect no more than the five full tax years next following the date
of completion of the project.
§ 647-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-25
1:1141
§ 647-26. Disqualification of property owner; termination of
agreement.
§ 647-27. Determination of tax.
The Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement or construction, the true taxable value
thereof. Except for projects subject to tax agreement as provided herein,
the amount of tax to be paid for the first full tax year following completion
shall be based on the assessed valuation of the property for the previous
year plus any portion of the assessed valuation of the improvement not
allowed an exemption pursuant to this article. The property shall continue
B. All projects subject to tax agreement as provided herein shall be subject
to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations on
pollution control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, housing
provision, zoning, planning and building code requirements.
C. That percentage which the payment in lieu of taxes for a property bears
to the property tax which would have been paid had an exemption not
been granted for the property under the agreement shall be applied to
the valuation of the property to determine the reduced valuation of the
property to be included in the valuation of the municipality for
determining equalization for county tax apportionment and school aid
during the term of the tax agreements covering the properties, and at
the termination of an agreement for a property the reduced valuation
procedure under this section shall no longer apply.
D. Within 30 days after the execution of a tax agreement, the City of
Vineland shall forward a copy of the agreement to the Director of the
Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community
Affairs.
A. If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable
from the property owner as if no exemption had been granted. The City
shall notify the property owner and the Tax Collector forthwith, and the
Tax Collector shall, within 15 days thereof, notify the owner of the
property of the amount of taxes due. However, with respect to the
disposal of the property, where it is determined that the new owner of
the property will continue to use the property pursuant to the
conditions which qualified the property, no tax shall be due, the
exemption shall continue and the agreement shall remain in effect.
B. At the termination of a tax agreement, a project shall be subject to all
applicable real property taxes as provided by state law and regulation
and local ordinance, but nothing herein shall prohibit a project, at the
termination of an agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the full
benefits of any other tax preferences provided by law.
§ 647-25 VINELAND CODE § 647-27
1:1142
to be treated in the appropriate manner for each of the five full tax years
subsequent to the original determination by the Assessor.
§ 647-28. Eligibility.
No exemption shall be granted pursuant to this article with respect to any
property for which property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid or for
which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 647-29. Application; filing; approval; recording.
No exemption shall be granted pursuant to this article except upon written
application therefor filed with and approved by the Assessor. Every
application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director of the Division
of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and provided for the use
of claimants by the City of Vineland and shall be filed with the Assessor
within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the completion
of the improvement or construction. Every application for exemption which
is filed within the time specified shall be approved and allowed by the
Assessor to the degree that the application is consistent with the provisions
of this article, provided that the improvement or construction for which the
application is made qualifies as an improvement or construction pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. The granting of an exemption or
tax agreement shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official
tax records of the taxing district, which record shall contain a notice of the
termination date thereof.
§ 647-30. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 96-87, adopted by the City Council of the City of Vineland
on October 22, 1996, and all amendments thereto, be and the same are
hereby repealed. No exemption granted pursuant to prior Ordinance No.
2009-15, as amended Ordinance No. 96-87, as amended, Ordinance No.
93-38, as amended, or Ordinance No. 84-10, as amended, shall be affected
or terminated by virtue of this repeal but shall remain in effect for the time
and under the terms granted as if the ordinance authorizing the exemption
had not been so repealed.
§ 647-31. Notice to taxpayers.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-20, notice of the adoption of this article shall
be included in the mailing of annual property tax bills to each owner of
a dwelling located in the City of Vineland during the first year following
adoption of this article.
§ 647-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-31
1:1143

ARTICLE VI
Environmental Opportunity Zone
[Adopted 6-25-1996 by Ord. No. 96-53 (Ch. 424, Art. VI, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 647-32. Legislative intent.
The adoption of the provisions of this article are intended to assist this
municipality in returning underutilized and abandoned industrial and
commercial properties to the active tax rolls to help alleviate the residential
property tax burden in this municipality. It is further understood that, by
revitalizing these properties, the municipality will not only ease their tax
burden but they will help to restore a vital resource for job creation and
foster redevelopment in the region.
§ 647-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSESSOR — The Municipal Tax Assessor appointed pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 9 of Title 40A of the New Jersey Statutes.
CONTAMINATION or CONTAMINANT — Any discharged hazardous
substance as defined pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1976, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11b), hazardous waste as defined pursuant to Section 1 of P.L.
1976, c. 99 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-38) or pollutant as defined pursuant to Section 3
of P.L. 1977, c. 74 (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-3).
ENVIRONMENTAL OPPORTUNITY ZONE — Any qualified real property
that has been designated by the governing body as an "environmental
opportunity zone" pursuant to Section 4 of P.L. 1995, c. 413 (N.J.S.A.
54:4-3.153).
QUALIFIED REAL PROPERTY — Any parcel of real property that is now
vacant or underutilized, which is in need of remediation due to a discharge
or threatened discharge of a contaminant, and which is listed in the most
recent Department of Environmental Protection publication of known
hazardous discharge sites in New Jersey prepared pursuant to P.L. 1982, c.
202 (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.15 et seq.).
REMEDIATION — All necessary actions to investigate and clean up any
known, suspected, or threatened discharge of contaminants, including, as
necessary, the preliminary assessment, site investigation, remedial
investigation, and remedial action.
§ 647-34. Application process.
A. A property owner or contract purchaser can obtain an application form
from the Tax Assessor's office. (The application must be filled out in its
entirety and have all necessary attachments to be determined complete
for review and recommendation.)
§ 647-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-34
1:1145
§ 647-35. Designation of environmental opportunity zones.
[Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-38]
B. In addition to a completed application, the applicant for an
environmental opportunity zone must provide a copy of the title or
purchase agreement; a copy of an executed memorandum of agreement
(MOA) or administrative consent order (ACO) with the State of New
Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection, Site Remediation
Program; and an agreement to perform the remediation. The specific
environmental opportunity zone, once remediated, will be used for
commercial or industrial purposes during the time period for which the
real property tax exemption has been given by the City Council of the
City of Vineland, based on the recommendation of the Tax Assessor,
which time period restriction shall be included in the executed tax
abatement/exemption agreement.
C. Confirmation, in writing, by the Director of the Department of Health,
the Environmental Health Coordinator or his/her designee, or other
entity designated by the City to review the potential environmental
hazard or the placement of the property on the State of New Jersey
Contaminated Site List, prepared pursuant to P.L. 1982, c. 202 (N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.15 et seq.), shall be sent out annually to each municipality.
D. Upon receipt of the documents described in Subsections A, B and C
above, the Tax Assessor shall prepare a recommendation of approval or
denial for the governing body's action at a regularly scheduled meeting
of the municipal governing body. In addition to reviewing the
paperwork described above, the Tax Assessor shall review the property
for tax delinquency status. If a property owner has consistently paid
taxes and now wishes to request the tax abatement offered to an
environmental opportunity zone, then the owner must demonstrate to
the City that without this designation the remediation of an
environmental hazard will not occur.
E. The designation of a property and its approval may be assigned to a
subsequent owner with the approval of the governing body.
A. The real properties referred to in this section are hereby designated as
environmental opportunity zones pursuant to P.L. 1995, c. 413 (N.J.S.A.
54:43.150 et seq.). This designation allows the owner or contract
purchaser of the designated property to apply for final designation as
set forth in this article. A final designation of an environmental
opportunity zone does not occur until the application is approved by the
Tax Assessor and recommended for final approval by the governing
body. The final approval will be granted by the governing body at a
regularly scheduled meeting by resolution of the governing body. The
real properties to be designated eligible for application as an
environmental opportunity zone are as follows:
(1) 14 N.W. Boulevard (Block 431, Lot 9).
§ 647-34 VINELAND CODE § 647-35
1:1146
§ 647-36. Payments in lieu of taxes.
(2) 119 S. East Boulevard (Block 573, Lot 17).
(3) 701 E. Elmer Street (Block 575, Lot 1).
(4) 109 S. Seventh Street (Block 575, Lot 22).
(5) 508 Washington Avenue (Block 726, Lot 2).
(6) 1903 S. Delsea Drive (Block 914, Lot 15).
B. This list may be expanded at anytime by resolution of the governing
body based upon a recommendation of the Tax Assessor and the
Director of the Department of Health, the Environmental Health
Coordinator, or designee, or such other official designated to determine
the potential or actual discharge on the property.
A. Payments in lieu of real property taxes will be computed as a portion of
the real property taxes otherwise due, according to the following
schedule:
(1) In the first tax year following execution of a memorandum of
agreement (MOA) or administrative consent order (ACO), no
payment in lieu of taxes otherwise due.
(2) In the second tax year following execution of an MOA or ACO, an
amount of not less than 10% of taxes otherwise due.
(3) In the third tax year following execution of an MOA or ACO, an
amount of not less than 30% of taxes otherwise due.
(4) In the fourth tax year following execution of an MOA or ACO, an
amount of not less than 40% of taxes otherwise due.
(5) In the fifth tax year following execution of an MOA or ACO, an
amount of not less than 50% of taxes otherwise due.
(6) In the sixth tax year following execution of an MOA or ACO, an
amount of not less than 60% of taxes otherwise due.
(7) In the seventh tax year following execution of an MOA or ACO, an
amount of not less than 70% of taxes otherwise due.
(8) In the eighth tax year following execution of an MOA or ACO, an
amount of not less than 80% of taxes otherwise due.
(9) In the ninth tax year following execution of an MOA or ACO, an
amount of not less than 90% of taxes otherwise due.
(10) In the tenth and all subsequent tax years following execution of an
MOA or ACO, the exemption shall expire and the full amount of the
assessed real property taxes, taking into account the value of the
real property in its remediated state, shall be due.
§ 647-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-36
1:1147
B. The payments required pursuant to this section of the article shall be
made in quarterly installments according to the same schedule as real
property taxes are due and payable. Failure to make these payments
shall result in the termination of the exemption.
C. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, if at any time the
governing body finds that the MOA has been terminated at the option of
the applicant, unless an ACO is issued in its stead, or that any of the
conditions of this article are not met, the period of the property tax
exemption shall end as determined by the appropriate municipal
officials.
§ 647-36 VINELAND CODE § 647-36
1:1148
ARTICLE VII
Motel and Hotel Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-72]
§ 647-37. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, N.J.S.A. 54:32D-1 et seq., which authorizes the governing body of a
municipality to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage
rate not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after
July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel or motel subject to taxation
pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30 (N.J.S.A.
54:32B-3), which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed
pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental
entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 647-38. Tax established.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
City of Vineland which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of 3% on
charges of rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to
taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30, N.J.S.A.
54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 647-39. Tax to be in addition to other taxes or fees.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 647-40. Exemptions.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized herein shall not be
imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or consumer
is an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy under the Sales
and Use Tax Act pursuant to Subsection (a) of Section 9 of P.L. 1966, c. 30
(N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9).
§ 647-41. Payment and collection of tax; vendor responsibilities;
violations and penalties.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
§ 647-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 647-41
1:1149
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the City by
the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally
liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected
hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to
collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent
and payable at the same time, provided that the Chief Financial Officer
of the City shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought
to collect the tax.
F. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be $1,250 for
each offense.
§ 647-41 VINELAND CODE § 647-41
1:1150
Chapter 651
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Limousines — See Ch. 441. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
§ 651-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation or association.
PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR — The appointed individual by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of City Council in accordance with § 123-11 of the
Code of the City of Vineland.[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-6]
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other public
place.
TAXICAB — Any automobile, motor vehicle or other vehicle, commonly
called "taxi," engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which
is held out, announced or advertised to operate and run or which is operated
or run over any of the streets or the public highways of this City and,
particularly, accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves
for transportation from points or places to points and places.
TAXIMETER — A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab upon
which the fare is based, which measures mechanically the distance driven
and the waiting time.
WAITING TIME — The time when a taxicab is not in motion, from the time
of acceptance of a passenger to the time of discharge, but does not include
any time that a taxicab is not in motion due to any cause other than the
request, act or fault of a passenger.
§ 651-2. License requirements.
No person may cause a taxicab to be operated without first having obtained
a taxicab owner's license from the Council of the City of Vineland. No
person may operate a taxicab without first having obtained a taxicab
operator's license from the Council of the City of Vineland.
§ 651-3. License procedure.
All applications shall be in writing on forms approved by the City Clerk. All
applications for taxicab owner's and operator's licenses shall be completed
in their entirety and filed with the City Clerk. Any application which is
deemed incomplete by the City Clerk or his/her designee shall be rejected.
§ 647-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 651-3
1:1151
All completed applications shall have the date and time that they have been
received recorded thereon.
A. Taxicab operator's license.
(1) All applications for taxicab operator's license shall contain or be
accompanied with the following:
(a) The name, age and residence of the applicant. A post office box
is not acceptable.
(b) The names and addresses of two references residing in the City
of Vineland.
(c) The full amount of the license application fee hereinafter
prescribed.
(d) Other information deemed appropriate by the Director of
Public Safety and/or the Chief of Police. [Amended 2-11-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-6]
(2) All applicants shall have the following qualifications: [Amended
2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-7]
(a) An applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
(b) An applicant shall be a citizen or legal resident of the United
States.
(c) An applicant shall have a valid New Jersey driver's license.
(d) An applicant shall be able to communicate in the English
language.
(e) An applicant shall be disqualified from operating or driving a
taxicab if a criminal history background check and/or driver's
abstract required pursuant to § 651-3A(5) revealed a record of
conviction of any of the following crimes or offenses:
[1] In New Jersey or elsewhere any crime or offense as
follows: aggravated assault, arson, burglary, escape,
extortion, homicide, kidnapping, robbery, aggravated
sexual assault, sexual assault, or endangering the welfare
of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon
enumerated in Subsection r. of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A.
2C:39-4 or N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9 or a disorderly persons or petty
disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use, possession
or sale of a controlled dangerous substance as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
[2] In any other state, territory, commonwealth or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the
§ 651-3 VINELAND CODE § 651-3
1:1152
world, as a result of a conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction, a crime which in that other jurisdiction or
country is comparable to one of the crimes enumerated in
Subsection A(2)(e)[1] of this section.
[3] In New Jersey or elsewhere the conviction of an alcohol- or
drug-related traffic offense enumerated in N.J.S.A.
39:4-49.1, N.J.S.A. 29:4-50 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 39:4-51 et
seq. or its equivalent in any other state, territory,
commonwealth or other jurisdiction of the United States,
which has occurred in the last 10 years prior to the
application being submitted.
(f) An applicant shall have further qualifications that the Director
of Public Safety may deem appropriate and necessary to
determine the fitness of the applicant to operate a taxicab.
(g) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if a person
who has been convicted of one of the crimes or offenses
enumerated in Subsection A(2)(e)[1] and [2] of this section can
produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense occurred outside
New Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction
where the criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense shall
not disqualify the applicant from operating or driving a taxicab.
(3) Each applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Vineland Police
Department or such other agency that regularly performs
background checks for the City of Vineland. [Amended 2-11-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-6]
(4) An operator's license shall not be transferable.
(5) Upon submission of an application, the Director of Public Safety
shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the
applicant meets the qualifications as set forth herein. The Director
shall submit his/her report of findings to the City Clerk.
(6) The City Clerk shall submit his/her recommendations for the
issuance of a taxicab operator's license to City Council for
consideration. When City Council has determined to grant such
license, it shall do so by resolution. Upon the adoption of such
resolution, the City Clerk shall sign all licenses and issue to each
approved operator an operator's license in accordance herewith.
(7) Each applicant who has been approved for an operator's license as
prescribed herein shall be issued an operator's license which shall
contain a photo identification of the operator. Said license shall be
displayed conspicuously on the dashboard of the taxicab being
operated in plain view of the passenger. Said license shall be
presented at anytime upon the request of any police officer, the
Code Enforcement Officer, the Director of Public Safety, any
§ 651-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 651-3
1:1153
authorized City agent or any passenger. Every operator's license
shall have affixed thereto the City license number, date of issue and
date of expiration.
(8) Each taxicab operator licensed in accordance herewith shall be
required to comply with Subsection A(3) every other year, which
shall be completed prior to the date of expiration of their current
license.
B. Taxicab owner's license.
(1) All applications for taxicab owner's license shall contain or be
accompanied by the following:
(a) The names, age and residence of the applicant. A post office
box is not acceptable.
[1] If a partnership, the names, ages and residences of all
partners along with the business address of the
partnership.
[2] If a corporation, the names, ages and residences of its
president, secretary and treasurer along with its
certificate of incorporation, certified copy of resolution
authorizing this application and a certificate of good
standing issued by the State of New Jersey not more than
30 days prior to the date of application. Application of any
corporation shall be signed by its president and attested
by its secretary.
[3] If a limited liability company, the names, ages and
residences of all of its members, name, age and residence
of managing member, certified copy of the resolution
authorizing the application, certificate of good standing
issued by the State of New Jersey not more than 30 days
prior to the date of the application.
(b) A description of the vehicle or vehicles to be licensed,
including the year, make and model, seating capacity, vehicle
identification number and license plate number thereof.
Should the applicant not have this information at the time his/
her application has been filed with the date and time of receipt
recorded thereon, then, in that event, this information must be
supplied to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of an owner's
license.
(c) The owner of such taxicab to be licensed in accordance
herewith shall file with the Clerk of the City of Vineland for
each taxicab operated an insurance policy of a company duly
licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of the
State of New Jersey, conditioned for the payment of a sum of
not less than $15,000 to satisfy all claims for damages by
§ 651-3 VINELAND CODE § 651-3
1:1154
reason of bodily injury to, or the death of, any one person
resulting from an accident and a sum of not less than $30,000
to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of the bodily injuries
to, or the death of, all persons on account of any such accident
by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of
such taxicab upon any public street; and conditioned for the
payment of a sum not less than $5,000 to satisfy any claim
for damages to property of any one person resulting from an
accident and a sum not less than $5,000 to satisfy all claims
for damages to property of all persons on account of any such
accident by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance
or use of such taxicab upon any public street.
(d) The names and addresses of two references residing in the City
of Vineland.
(e) The full amount of the application fee herein prescribed.
(f) Other information deemed appropriate by the Director of
Public Safety.
(2) All applicants for a taxicab owner's license shall have the following
qualifications: [Amended 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-7]
(a) An applicant shall be at least 18 years of age. All partners,
corporate officers or members of the limited liability company
applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
(b) All applicants shall be a citizen or legal resident of the United
States. All partners, corporate officers or members of a limited
liability company applicant shall be a citizen or legal resident
of the United States.
(c) An applicant shall be disqualified from obtaining a taxicab
owner’s license if any persons enumerated in § 651-3B(1)(a)
shall have a record of conviction of any of the following crimes
or offenses:
[1] In New Jersey or elsewhere any crime as follows:
aggravated assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion,
homicide, kidnapping, robbery, aggravated sexual assault,
sexual assault, or endangering the welfare of a child
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not armed with or
having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
Subsection r. of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A. 2C:39-4 or N.J.S.A.
2C:39-9 or a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons
offense for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a
controlled dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:35-2.
§ 651-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 651-3
1:1155
[2] In any other state, territory, commonwealth or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the
world, as a result of a conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction, a crime which in that other jurisdiction or
country is comparable to one of the crimes enumerated in
Subsection B(2)(c)[1] of this section.
[3] In New Jersey or elsewhere the conviction of an alcohol- or
drug-related traffic offense enumerated in Title 39-4 et
seq., which has occurred in the last 10 years prior to the
application being submitted.
(d) (Reserved)
(e) An applicant shall have such further qualifications that the City
Clerk or Director of Public Safety may deem appropriate and
necessary to determine the fitness of the applicant to own a
taxicab.
(f) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if a person
who has been convicted of one of the crimes or offenses
enumerated in Subsection B(2)(c)[1] and [2] of this section can
produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense occurred outside
New Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction
where the criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense shall
not disqualify the applicant from operating or driving a taxicab.
(3) Upon receipt of the completed application by the City Clerk, and
provided an owner's license is available for distribution by the City
of Vineland, the application shall be forwarded to the Director of
Public Safety or his/her designee and Chief of Police, who shall
cause an investigation to be made in accordance herewith, and
thereafter he/she shall provide his/her findings and
recommendations to the City Clerk. In the event an owner's license
is not available for distribution by the City of Vineland, the
application shall be placed on file with the City Clerk with the date
and time recorded thereon in accordance herewith. As owners'
licenses become available they shall be offered to those applicants
in the order of the date and times upon which each completed
application was received and filed, the earliest having the first
option to acquire said license in accordance herewith. Notice of
availability shall be sent by certified mail and regular mail
simultaneously, requiring the applicant to respond within 20 days
of mailing by notifying the City Clerk in writing of his/her interest
to acquire the available license. Should there be no response within
said time, or should notice to the address given in the application
be undeliverable or returned, notice shall then go the next
applicant based upon the date and time of receipt of the completed
application. It shall be the applicant's obligation to notify the City
Clerk of any change of address. A nonrefundable police/public
§ 651-3 VINELAND CODE § 651-3
1:1156
§ 651-4. License term.
Any new license issued hereunder shall be valid from its date of issuance
until December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, a renewal license shall be
valid for one year from January 1 to December 31.
§ 651-5. Fees. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68;
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-16]
safety investigation fee shall be paid prior to submission to the
Director of Public Safety for fingerprinting, if applicable, and
investigation. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-6]
(4) Upon compliance with all requirements specified herein, the City
Clerk shall issue a certificate in duplicate showing that the owner
of the taxicab or taxicabs has complied with the terms and
conditions of this chapter for each taxicab to be operated by the
owner's license holder. The certificate shall recite the name of the
insurance company, the number and date of expiration of the policy
or bond, a description of the taxicab insured thereunder and the
registration number of the same. Upon issuance of a certificate of
compliance, City Council shall consider the adoption of a resolution
authorizing the issuance of an owner's license. The duplicate
certificate shall thereafter be filed with the Motor Vehicle
Commission before any such car is licensed as a taxicab in the City
of Vineland. A certificate of compliance duly filed in accordance
herewith and accompanying Council resolution is required for each
taxicab being operated by the owner's license holder.
(5) Each applicant who has been approved for an owner's license as
prescribed herein shall be issued an owner's license which shall
contain a photo identification of the owner. Said license shall be
displayed conspicuously on the dashboard of the taxicab being
operated in plain view of the passenger in addition to the certificate
of compliance. Said license shall be presented at anytime upon the
request of any police officer, the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Director of Public Safety, any authorized City agent or any
passenger. Every owner's license shall have affixed thereto the City
license number, date of issue and date of expiration.
A. New owner's license application fee, for each taxicab per year:
(1) For year 2016: $94.
(2) For year 2017: $97.
(3) For year 2018: $100.
(4) For year 2019: $103.
(5) For year 2020: $106.
§ 651-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 651-5
1:1157
B. New owner's license, public safety investigation fee, per applicant per
year:
(1) For year 2016: $84.
(2) For year 2017: $87.
(3) For year 2018: $90.
(4) For year 2019: $93.
(5) For year 2020: $96.
C. Renewal of owner's license and taxicab inspection fee, per taxicab per
year:
(1) For year 2016: $84.
(2) For year 2017: $87.
(3) For year 2018: $90.
(4) For year 2019: $93.
(5) For year 2020: $96.
D. Transfer of owner's license:
(1) For year 2016: $94.
(2) For year 2017: $97.
(3) For year 2018: $100.
(4) For year 2019: $103.
(5) For year 2020: $106.
E. New operator's license:
(1) For year 2016: $94.
(2) For year 2017: $97.
(3) For year 2018: $100.
(4) For year 2019: $103.
(5) For year 2020: $106.
F. Renewal of operator's license:
(1) For year 2016: $94.
(2) For year 2017: $97.
(3) For year 2018: $100.
§ 651-5 VINELAND CODE § 651-5
1:1158
§ 651-6. Insurance or bond.
(4) For year 2019: $103.
(5) For year 2020: $106.
G. Replacement operator's license:
(1) For year 2016: $28.
(2) For year 2017: $29.
(3) For year 2018: $30.
(4) For year 2019: $31.
(5) For year 2020: $32.
H. Fingerprint fees shall be an additional fee as determined by the
Vineland Police Department.
A. No owner's license shall be issued until the owner of such taxicab shall
have filed with the City Clerk an insurance policy in accordance with
§ 651-3B(1)(c).
B. An owner's license shall become effective and operation thereunder
shall be permitted only so long as the insurance policy shall remain in
force to the full and collectible amounts as aforesaid.
C. If an owner's license holder operates more than one taxicab, he/she
may file with the City Clerk, in lieu of the insurance policy required by
§ 651-3B(1)(c) herein, a bond or insurance policy of a company duly
licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of this state in
the sum of $50,000, which shall be a blanket insurance covering all
taxicabs operated by the owner's license holder, which shall provide for
the payment of any final judgment involved by any person on account of
the ownership, maintenance and use of any such taxicabs or any fault
with respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of any person suffering
loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
D. Where a taxicab operator has a principal place of business other than
the City of Vineland, said taxicab owner shall, prior to operating in the
City of Vineland, file with the City Clerk the insurance policy or bond
required by §§ 651-3B(1)(c) and 651-6C as well as the certificate of
compliance required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-6.
E. The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the taxicab or any fault in respect thereto and
shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury
as aforesaid.
§ 651-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 651-7
1:1159
§ 651-7. Power of attorney.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-5, every owner shall execute and deliver to
the City Clerk, concurrently with the filing of a policy or bond aforesaid,
a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the
City of Vineland Chief Fiscal Officer his/her true and lawful attorney for
the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy or bond filed.
§ 651-8. Owner's office.
Every owner, before obtaining a license hereunder, shall have and maintain
in the City of Vineland an office with telephone service for the purpose
of receiving telephone calls from prospective passengers and from where
said taxicab may be dispatched to provide taxicab service to a prospective
passenger. The owner's license shall be maintained in said office, and said
license shall be conspicuously displayed.
§ 651-9. Taxicab inspection; identification signs.
A. No owner's license shall be issued until the Code Enforcement Officer:
(1) Determines that such owner has adequately provided for the safety
of children under the age of five years who are taxicab passengers.
The owner shall provide a written policy and posted notice, at the
owner's base of operation and in each taxicab, conspicuous to
operators, stating that, prior to operating a taxicab, a child 18
months of age or younger shall be a rear seat passenger secured in
a state or federally approved child passenger restraint system, and
a child over the age of 18 months but less than five years shall be a
rear seat passenger secured in either a state or federally approved
child passenger restraint system or secured in a lap belt or lap belt
and shoulder harness. Each owner shall keep and maintain a state
or federally approved child passenger restraint system in the
passenger compartment or trunk of the taxicab for use pursuant to
this section and § 651-13F hereunder.
(2) Directs a thorough inspection ensuring that each taxicab:
(a) Is safe, clean and sanitary to transport passengers.
(b) Is properly equipped with an approved child passenger
restraint system as described in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard Number 213.
(c) Carries, in such position viewable from the outside, an electric
sign not less than five inches by nine inches nor more than six
inches by 10 inches which shall be illuminated at night and
shall plainly show the word "Taxi" and the number of the
owner's license in legible letters and figures.
§ 651-7 VINELAND CODE § 651-9
1:1160
§ 651-10. Maximum number of owners' licenses; transfers.
§ 651-11. Renewals; change of residence.
(d) Has painted on each side thereof, in letters at least three
inches high, the word "taxi" or "cab" or the name of the
operating owner containing the word "taxi," "cab" or "taxicab."
(e) Does not have any visual structural or mechanical deficiencies
for which a motor vehicle registration would be denied.
(f) Complies with any and all other provisions of this chapter.
B. If the inspection concludes that there is no violation of this section, a
new City-issued reflective sticker shall be affixed to the driver's side
rear quarter panel indicating the owner's license number and year
issued.
C. The Police Department shall also have inspection power under this
section to assist code enforcement.
D. Each taxicab licensed in accordance herewith shall have affixed in a
conspicuous location within the taxicab so that any passenger may read
the same a sign or sticker indicating: "If you have any complaints
regarding this taxicab or taxi operator, you may lodge your complaints
by filing a written notice with the City Clerk of the City of Vineland, 640
E. Wood Street, Vineland, New Jersey 08360."
A. The maximum number of owners' licenses issued hereunder shall be 28,
and no new license shall be issued to exceed this number; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent renewals or person-toperson
transfer of owners' licenses issued and outstanding.
B. No owner's license shall be transferred from one owner to another
unless said prospective owner has complied with all of the terms and
conditions contained herein and required for the issuance of an owner's
license.
A. Any taxicab owner's and/or operator's license may be renewed for a
succeeding license term to replace a license which expired or is due to
expire on the last day of the immediately preceding license term;
provided, however, that said license is for the same owner or operator
as the expired or expiring license, covers the same taxicab, is issued to
the holder of the expired or expiring license and is issued pursuant to
an application therefor which shall have been filed with the City Clerk
prior to the commencement of said new license term or not later than
30 days after the commencement thereof. Taxicab owner's and/or
operator's licenses issued otherwise than aforesaid shall be deemed
new licenses.
B. A change of residence by any owner or operator shall be reported in
writing to the City Clerk within 30 days after such change.
§ 651-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 651-12
1:1161
§ 651-12. Taxi stands.
§ 651-13. Operation regulations.
A. City Council may designate by ordinance certain locations within the
City for use as taxi stands as it deems necessary for public convenience.
(See Chapter 694, Vehicles and Traffic.)
B. Only taxicabs licensed hereunder shall occupy any part of said taxi
stands.
C. All taxi stands shall be used by operators on a first-come-first-served
basis. An operator entering a taxi stand in a taxicab shall join behind
any waiting taxicabs and advance forward as the preceding taxicabs
depart.
D. Taxicab owners shall maintain the sanitary condition of taxi stands and
shall provide properly screened refuse storage areas for the use of
operators and customers on lands other than the City-owned miniparks
and adjacent drives and walkways. An owner's right to use taxi stands
shall be subject to revocation by City Council upon submission of
documented evidence of litter/trash ordinance violations by the City
Engineer's Office, the Health Department or other solid waste
enforcement agency.
A. Any taxicab occupying a taxi stand shall be immediately available for
hire. Upon request, no owner or operator, unless previously engaged,
shall refuse or neglect to carry any orderly person anywhere within the
City. No owner or operator shall leave a vehicle unattended or in any
other manner render said vehicle unready for immediate use while
occupying any taxi stand.
B. No owner or operator shall permit any person, other than a passenger
being transported for hire, in or about such taxicab when in service as a
taxicab.
C. No operator shall cruise on streets of this City with any taxicab at any
time for the purpose of soliciting passengers or to bring the presence of
the taxicab to the attention of prospective passengers. A taxicab being
driven along the City streets for any purpose other than transporting a
passenger, going to a specified destination by the most direct route in
response to a call for a taxicab by a prospective passenger or returning
by the most direct route to the taxicab's home terminus after
discharging a passenger, or going to or from said terminus to the
operator's home by the most direct route, shall be prima facie evidence
of cruising.
D. No owner or operator shall induce any person to employ him by
knowingly misinforming or misleading any such person, either as to the
time or place of arrival or departure of any train or bus or as to the
location of any hotel, public or private place, nor shall any such owner
or operator deceive any person, make false representations to him or
§ 651-12 VINELAND CODE § 651-13
1:1162
§ 651-14. Discontinued service; surrender of license.
An owner who discontinues taxicab service or fails, without good cause,
to operate and maintain the taxicab for more than 90 consecutive days
shall immediately surrender his taxicab license to the Municipal Clerk for
cancellation. Failure so to do shall be sufficient cause for suspension or
revocation of said taxicab license.
§ 651-15. Taximeters.
convey any passenger to any other place or over any other route than
that indicated by the passenger.
E. No owner or operator who has accepted an order to call at any point in
the City of Vineland for the purpose of conveying any person to any
other point in said City or the surrounding community shall neglect or
unreasonably delay to execute the order. Any order delivered to and
accepted by a person in charge of the garage, office or home of the
operator shall be considered as having been delivered to and accepted
by the owner or operator.
F. Transport of children.
(1) Every taxicab operator hereunder who transports a child under the
age of five years shall be responsible for the protection of the child
by properly using a state or federally approved child passenger
restraint system.
(2) No operator shall transport a child five years of age or younger
unless a child 18 months of age or younger is a rear seat passenger
secured in a state or federally approved child passenger restraint
system and a child over 18 months of age but less than five years is
a rear seat passenger secured in either a state or federally
approved child passenger restraint system or secured in a lap belt
or lap belt and shoulder harness.
G. If for any safety reason an operator believes that a customer should not
be served, said operator shall not be required to provide service to said
customer.
A. All taxicabs shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the
passengers, visible to them at all times, day and night. After sundown,
the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. Said taximeter shall be
operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and
construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the
front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving
mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if
manipulated, would affect their correct reading. Each taximeter shall
have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it
is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the operator to throw the
flag of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of
§ 651-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 651-15
1:1163
§ 651-16. Fares.
each trip. The Director of Public Safety or any Police Officer is
authorized, either on complaint of any person or without such
complaint, to inspect any taximeter and, upon discovering any
inaccuracy therein, to notify the taxicab operator to cease operation.
Thereupon, said taxicab shall be kept off the highways until the
taximeter is repaired and in required working condition.
B. All taximeters required in accordance herewith shall have been
properly inspected and have affixed thereto proof of compliance with
the State of New Jersey, Department of Weights and Measures. No
taxicab owner's license shall issue nor shall any taxicab operate without
the prior compliance with this section.
A. No owner or operator of a taxicab or other vehicle for hire shall charge
a sum greater than the following fares for the use of said vehicle:
(1) A minimum fare of $3 is established.
(2) Mileage rates: $1.60 shall be charged upon entering the taxicab,
also known as the "drop fare," and $2 for each additional meter
mile. Fractions of each mile shall be calculated at the rate of $0.20
per 1/10 of a mile.
(3) Plus $0.50 for each article of luggage or baggage for each
passenger.
(4) Waiting time at the rate of $0.40 for each minute.
(5) Plus additional charges for accepting and discharging passengers
in the following zones:
(a) Zone 1 shall be a free zone. Fares resulting from accepting or
discharging passengers within Zone 1 shall not incur any
additional charge over the fare set forth in Subsection A(2)
above.
(b) Zone 2. All fares resulting from acceptance or discharge of
passengers in Zone 2 which did not begin or end in Zone 1
(free zone) shall incur a charge of $0.50, in addition to the fare
set forth in Subsection A(2) above.
(c) Zone 3. All fares not otherwise covered by Subsection A(5)(a)
and (b) herein resulting from acceptance or discharge of
passengers in Zone 3, which did not begin or end in Zone 1
(free zone), shall incur a charge of $1, in addition to the fare
set in Subsection A(2) above.
(d) Zone 4. All fares not otherwise covered by Subsection A(5)(a),
(b) and (c) herein resulting from acceptance or discharge of
passengers in Zone 4 which did not begin or end in Zone 1
§ 651-15 VINELAND CODE § 651-16
1:1164
§ 651-17. Issuance of receipts.
An operator shall, upon demand by a passenger, provide such passenger a
receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or
by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the owner,
license number or motor number, amount of meter-reading charges and
date of transaction.
§ 651-18. Authority to adopt rules and regulations.
§ 651-19. Denial, suspension or revocation; hearing. [Amended
2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-6]
Any owner's or operator's license may be denied, revoked or suspended
at any time for cause for the violation of any provision hereunder or any
other City ordinance. The licensee may make a written request for a hearing
within 10 days from date of denial, revocation or suspension. The hearing
(free zone), shall incur a charge of $2, in addition to the fare
set forth in Subsection A(2) above.
(e) Zone 5. All fares not otherwise covered by Subsection A(5)(a),
(b), (c) and (d) herein resulting from acceptance or discharge
of passengers in Zone 5 which did not begin or end in Zone 1
(free zone) shall incur a charge of $3, in addition to the fare set
forth in Subsection A(2) above.
(f) Zone 6. All fares not otherwise covered by Subsection A(5)(a),
(b), (c), (d) and (e) herein resulting from acceptance or
discharge of passengers in Zone 6 which did not begin or end
in Zone 1 (free zone) shall incur a charge of $4, in addition to
the fare set forth in Subsection A(2) above.
B. The locations and boundaries of Zones 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 in the City of
Vineland shall be shown on a City of Vineland map, entitled the "Taxicab
Fare Zone Map, Vineland, New Jersey" and kept on file with the City
Clerk. The map shall be displayed in each taxicab and taxi stand, and its
cost shall be borne by each owner.
C. Every taxicab operated hereunder shall have a rate card setting forth
the authorized rates of fare displayed in plain view of all passengers.
A. City Council reserves the right to make such rules and regulations for
the operation of taxicabs and the conduct of the operators thereof as it
may determine to be necessary and proper in the best interests of the
citizens of the City. Any violation of said rules and regulations shall
constitute a violation of this chapter, punishable as provided hereunder.
B. The Director of Public Safety, his/her designee or the Chief of Police
may, with the approval of City Council, make reasonable regulations not
inconsistent herewith for the conduct of owners and operators
hereunder. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-6]
§ 651-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 651-19
1:1165
shall be held before the Director of Public Safety, his/her designee or any
director duly appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of City
Council. Such denial, suspension or revocation may be in addition to or
instead of penalties prescribed by § 651-20 hereunder. A suspended or
revoked license shall not be reissued except for good and sufficient reasons
shown.
§ 651-20. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 660
TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Health — See Ch. 62. Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 216.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty. [Amended 10-27-2009
by Ord. No.2009-68]
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the
same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
C. Unless another law is stated to the contrary, the Vineland Municipal
Court shall have jurisdiction over the violations and penalties set forth
in this section.
§ 651-19 VINELAND CODE § 651-20
1:1166
ARTICLE I
Sale to Minors; Vending Machines and Self-Service Displays
[Adopted 10-28-1997 by Ord. No. 97-78 (Ch. 431 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 660-1. Prohibition of tobacco sales to minors. [Amended
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68; 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58;
7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-45]
§ 660-2. Identification required. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-68; 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58]
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco and/or electronic smoking device retailer
to sell or permit to be sold to any individual without requesting and
examining identification from the purchaser positively establishing the
purchaser's age as 21 years or greater unless the seller has some other
conclusive basis for determining the buyer is over the age of 21 years.
§ 660-3. Prohibition of vending machines and self-service tobacco
and/or electronic smoking device displays. [Amended 5-11-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-22; 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58; 7-9-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-45]
A. It shall be unlawful to sell tobacco and electronic smoking devices and
any substance used in such device to a person under the age of 21.
B. Sign requirements. Any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:40A-1 et seq. shall, as a condition of the license,
conspicuously post a sign at the point of display of any tobacco product
and/or electronic smoking device at the point of sale. The sign shall be
of a size and contain language in compliance with N.J.S.A. 54:40A-4.1
for tobacco as well as electronic smoking devices.
A. It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco and/or electronic
smoking devices or any substance used in such device through a
vending machine in the City of Vineland.
B. Self-service tobacco and/or electronic smoking devices or any
substance used in such devices are prohibited in all retail and
wholesale establishments where retail sales are permitted.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Self-service tobacco and/or electronic smoking devices or any
substance used in such device displays and the sale of the same
through a vending machine are permitted in the following
establishments, provided that such vending machines are non-selfservice
vending machines as defined herein:
(a) Tobacco retail establishments.
(b) All establishments wherein alcoholic beverages are sold to the
public except restaurants as defined in Ordinance No. 97-15,278
§ 660-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-3
1:1167
§ 660-4. Admission to tobacco and electronic smoking device retail
establishments; sign to be posted. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-68; 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58]
§ 660-5. Removal of tobacco and/or electronic smoking device
vending machines and self-service tobacco and/or electronic
smoking device displays. [Amended 11-13-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-58]
All tobacco and/or electronic smoking device machines made unlawful by
the terms of this article shall be removed within 30 days from the effective
date of this article.
§ 660-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic or other powered device
that can be used to deliver nicotine, vapor or other substance to the person
inhaling from the device, including but not limited to electronic cigarettes,
commonly known as "e-cigarettes," electronic cigar, cigarillo or pipe, or any
cartridge or other component of the device or related product, including
but not limited to any substances used in such devices, such as liquids
or powders or other forms of tobacco. A reference to "electronic smoking
provided, however, that if such restaurant maintains a bar or
bar area and there exists restricted access by way of walls,
partitions, or such similar barriers with a minimum height of
42 inches and the means of access does not exceed total of 10
feet, sale of tobacco and/or electronic smoking devices or any
substance used in such device shall be permitted in the bar
or bar area only and shall be sold in the manner as provided
herein.
(2) All such permitted vending machines shall be placed in a
conspicuous location in such establishments and shall be in clear
view at all times by the owner or designee of such establishment.
A. It shall be unlawful for a tobacco and/or electronic smoking device
retail establishment to permit admission to said establishment to any
person under the age of 21 years unless such person is accompanied by
a parent or guardian or spouse over the age of 21 years.
B. Sign requirements. The following six-inch-by-eight-inch sign shall be
posted on each entrance to said tobacco and/or electronic smoking
device establishment: "Admission to the premises by persons under the
age of 21 is prohibited unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or
spouse over the age of 21 years."
278. Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 660-3 VINELAND CODE § 660-6
1:1168
device" shall also refer to any cartridge, substance or other component of
the device or related product.[Added 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58]
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The City of Vineland Health Department and
may be referred to in this article as the "Department."
HEALTH OFFICER — The administrative officer of the City of Vineland
Health Department and/or his or her authorized representatives.
NON-SELF-SERVICE TOBACCO AND/OR ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE
VENDING MACHINE — A vending machine which vends tobacco and/or
electronic smoking device products and:[Amended 11-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-58]
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
RETAIL ELECTRONIC SMOKING ESTABLISHMENT — A physical
establishment, duly licensed by the City of Vineland Department of Health
that sells, offers for sale, gives, distributes or furnishes electronic smoking
devices designed for consumption through inhalation as defined
herein.[Added 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58]
SELF-SERVICE TOBACCO AND/OR ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE
DISPLAY — A display or rack where any person shall have the capability of
direct access to tobacco, tobacco products, and electronic smoking devices
as defined herein.[Amended 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58]
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — A store, stand or booth at which
not less than 75% of the retail floor area of said store, stand or booth is
dedicated and used for the advertisement, examination and purchase of
tobacco, tobacco products and products incidental to the use of tobacco
products.
Which has attached thereto or constructed therein a device which
precludes the self-service operation of said machine.
A.
Can only be unlocked or activated by the owner or designees of such
establishment wherein the machine is located after such owner or
designee has made a proper identification as described in § 660-2
herein; and
B.
Has permanently affixed thereto in a conspicuous location on the front
of the machine a six-inch-by-eight-inch sign which shall state the
following: "This vending machine is not self-service. A person desiring
to purchase tobacco and/or electronic smoking devices from this
machine is required to show proper identification to attendant. The sale
of tobacco and/or electronic smoking devices to persons under the age
of 21 is illegal."
C.
§ 660-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-6
1:1169
VENDING MACHINE — An automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
cigarettes or other tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE LOCATION — The room, enclosure, space or area
where a tobacco vending machine is installed or operated.
§ 660-7. License required for retail sale of electronic smoking
devices; fees. [Added 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58279]
§ 660-8. Enforcement; complaints.
A. No person shall conduct, maintain or operate a retail electronic
smoking device establishment without first obtaining from the
Department of Health a license to do so.
B. No itinerant establishments or vendors shall be permitted to obtain an
electronic smoking device establishment license.
C. The fees collected for the license may be used to fund the
administration of this article and the development and maintenance of a
Health Department age of sale enforcement program and other
smoking cessation, prevention and control programs. Fees in
accordance with the following schedule shall be paid before any license
required in this article shall be issued: annual electronic smoking
device establishment license fee: $600 for the initial annual license and
$300 per year for each renewal license thereafter.
D. Licenses issued under this article, unless forfeited or revoked by the
Board of Health, shall expire annually on the 31st day of December
each year or whenever the licensed establishment is no longer
operating as a retail electronic smoking device establishment,
whichever first occurs. Renewal applications are to be filed on or before
December 31 of each year.
E. No license is transferrable by sale or otherwise; a license is valid only
for the specific premises and retail electronic smoking device
establishment listed thereon.
F. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the retail
electronic smoking device establishment.
A. Whenever the Health Officer or his/her designee reasonably believes
there exists a violation of this article, he/she may issue a complaint no
later than 90 days after discovery of the alleged violation. The
complaint shall be written and shall state with reasonable particularity
the nature of the violation, including reference to the section of this
article alleged to have been violated. The complaint shall be delivered
or sent by certified mail to the alleged violator.
279. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 660-7 through 660-9 as §§ 660-8
through 660-9.1, respectively.
§ 660-6 VINELAND CODE § 660-8
1:1170
§ 660-9. Severability; construal.
§ 660-9.1. Violations and penalties.
B. The Health Officer, or his/her designees, or any other person charged
with enforcement of this article, after giving proper identification, may
inspect any matter, thing, premises, place, person, record, vehicle,
incident or event as necessary.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer or his/her designee, who
may request the assistance of the Police Department of the City of
Vineland when necessary to execute his or her official duty in a manner
prescribed by law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article.
A. If any section, subsection or paragraph of this article is declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection or paragraph shall, to
the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain
in full force and effect, and no such determination shall be deemed to
invalidate the remaining sections, subsections or paragraphs of the
article.
B. This article shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the City of Vineland.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, General Penalty. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal
Court of the City of Vineland or bef0225ore other judicial officer having
authority under the laws of the State of New Jersey. [Amended
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68]
B. Each sale of tobacco and/or electronic smoking devices to persons
under the age of 21 shall constitute a separate violation. [Amended
11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58]
C. The Health Officer may suspend the retail food establishment license of
any person convicted of a third or subsequent violation of this article for
a period of not more than three days pursuant to the authority of the
Health Department to license and regulate food establishments as
provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-3 1c.
D. In addition, upon conviction of a first offense, the municipality may
recommend to the Division of Taxation a suspension of the license
issued under Section 202 of P.L. 1948, c. 65 (N.J.S.A. 54:40A-4) of a
retail dealer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13.1. Upon conviction of a
second or subsequent offense, the municipality may recommend
§ 660-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-9.1
1:1171
revocation of the license issued as aforementioned. [Amended
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-68]
E. In addition, the Health Officer may, upon a second or subsequent
conviction of a violation of this article, revoke the license issued
pursuant hereto. The vendor may request a hearing regarding the
suspension before the Board of Health if, within 10 days after notice of
such revocation, it requests a hearing, in writing, addressed to the
Health Officer. A hearing shall be scheduled within 10 days of such
request. [Added 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58]
§ 660-9.1 VINELAND CODE § 660-9.1
1:1172
ARTICLE II
Use of Tobacco and Tobacco-related Products on Public Property
[Adopted 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-12]
§ 660-10. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — The use of an electronic device that
can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling
the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar,
cigarillo or pipe.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The City of Vineland Health Department, and
may be referred to in this article as the "Department."
HEALTH OFFICER — The administrative officer of the City of Vineland
Health Department and/or his or her authorized representative.
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND IMPROVEMENTS — Shall include all
structures owned, leased, rented and/or operated by the City of Vineland,
and/or occupied by City employees, which are open to the public or to which
the public may be invited.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or the
possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, cigarillo or pipe or any other matter
or substance which contains tobacco.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing tobacco or nicotine,
including but not limited to cigars, cigarillos, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, snus, and electronic cigarette cartridges.
§ 660-11. Prohibited acts.
§ 660-12. Enforcement.
A. Smoking or use of tobacco products on public property upon which is
constructed a public building or other improvements open to the public
or to which the public may be invited is prohibited.
B. No person shall engage in smoking or the use of tobacco products while
on the grounds upon which are constructed municipal buildings and
improvements, including contiguous properties owned, leased, rented
and/or operated by the City of Vineland, regardless of whether any
municipal building or improvement is constructed thereon.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Health Officer, the Police
Department and/or the Recreation Commission or any other person
charged with the enforcement of ordinances in the City of Vineland.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer or a member of the
§ 660-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-12
1:1173
§ 660-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to be in violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the following penalties:
Recreation Commission or their designee executing their official duty
in a manner prescribed by law.
C. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article.
A. A fine of not less than $50 but not exceeding $100 for the first offense;
B. A fine of not less than $100 but not exceeding $200 for the second
offense;
C. A fine of not less than $200 but not exceeding $500 for the third
offense.
§ 660-12 VINELAND CODE § 660-13
1:1174
Chapter 665
TOWING AND STORAGE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Reimbursement for cleanup of hazardous
materials — See Ch. 407, Art. I.
Towing and wrecker licensing — See Ch. 669.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
§ 660-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 660-13
1:1175

ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 665-1. Definitions.280
The following words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AUTO REPAIR FACILITY — Any public garage where motor vehicles are
painted and/or repaired. No motor vehicle shall remain at an auto body
shop for longer than six months, for purposes of this chapter.[Amended
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of a motor
vehicle from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a parking
area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident thereto,
but does not include recovery of a motor vehicle from a position beyond the
right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other object within
the right-of-way or berm.
CITY — The City of Vineland.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Vineland.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Vineland.
CLEANUP AND REMOVAL COSTS — All costs incurred by the City or its
agents in the removal or attempted removal of hazardous substances and
disposal thereof; or costs for the taking of reasonable measures to prevent
or mitigate damage, whether actual or threatened, to the public health,
safety or welfare.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or
dumping of hazardous substances into the water or lands of the State of
New Jersey.
DISPATCH FACILITY — A place established to transmit requests for towing
services.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — The list of hazardous substances adopted
by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to Section
101 of the "Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act of 1980," P.L. 96-510 (42 U.S.C. Chapter 9601 et seq.), and
amendments thereto, and those substances listed by the NJDEP as
environmental hazardous substances pursuant to Section 4 of P.L. 1983,
Chapter 315 (N.J.S.A. 34:5A-4), and amendments thereto.
HEAVY-DUTY TOW — A tow truck with dual wheels capable of towing
large trucks/vehicles and shall meet the following minimum requirements:
gross vehicle weight (GVW), 30,000 pounds; gross combined weight rating
280. Editor's Note: The original definitions of "health," "licenses and inspections," "license,"
"storage charges for twenty-four-hour period" and "Zoning Official," which appeared in
this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
§ 665-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-1
1:1177
(GCWR), 80,000 pounds; boom rating, 50,000 pounds; winch rating, 50,000
pounds; cable size and length, 5/8 inch and 200 feet.[Added 11-28-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-99]
INSIDE BUILDINGS — Any portion of a towing facility that is completely
indoors, having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal
of vehicles and is secured by a locking device on each opening.
JUNKYARD — Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or
abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded
goods, materials, machinery, or two or more unregistered/uninspected,
inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk. For purposes of this
chapter, an auto repair facility or a towing facility shall not be considered a
junkyard.[Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks
and motorized bicycles.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a motor vehicle
comes in contact with any other object for which the motor vehicle must be
towed or removed from the scene thereof.
OUTSIDE SECURED — Any portion of a towing facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is eight feet
high or as otherwise required by Chapter 425, Land Use, and is installed
with a passive alarm system (e.g., bell ringer located in the gate area to the
enclosed facility) or a similar on-site security measure. Fences which are
not less than six feet in height which existed prior to passage of this chapter
shall be permitted; however, if such fences are replaced, the new fence shall
be eight feet in height or as otherwise required by Chapter 425, Land Use.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — Any portion of a towing facility that is not
indoors and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier,
and all other storage facilities not otherwise defined as inside buildings or
outside secured.
PETROLEUM or PETROLEUM PRODUCTS — Oil or petroleum of any kind
and in any form, including but not limited to oil petroleum, gasoline,
kerosene, fuel oil, oil sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with other wastes.
PLOT PLAN — A diagram which shows the buildings, streets, roads,
driveways, dimensions of existing and proposed structures, parking areas,
easements and property lines of an existing or proposed site at a defined
scale. [Added 9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-37]
POLICE HOLD VEHICLES — Motor vehicles which are alleged to have been
involved in illegal activity, involved in a fatal motor vehicle collision, or
designated by a Vineland police officer.
PUBLIC GARAGE — Any building, structure or property designed and used
for equipping, adjusting, greasing, washing, polishing, servicing or storage
of motor vehicles, other than at a junkyard, operated for profit and for
service to the public. For purposes of this chapter, a "public garage" means
§ 665-1 VINELAND CODE § 665-1
1:1178
any general repair garage, specialized repair garage, car wash, auto repair
facility, or towing facility.
RESPONSE TIME — Not more than 20 minutes from the time of the initial
request by the Vineland Police Department Communications Center to the
tow vehicle's arrival at the site of the incident requiring tow services, all
traffic regulations observed.
STORAGE FACILITY — A place for the storing of motor vehicles.
TOWING FACILITY — Any public garage which offers towing services. No
motor vehicle shall remain at a towing facility for longer than 60 days for
purposes of this chapter.
TOWING OPERATOR — Any entity that operates a towing business or tow
vehicle.
TOW VEHICLE — Those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms, winches,
slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically designed
by the vehicle manufacturer for the removal or transport of motor vehicles.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in use.
§ 665-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-1
1:1179

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Tow Vehicle Operators for Police Department Tow List
§ 665-2. License required.
Prospective tow list operators shall have a duly licensed towing facility or
auto repair facility meeting the requirements set forth in this chapter.
§ 665-3. Application process for Police Department tow list.
A. License application; data required. An application for license shall be in
writing, upon forms to be furnished by the City of Vineland, signed by
the applicant and filed with the Director of the Department of Licenses
and Inspections; said application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name, business address, business name and telephone number
of the towing operator.
(2) The location of the towing operator's towing facility.
(3) The name of the towing operator's insurance company and
insurance policy number.
(4) The towing fees, storage fees charged, and any other information
which the Director deems relevant and appropriate, including
experience and references.
(5) The type, condition, and design of tow vehicle(s) and equipment
available for service and the name and address of the owner of such
vehicle(s).
(6) Communications availability including radio communications, and
the location and availability of the dispatch center.
(7) The name, address and driver's license number for each driver or
operator of the tow vehicle(s).
(8) Proof that each vehicle to be licensed is duly registered and
inspected by the State of New Jersey, Division of Motor Vehicles as
a tow vehicle.
(9) Proof of insurance upon the terms and conditions stated in § 665-5
herein.
(10) Plot plan. A plot plan shall: [Added 9-25-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-37]
(a) Be drawn neatly to scale, preferably at one inch equals 20 feet.
(b) Indicate the entire lot for which application is being made.
(c) Contain a symbol indicting the direction of North.
§ 665-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-3
1:1181
(d) Indicate the name of all streets and ways upon which the lot is
located, street address and the location and type of existing
and proposed street fixtures such as utility poles, street lights,
traffic signals and signs.
(e) Indicate the name of the nearest intersection street and the
distance, in feet, to it.
(f) Indicate, with dimensions, all parking and storage areas with
distance from building and property lines.
(g) Indicate all driveways and curb cuts and easements.
(h) Indicate the width of all rights-of-way (streets and ways) upon
which the lot is located.
(i) Indicate the lot number of the subject property and abutting
lots.
(j) Draw a key map of area.
(11) Renewals; plot plan. The applicant may submit a notarized
statement with its renewal application that the plot plan required
by Subsection A(10) above has not changed from the immediate
preceding term. Any changes to the plot plan must be approved by
the Planning and/or the Zoning Board of Approval. [Added
9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-37]
B. If a firm, partnership, association, limited liability company, corporation
or other organization, the name and address of each officer, director,
partner, and/or member thereof. Each application for a license, or a
renewal thereof, shall contain the street address for the residence and
business of the licensee at the time of application or renewal. A post
office box shall be permitted only as part of a mailing address that is
submitted by the licensee in addition to the street address of the
licensee's residence or business. A licensee whose last address appears
as a post office box shall change the address on the application to the
street address of the licensee's residence and business. An application
of a corporation shall be signed in the name of the corporation by the
president and attested by the secretary. [Amended 11-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-99]
C. Said application shall be duly verified by the applicant before a notary
public or some other person duly authorized to administer oaths.
D. Each such application shall be accompanied by the full amount of the
license fee hereinafter prescribed.
E. No license shall be issued to a towing operator unless the applicant's
towing facility is located within a zoning district where such use is a
permitted use in accordance with the City of Vineland Land Use
Ordinance, Chapter 425, or unless a use variance has been obtained
therefor, and any and all Planning Board or Zoning Board approvals
§ 665-3 VINELAND CODE § 665-3
1:1182
and/or permits have been obtained therefor, or unless sufficient proofs
are provided by the applicant that said facility was operated at its
present location prior to adoption of Chapter 425, Land Use. Details of
the location shall be shown on a map or diagram accurately depicting
the dimensions, proposed layout and size of the vehicle storage spaces,
fire lanes and the maximum number of vehicles to be stored at such
premises. The information shall be submitted on a site plan approved
by the City of Vineland Planning Board and/or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
F. The tow vehicle(s) shall comply with any and all state, federal and local
laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining to safety, lighting and
towing equipment and shall be subject to inspection by the Director of
Licenses and Inspections or his designee. The Vineland Police
Department shall also have inspection power under this section to
assist the Department of Licenses and Inspections. [Amended
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
G. An application shall not be deemed complete unless accompanied by:
(1) A letter of good conduct from the Vineland Police Department
verifying that the towing operator has provided proof of a current
and valid driver's license for each driver or operator and no
criminal convictions relating to the automobile/motor vehicle
industry or which otherwise relate to the operator's ethics or
integrity. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
(2) A letter of compliance from the Zoning Official representing the
municipality having jurisdiction over the facilities of the tow
operator's base of service, dispatch and/or storage area that such
facilities are not in violation of applicable land use ordinances.
(3) A letter of compliance from the Department of Licenses and
Inspections or such other official, as applicable, representing the
municipality having jurisdiction over the property of the tow
operator that such property is not in violation of applicable
property maintenance and health codes. This compliance letter
shall include the dispatch facility and storage facility if not one and
the same. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
H. The City of Vineland shall have the right to verify the accuracy of the
information supplied in the application by interviewing, investigating
and inspecting all personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage areas
proposed for utilization by the applicant, and to determine compliance
with all applicable laws, regulations and standards of performance
required by this chapter.
I. Upon receipt of a completed application form, the Director of the
Department of Licenses and Inspections or a designee shall furnish a
copy of the application to the Chief of Police.
§ 665-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-3
1:1183
§ 665-4. Recommendation of approval or disapproval. [Amended
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
§ 665-5. Insurance.
J. The Director of Licenses and Inspections or a designee, upon receipt of
a completed application, shall conduct a background investigation of
the towing operator. This investigation shall include an inspection of the
towing facility, the tow vehicle(s) and the towing operation, and inquiry
into all relevant matters to determine if the towing operator meets the
requirements of all applicable laws, regulations, standards of
performance and security of vehicles towed or stored as mandated by
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49b. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
K. The Director of Licenses and Inspections may request and obtain
additional information from the Chamber of Commerce and the
Department of Weights and Measures and Consumer Protection of the
applicable county and from any other appropriate sources. [Amended
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
L. The towing operator shall at no time transfer or assign a license, or any
part thereof, for any purpose whatsoever.
M. No individual shall operate a tow vehicle unless that individual is duly
licensed by the State of New Jersey. Any change in licensure of vehicle
operators during the period of the license must be reported to the
Department of Licenses and Inspections within 15 days of such change.
Failure to do so shall be basis for revocation of a license. [Amended
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
A. In the event that the Director of Licenses and Inspections determines
that the towing operator is not qualified, a written report shall be filed
specifying the findings and the reasons for the recommendation of
rejection. A copy of the report shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and regular mail to the towing operator applicant.
B. Any towing operator who is denied a license based upon the findings
and recommendations of the Director of Licenses and Inspections may
file with the City Clerk a written request for a hearing before City
Council, provided such request is filed within 30 days of receipt of
notification. A hearing shall be scheduled before City Council within 60
days of the City's receipt of such request, at which hearing City Council
shall be the hearing officer for final determination of the matter.
A. In order to be included on the City of Vineland Police Department Tow
List, a towing operator shall submit proof of insurance to the Director of
the Department of Licenses and Inspections and a copy thereof to the
Vineland Police Department each year on or before January 1 that its
towing facility is insured by a reputable insurance company licensed to
do business in the State of New Jersey with a standard general liability
insurance policy designed to cover garage operations. Said insurance
§ 665-3 VINELAND CODE § 665-5
1:1184
§ 665-6. Licensing procedure. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-99]
Upon the receipt and review by the Director of the Department of Licenses
and Inspections of a completed application, and upon the findings resulting
from the investigation of the applicant and a recommendation of approval,
the application shall thereupon be referred to the Council of the City
of Vineland for consideration; and when the Council has determined to
policy shall provide for minimum monetary limits for any single
occurrence as follows: [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
(1) Automobile liability in an amount not less than $500,000 combined
single limits.
(2) Workers' compensation as required by statute.
(3) Garage keepers' legal liability in an amount not less than $100,000
per location.
(4) Garage liability, including cargo insurance, in an amount not less
than $1,000,000 combined single limit.
(5) A certificate of insurance naming the City of Vineland as a
certificate holder for a one-year term with a thirty-day notice of
cancellation.
B. The insurance company must be an approved carrier licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey. The aforesaid insurance policy shall
also be written as to include coverage for the property owned by others
which is in the care, custody or control of the licensed towing operator,
including the perils of transportation for any motor vehicle in the
possession or control of the towing operator. The garage keeper's legal
liability shall include comprehensive and collision coverage. Said
insurance policy shall provide that the insurance company will pay on
behalf of the City for any and all claims against the City resulting from
the operations of the towing operator.
C. The insurance coverage shall provide that the insurance policy may not
be canceled or materially changed without 30 days' prior written notice
to the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections and the
Vineland Police Department.
D. The towing operator shall agree in writing to assume the defense of and
indemnify and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, boards,
commissions, officers, employees and agents, from all suits, actions,
damages or claims to which the City may be subjected of any kind and
nature whatsoever resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as a
consequence of the provision of towing, storage and/or emergency
services provided by the towing operator pursuant to this chapter. Tow
operators shall enter into a hold-harmless agreement in a form to be
approved by the City Solicitor prior to being included on the towing list.
§ 665-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-6
1:1185
approve the granting of such license, it shall do so by resolution. Upon the
adoption of such resolution, the Director of the Department of Licenses and
Inspections shall issue a license certificate, which shall state the purpose
for which the license is granted, the name, business name and the base-ofservice
address of the licensee, the number of the license and the date of its
expiration, which license certificate shall be signed by the Director of the
Department of Licenses and Inspections.
§ 665-7. License term. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99;
9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-37]
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective for the period of two
years. The license shall begin on the first day of January and end on the 31st
day of December two years after the granting of the same. All licenses shall
expire automatically; applications for renewal thereof shall be submitted
on or before December 1 of the expiring year. Applications received after
December 1 of the expiring year will not be accepted.
§ 665-8. Fees.
A nonrefundable fee of $250 shall be submitted simultaneously with an
original application and all renewal applications.
§ 665-9. Suspension or revocation of license.
A license may be revoked or suspended at any time for cause by action
of the Vineland City Council, after an opportunity for the licensee to be
heard, for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance of the City of Vineland. Such license, when so suspended or
revoked, shall not be reinstated except for good and sufficient cause shown.
§ 665-6 VINELAND CODE § 665-9
1:1186
ARTICLE III
Police Department Tow List
§ 665-10. General provisions.
§ 665-11. Services to be performed by licensed towing operators.
A. Eligibility.
(1) All towing operators, in order to provide services in no-preference
motor vehicle accidents or for the removal of motor vehicles from
private or public property, as may be authorized by the Police
Department or the Department of Health, must be licensed by the
City of Vineland in accordance with this chapter.
(2) Towing operators must meet the twenty-minute-response time to
be eligible for inclusion on the City of Vineland Police Department
Tow List.
B. The list of licensed towing operators shall be maintained by the Police
Department and shall be utilized on a rotation basis. The rotation shall
be on a weekly basis unless otherwise specified by the Police
Department or in the event of emergency conditions. The towing and
storage services shall be rotated among towing operators on an equal
basis, by the job or by the week.
C. Licensed tow operators shall be subject to the minimum standards of
the performance rules and regulations of the Vineland Police
Department, including safety, availability, and compliance with the
procedures established by this chapter.
D. If the Chief of Police determines at any time that a towing operator is
unable or unwilling to fulfill the requirements of this chapter or the
statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey, the Chief of Police
shall file a written report with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall then
notify the towing operator by regular and certified mail at the address
stated pursuant to § 665-3A(1), that the Chief of Police has
recommended its removal from the Police Department Towing List. The
tow operator may file a written exception and request for a hearing with
the City Clerk within 15 days from receipt of notification. The City Clerk
shall then schedule a hearing before City Council within 30 days of the
aforesaid request. After conducting a hearing, the City Council may
then, by resolution, remove the towing operator from the Police
Department Towing List if Council determines, by a preponderance of
evidence, that the performance of the towing operator is unreliable or
inadequate.
E. The tow operator shall cease towing of vehicles on behalf of the City of
Vineland Police Department upon notification by the City Clerk that the
tow operator is to be removed from the list. [Amended 11-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-99]
§ 665-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-11
1:1187
A. Licensed towing operators agree to provide the following services on an
around-the-clock basis:
(1) Removal and transporting of motor vehicles involved in a motor
vehicle accident where the owner or operator of the motor vehicle
has not made a preference for the towing of the vehicle.
(2) Removal and transporting of a motor vehicle from private or public
property as may be authorized by the Police or Health Department
of the City of Vineland.
(3) Removal and disposal from City or private property motor vehicles
which, pursuant to state law and regulations, would be subject to
the jurisdiction of the Vineland Police Department. Such vehicles
shall be moved to such location as specified by the Vineland Police
Department.
(4) The storage of a motor vehicle removed and transported from the
scene of a motor vehicle accident.
B. Cleanup.
(1) A towing operator responding to a tow shall be responsible for all
site cleanup related to a motor vehicle accident, including the
pickup and removal of all debris from the scene of the accident and
containment of any hazardous fluids from the vehicle prior to tow,
in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, and all
services as defined by state regulations and Article I herein.
(2) It is understood that the responsibility of the tow operator as
established above in no way relieves the vehicle owner of his
responsibility for the cleanup and removal of any debris or spilled
fluids coming from his vehicle.
C. A towing operator shall provide either one boom tow truck with a wheel
lift or winch rollback or one boom tow truck with a wheel lift, capable of
transporting the vehicle to be removed without additional damage. The
transported vehicle shall not exceed the carry weight or capacity of the
carrying vehicle.
D. The towing operator shall ensure the proper utilization and deployment
of safety devices as more particularly defined in Article III, § 665-12,
herein.
E. If a licensed towing operator is unable to handle a particular situation
for whatever reason, the City shall have the right to use whatever
means necessary to accomplish the removal, transporting and storage
of motor vehicles.
F. No towing operator shall subcontract any work to be performed
pursuant to this chapter without having first obtained prior written
approval from City Council. Any towing operator to whom approval to
subcontract work has been given shall be responsible for the services
§ 665-11 VINELAND CODE § 665-11
1:1188
§ 665-12. Responsibility of towing operators on list.
performed by and the acts and omissions of the subcontractor and shall
remain liable for any violation of this chapter by the subcontractor.
A. The towing operator shall provide a towing facility of sufficient size to
accommodate not less than 25 passenger vehicles and one tractor and
trailer, and not less than 800 square feet of inside storage facilities to
hold and protect "police hold" vehicles. At no time shall any automobiles
towed by a towing operator be stored at any other location, except
where a vehicle is towed at the request of the owner to a specific
location. Vehicles shall have a maximum of sixty-day storage life with
the exception of vehicles awaiting repair or in the process of being
repaired at authorized body shops, in which case vehicles shall have a
maximum of six months' storage life, or vehicles taken to authorized
junkyards.
B. The towing facility shall be staffed by the licensed towing operator
during normal business hours and include twenty-four-hour telephone
service seven days per week during the week in which the licensed
facility is on call.
C. The towing operator shall provide tow vehicles capable of handling the
transporting of motor vehicles as defined in Article I of this chapter and
equipped to provide regular towing service. Gross vehicular weight of
14,000 pounds to 15,000 pounds is "regular towing service." Gross
vehicular weight of 15,000 pounds and above is "heavy towing service."
Carry weight shall not be less than 4,000 pounds or less than that
needed to carry the transported vehicle safely.
D. Each tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall be equipped with towing and
safety equipment, warning devices such as lights, flares and flags to
warn other automobile operators of the presence of a disabled
automobile, and mechanics tools to perform complete emergency work,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on the
highest practical location of the vehicle, which when in use shall be
visible from 360° at a distance of not less than 500 feet during
daylight hours.
(2) One snatch block per winch.
(3) Safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights for towing vehicles at
night. Safety tow lights, red in color, shall be mounted in the rear of
the vehicle being towed.
(4) Ample chains and cable for pulling or securing a towed vehicle. The
working limit of cable shall be noted.
(5) At least one heavy-duty broom, shovel, crowbar or pry bar, jumper
cables, flashlight, fire extinguisher of dry chemical type having
§ 665-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-12
1:1189
capacity of not less than two pounds, one dozen flares or similar
warning devices for placement at the scene of an accident or
behind a disabled vehicle, not less than 10 pounds of dry sand or
a drying compound for gasoline and oil spilled onto the roadway,
and tools sufficient to enable the tow vehicle operator to perform
proper and adequate emergency repair services for the tow.
(6) Backup alarms.
E. All wrecked vehicles must be in compliance with all safety equipment
requirements as listed in N.J.S.A. 39:3-1 et seq. and 49 CFR 393.
F. No changes may be made to tow vehicles or equipment without prior
written approval of the City of Vineland.
G. Each tow vehicle shall display a sticker issued by the Department of
Licenses and Inspections on the upper left side of the driver's door
panel and shall have the name and number of the licensed tow operator
displayed on the vehicle in such manner and of such lettering as to
conform to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
H. Towing operators and their employees shall provide all services
required by this chapter at all times and shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Possess sufficient knowledge, skill and ability to provide minimum
road services for disabled vehicles and to adequately remove a
vehicle from an accident scene without causing additional damage
to the vehicle.
(2) Possess a valid driver's license and/or a commercial driver's license
with no restrictions or conditional endorsements except for the
wearing of eyeglasses.
(3) Be mentally alert and present a neat appearance at all times.
(4) Obey all traffic laws, statutes, regulations and ordinances
promulgated by the State of New Jersey and the City of Vineland.
(5) Be subject to inspection by the Department of Licenses and
Inspections or a designee and shall be approved by the Department
of Licenses and Inspections prior to rendering any services
pursuant to this article. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-99]
(6) Have no criminal convictions and not be subject to driving privilege
suspensions or revocations within one year from the date of the
application or renewal.
I. The tow vehicles provided by the towing operator shall be of such type
and design to properly and safely perform all towing services required
by this chapter and shall at all times comply with New Jersey statutes
and regulations and be subject to inspection by the Department of
§ 665-12 VINELAND CODE § 665-12
1:1190
Licenses and Inspections and the Vineland Police Department.
[Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
J. All drivers of tow vehicles shall possess at all times a valid New Jersey
driver's license and a commercial driver's license, where applicable,
which shall be subject to inspection by the Vineland Police Department.
Said operator shall respect all traffic laws and shall comply with all
statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey and of the City of
Vineland. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
K. The tow vehicles provided by the towing operator shall be
geographically located so as to permit a response time within 20
minutes.
L. The towing fees and storage fees established by the towing operator
shall be conspicuously posted at the towing facility owned or operated
by the towing operator, which fees shall not exceed the maximum fees
set forth in this chapter.
M. At all times the towing operator shall maintain the towing facility in a
clean and orderly fashion. Reasonable measures shall be taken by the
towing operator to prevent vandalism, theft or damage to automobiles
stored therein.
N. In the event that automobiles which are towed and stored by the towing
operator are abandoned or unclaimed by the owners thereof, the towing
operator shall make no claim against the City, its agents or employees.
Only those vehicles towed from private property or public right-of-way
under authorization of either the City Health Department or the Police
Department, not including accident vehicles, shall be disposed of by the
City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq., or other appropriate state
statutes or state regulations.
O. The towing operator operating pursuant to these regulations is an
independent contractor and in no sense an agent, servant or employee
of the City. Said operator shall at all times maintain direct supervision,
management and control over all its employees and personnel engaged
in the operation or services performed pursuant to these regulations.
P. The City shall not be responsible for the acts of the towing operator in
performing the services contemplated by this chapter. The towing
operator agrees to save and hold harmless the City from all manner of
liability as a result of its actions or omissions, whether of a negligent or
intentional nature.
Q. Towing operators approved for tow list eligibility shall be required to
fulfill tow requests of the Department of Health and/or the Police
Department of the City of Vineland. Failure or refusal to remove a
vehicle pursuant to directive of the City of Vineland shall be cause for
removal from the list.
§ 665-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-12
1:1191
§ 665-13. Towing facilities.
R. The tow operator shall be responsible for ensuring the proper, safe and
secure storage of all vehicles towed. The tow operator shall be liable for
any and all damage incurred by such vehicles while in transit to or while
stored in or at the facilities of the operator.
S. The tow operator shall record all vehicles towed in a book kept for such
purposes. The details of each disabled vehicle towed, serviced or
transported, together with full information of the towed vehicle and
name and address of the owner and the charges paid for his services,
shall be recorded. Full information of the towed vehicle shall include,
but not be limited to, the vehicle's license number, VIN registration
number, make, model, color and year. The record book herein described
shall be kept open for inspection at all times by any duly authorized
representative of the City of Vineland. A quarterly towing record
containing the information herein stated above shall be filed with the
Vineland Police Department and Director of Licenses and Inspections
setting forth the details of all tows by vehicle type, date, time of day,
sector and whether additional services were required. [Added
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
A. Every tow operator on the Police Department Tow List shall maintain an
inside building and outside secured storage area meeting the following
requirements:
(1) The storage area shall be capable of storing not less than 25
passenger vehicles and one tractor and trailer. The area shall have
not less than 800 square feet of inside storage facilities to hold and
protect "police hold" vehicles.
(2) The storage area shall be located either within the limits of the City
or at such location outside of the City as to facilitate a response
time of not more than 20 minutes.
(3) Outside storage areas shall be fully enclosed by a fence of sufficient
security to prevent trespassing having a height of eight feet, or as
otherwise required by Chapter 425, Land Use, with at least one
lockable gate for ingress and egress, and shall be lighted from dusk
to dawn. (If the storage facility includes more than one access
point, then all access points must be secured with appropriate gate
and lock.) Fences which are not less than six feet in height which
existed prior to adoption of this chapter shall be permitted;
however, if such fences are replaced, the new fence shall be eight
feet in height or as otherwise required by Chapter 425, Land Use.
(4) The storage facility shall be available to the Vineland Police
Department 24 hours a day, 365 days per year and shall be open to
the public on weekdays during normal business hours and for
limited but reasonable hours on weekends. The applicants shall
specify the hours on which the facility will be open to the public on
§ 665-12 VINELAND CODE § 665-13
1:1192
§ 665-14. Fees. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-35;
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
weekends. The storage facility shall release a stored vehicle to the
owner thereof on such date as shall have been requested by said
owner, and storage charges shall not accrue beyond the requested
date of release.
(5) The tow operator shall have an employee on duty during all hours
in which the storage facility is open.
(6) The tow operator shall not charge a release fee or other charge for
releasing vehicles to their owners after normal business hours or
on weekends.
B. The City of Vineland shall not be responsible for processing of licensure
or any other documents required by the State of New Jersey with
regard to vehicles left abandoned at a repair facility. Vehicles left
abandoned at a repair facility, including those involved in accidents, are
the responsibility of the repair facility, per N.J.S.A. 39:10A-8.
A. When towing or storing a motor vehicle under the police tow list, the
towing charge and storage charge per vehicle shall not exceed those
charges as set forth in the following fee schedule. [Amended
9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-37]
(1) Towing.
(a) Days.
[1] First mile or less.
[a] Regular: $125.
[b] Heavy duty: $450 per hour per truck (payable in
fifteen-minute increments); two-hour minimum per
truck.
[2] Each additional mile: $5.
(b) Nights, weekends and New Jersey State holidays:
[1] First mile or less.
[a] Regular: $125.
[b] Heavy duty: $450 per hour per truck (payable in
fifteen-minute increments); two-hour minimum per
truck.
[2] Each additional mile: $5.
(2) Storage of vehicles, per day.
(a) Inside building.
§ 665-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-14
1:1193
§ 665-15. Miscellaneous provisions.
[1] Regular: $35.
[2] Heavy duty: $100.
(b) Outside secured.
[1] Regular: $30.
[2] Heavy duty: $65.
(3) Additional fees.
(a) Recovery fee: $150. Recovery fee shall include oil dry (three
forty-pound bags).
(b) Each additional oil dry: $15 per bag.
(4) There will be no charge for towing of all non-heavy-duty City of
Vineland vehicles within the City of Vineland and the County of
Cumberland.
(5) There shall be no additional charges other than provided herein.
B. Tow vehicles transporting multiple motor vehicles at one time may
charge the applicable fee for each such vehicle transported.
C. The towing rates shall be calculated based on the total distance
traveled from the point of tow to the tow operator’s base of service by
way of the shortest available route. Fractions may be rounded up to the
nearest whole mile. [Amended 9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-37]
D. The Department of Licenses and Inspections shall make available to the
public, during normal business hours, a copy of this chapter and the fee
schedule of licensed towing operators.
E. There shall be no additional charges other than those provided in the
fee schedule.
A. The Department of Licenses and Inspections and the Vineland Police
Department shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
B. Abandoned vehicles.
(1) The City of Vineland Police Department may authorize the towing
and storage of motor vehicles located on public streets or public
property which are unregistered, abandoned, illegally parked, or
which are permitted to be towed and stored pursuant to state
statute or state regulations.
(2) Abandoned or unlicensed motor vehicles which are in violation of
Chapter 537, Property Maintenance, shall be subject to
enforcement procedures as established in the aforesaid chapter.
§ 665-14 VINELAND CODE § 665-15
1:1194
C. A tow operator shall not tow motor vehicles located in the public rightof-
way or on private property unless authorized to do so by the owner of
the vehicle or by the Police Department or Department of Health. This
chapter, however, does not preclude a towing operator licensed by the
City or state from towing motor vehicles located on private property in
accordance with state licensure privileges.
D. Motor vehicles which remain unclaimed by the owner or other person
having legal right thereto shall be disposed of pursuant to the
applicable provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes. The last
known owner of an abandoned vehicle, or the owner of the property
from which an abandoned vehicle is removed, shall be responsible for
all towing fees or charges, storage fees or charges, road service fees or
charges, and any other fees permitted by law.
E. The City shall make periodic inspections of facilities, equipment and
service and, upon request, shall be provided full access to equipment or
property. Such inspections shall be made quarterly, semiannually, or
annually, as determined by the applicable City official, but in no case
shall such inspections be made less than annually.
F. The Department of Licenses and Inspections shall establish a procedure
to process complaints received by the City regarding any licensed
towing operator, including, without limitation, charging of fees in
excess of those permitted hereunder or damage to vehicles, and to
notify a vehicle owner of the location of the motor vehicle towed.
[Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
G. The towing operator shall notify the vehicle owner, by written form
acknowledged by the owner at the time of the tow, or by certified mail
within three days of the tow, of towing and storage fees and removal of
the vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the towing operator to
obtain all information regarding the vehicle owner at the time of the
tow.
H. Storage by Police Department.
(1) The Police Department shall have the right to store at its own
facilities motor vehicles towed at its direction or confiscated in
suspected crimes. All licensed towing operators shall extend
storage to the City of Vineland Police Department, and, if so
requested, shall provide separate storage space for exclusive use of
the Police Department.
(2) Abandoned vehicles or vehicles confiscated by the Police
Department are to be stored as authorized by the Police
Department to assure protection of the vehicle and to provide
security of said vehicle until appropriately disposed of by the Police
Department.
§ 665-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-15
1:1195
(3) The towing operator shall not release a designated police hold
vehicle without the proper release form approval from the Vineland
Police Department. [Added 9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-37]
I. All towing operators shall provide adequate public posting of charges at
their primary place of business and storage facility.
J. Towing operators shall not pile vehicles or park towed vehicles on
public streets or sidewalks.
K. All towing operators shall maintain a record of each motor vehicle
towed, stored and released, and of all services rendered, which records
shall be maintained at one central location and retained for a period of
not less than five years.
L. Discharged petroleum or hazardous substances.
(1) Pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, including
N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11(g)c, any person in any way responsible for a
discharge of petroleum or hazardous substances shall be strictly
liable, jointly and severally, without regard to fault, for all costs of
cleanup and removal of the discharge from the public right-of-way
and private property within the area of the spill. The tow operator
and/or facility owner shall be responsible for the cleanup and
removal of any spill or discharge of petroleum or hazardous
substances at its storage facility. The facility owner may choose to
take action against the vehicle owner for the cost of such cleanup
and removal. The responsible party shall contact the NJDEP Action
Line to report any spills or leaks as required by N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11e.
(2) Whenever any petroleum or hazardous substances are discharged
on or in public property or within the public right-of-way, the
Health Department may, in its discretion, act to remove or arrange
for the removal of such discharge or may direct the responsible
party to remove or arrange for the removal of such discharge. The
Health Department shall monitor compliance with any cleanup
directives. Pursuant to Chapter 407, Hazardous Materials, Article
I, Reimbursement for Cleanup (City Ordinance No. 90-117), and
N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11f, any person who fails to comply with a
cleanup directive shall be liable to the City in an amount equal to
three times the cost of such removal.
M. This chapter is not intended to regulate or set fees for nonbasic towing
services or the towing or storage of trucks and buses. Such service, if
requested, shall be billed at reasonable prevailing rates. The towing
contractor shall submit a list of fees in advance for nonbasic towing to
the Director of Licenses and Inspections, who shall have the sole
discretion in determining reasonable prevailing rates. [Added
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-99]
§ 665-15 VINELAND CODE § 665-15
1:1196
Chapter 669
TOWING AND WRECKER LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing and storage services — See Ch. 665. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
§ 669-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, sole proprietorship, firm, partnership,
association, limited liability company, corporation or other organization.
WRECKER — A vehicle driven by mechanical power and used for the
purpose of towing, transporting, conveying or removing any and all kinds
of vehicles which are unable to be and are not operated under their own
power from the place where they are disabled.
§ 669-2. License and registration required.
§ 669-3. License application; information required.
The application for a license as required by the preceding section shall
be made to the Department of Licenses and Inspections of the City of
Vineland on the prescribed form and shall accurately specify the following
information, the truth of which shall be sworn to by the applicant:
A. No person shall operate any wrecker or conduct any wrecker service
within the City of Vineland without first having obtained a license for
each wrecker.
B. No employee or agent of a person conducting any wrecker service
within the City of Vineland or such person shall operate any wrecker
within the City of Vineland without first having been registered as
provided herein.
C. Whenever a property owner or agent shall arrange to have a vehicle
towed from a City of Vineland location, said property owner or agent
shall utilize only the services of a towing company licensed by the City
of Vineland. An annual list of all licensed tow companies shall be
supplied by the Department of Licenses and Inspections.
A. The year, make, type and registration number of the wrecker. The
wrecker must be registered or leased for one year to the applicant, and
the registration card or lease must be exhibited to the City of Vineland.
B. The name and address of the applicant. If a firm, partnership,
association, limited liability company, corporation or other
§ 665-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 669-3
1:1197
§ 669-4. Insurance requirements.
Each license application shall be accompanied by certificates of automobile
and garage keeper's liability insurance, issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Said insurance policy
shall provide for minimum monetary limits for any single occurrence as
follows:
organization, the name and address of each officer, director, partner
and/or member thereof. Each application for a license, or a renewal
thereof, shall contain the street address for the residence and business
of the licensee at the time of application or renewal. A post office box
shall be permitted only as part of a mailing address that is submitted by
the licensee in addition to the street address of the licensee's residence
or business. A licensee whose last address appears as a post office box
shall change the address on the application to the street address of the
licensee's residence and business.
C. The name and address, social security number, New Jersey driver's
license number and telephone number of the owner of the wrecker, if
other than the applicant.
D. The name, address and New Jersey driver's license number for each
driver or operator of the wrecker, accompanied by a photo
identification, and proof that each vehicle to be licensed is duly
registered and inspected by the State of New Jersey, Division of Motor
Vehicles.
E. The location of the premises where the wrecker is domiciled or
garaged.
F. The location of the premises to which vehicles are towed. Details of the
location(s) shall be shown on a map or diagram accurately depicting the
dimensions, proposed layout and size of the vehicle storage spaces, fire
lanes and the maximum number of vehicles to be stored at such
premises. The said information shall be submitted on a site plan
approved by the City of Vineland Planning Board and/or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
G. Documentary proof that the applicant has the ability to comply with the
terms of this chapter.
H. A complete list of all criminal convictions of the applicant or owner,
partner, officers or local office manager of the applicant and each driver
or operator of the wrecker.
I. Whether the wrecker is to be used as an accessory use to a gasoline
service station or motor vehicle repair shop.
A. Automobile liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limits.
§ 669-3 VINELAND CODE § 669-4
1:1198
§ 669-5. Investigation of application; storage requirements.
B. Workers' compensation as required by statute.
C. Garage keeper's legal liability in an amount not less than $100,000 per
location.
D. Garage liability, including cargo insurance, in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit.
E. A certificate of insurance naming the City of Vineland as a certificate
holder for a one-year term with a twenty-day notice of cancellation to
the City of Vineland in the event of any material change or cancellation.
A. Upon receipt of a completed application as required by § 669-3 hereof
and certificates of insurance as required by § 669-4 hereof, the
Department of Licenses and Inspections shall investigate whether the
applicant's proposed domicile of the wrecker complies with local zoning
and building ordinances and whether the applicant and applicant's
equipment meets the following requirements:
(1) Each towing vehicle shall be required to have red combination stop
and directional signal lights, visible from the rear of the truck,
unobstructed by the vehicle being towed.
(2) Each towing vehicle shall be required to have two safety chains, in
addition to a towing sling and/or hook, when towing a vehicle.
(3) Each towing vehicle shall be equipped for towing purposes with a
power or manual winch-type towing system with automatic selflocking
device.
(4) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3-54, the use of any type of flashing lights
on any vehicle, including a tow truck, is prohibited, unless
authorized by a permit issued by the Director of Motor Vehicles.
Said permit must be displayed in the vehicle.
(5) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall display the official tower's
license and shall have the name of the official tower displayed on
the vehicle in such manner and of such lettering as conforms to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
(6) The towing operators' wrecker(s) and all other vehicles shall be
properly licensed and registered with the New Jersey Division of
Motor Vehicles.
(7) Towing operators' vehicles shall display New Jersey commercial
license plates.
B. Each applicant for a new license must provide, and continue to provide
during the licensing year, secure storage as pursuant to the current
land use ordinance.281 All motor vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter
shall be stored at the aforesaid location.
§ 669-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 669-5
1:1199
§ 669-6. Registration of wrecker operators.
Each employee or agent of licensees under this chapter who operates a
wrecker within the City of Vineland shall be registered with the Department
of Licenses and Inspections, and such registration shall be the joint
obligation of the employee or agent and employer. The registration shall
include the name and address of the employee or agent; the name of the
employer; a criminal history background check, a certified driver's abstract
of the employee or agent; the length and type of the employee's or agent's
experience in the wrecker business and with the employer. All registration
forms shall be reviewed by the Director of Licenses and Inspections or
designee, who shall determine, within 30 days of its submission, whether a
registration should be issued. Any employee or agent denied a registration
hereunder shall have 10 days to appeal the decision to City Council, which
shall hear and decide the appeal.
§ 669-7. Approval or denial by City Council; hearing.
Upon receipt of all reports as set forth in § 669-5 hereof, the Director of
Licenses and Inspections shall forthwith transmit the same to City Council,
which shall grant or deny the issuance of a license within 30 days after
receipt of all reports. No application shall be denied unless City Council
determines that the applicant has not demonstrated the ability to comply
with the terms of this chapter, for any reason specified in § 669-12 hereof, or
for other just cause. In the event of any denial, the applicant shall forthwith
be notified thereof in writing, which shall specify the reason for the denial.
After receipt of such notification, the applicant shall have 10 days in which
to make written request to the City Clerk for a hearing before City Council.
§ 669-8. License requirements; fees.283
(1) All licensees, except those licenses which are solely accessory uses
to gasoline and service stations, must provide secure storage space
for all towed vehicles. The storage area shall be fenced if required
by the current land use ordinance.
(2) Vehicle storage spaces and lots shall conform to all requirements of
the City of Vineland Land Use Ordinance282 where applicable.
(3) If the storage area is not situated within the boundaries of City of
Vineland, a current and valid certificate of occupancy or other
proof of the legal use of the premises to store automobiles must be
presented with the application.
(4) If the storage area is not owned by the applicant, a copy of a
written lease agreement for the storage area must accompany the
application.
281. Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use.
282. Editor's Note: See Ch. 425, Land Use.
283. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 669-5 VINELAND CODE § 669-8
1:1200
§ 669-9. License renewal.
§ 669-10. Annual inspection.
A. No license shall be granted to any applicant who does not fulfill each
and every requirement of this chapter. No applicant who obtains a
license shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in any other business
licensed under this chapter by another applicant. Should it be
determined that a licensee does have an interest in another towing
license, according to the same standards used for the issuance of
alcoholic beverage licenses that licensee shall immediately forfeit both
licenses. Licenses shall not be transferable.
B. Any new license issued hereunder shall be valid from its date of
issuance until December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, a renewal
license shall be valid for one year from January 1 until December 31.
Notwithstanding the above, any license issued in the year 2006 shall be
valid until December 31, 2007.
C. Each wrecker shall be licensed separately. The fee for each wrecker
license shall be $103 per year for the first wrecker and $52 per year for
each additional wrecker owned by the same licensee and domiciled at
the same address. Each such license shall be issued in duplicate. One
copy of the license shall be kept at all times at the location at which the
wrecker is domiciled.
D. Each employee or agent registered under this chapter shall pay an
annual permit fee of $11.
A. Any license issued hereunder may be renewed for one year upon:
(1) Submission to the Department of Licenses and Inspections of a
renewal application containing the same information as required
by § 669-3 hereof not less than six weeks prior to the expiration
date of the current license.
(2) Presentation of renewed insurance certificates as required by
§ 669-4 hereof.
(3) Payment to the Department of Licenses and Inspections of a
renewal fee the same as a new license fee in accordance with
§ 669-8 hereof.
B. City Council may deny, within 30 days after the submission of all items
required by this chapter, the renewal of any license, if it finds that the
applicant no longer demonstrates the ability to comply with the terms
of this chapter, for any reason specified in § 669-12 hereof. Should a
license renewal be denied, the applicant shall forthwith be notified in
writing, which shall specify the reason for the denial. After receipt of
such notification, the applicant shall have 10 days to make a written
request to the City Clerk for a hearing before City Council.
§ 669-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 669-10
1:1201
§ 669-11. Transfer or assignment of licenses not permitted.
Any license or registration required by this chapter shall not be transferred,
subcontracted or assigned without the prior approval of City Council, nor
shall the domicile of any wrecker licensed hereunder be changed without
the prior approval of City Council.
§ 669-12. Violations and penalties.
A. After the issuance of a license pursuant to the provisions hereof, each
licensee shall be subject to an annual inspection by the Department of
Licenses and Inspections to determine whether the licensee is in
compliance with all requirements of the licensing ordinance.
B. The Police Department shall also have inspection power under this
section to assist the Department of Licenses and Inspections.
C. In the event that any City of Vineland department conducting an
inspection finds the licensee to be in violation of any provision of this
chapter, the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall immediately
notify the licensee in writing of the violation and demand that the same
be corrected within 10 days. In the event the violation is not remedied,
the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall have the right to
suspend the licensee from all City towing services for 90 days. After
receipt of such notification, the licensee shall have 10 days in which to
make written request to the City Clerk for a hearing before City
Council. In the event that City Council upholds the inspecting
department's determination that a violation exists, City Council shall
issue an order suspending the license of the licensee until such time as
the violation is remedied.
D. Nothing contained herein with regard to suspensions from City towing
services shall preclude any authorized agent of the City from issuing
summonses for violations or continuing violations which are not abated
and which would otherwise subject the property owner or licensee to
fines and penalties set forth in other chapters of the City of Vineland
Code.
A. Any person, firm or corporation that violates any provision of this
chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant hereto, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Vineland, shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
General Penalty.284
B. In addition to the above-noted penalties, City Council may suspend or
revoke any license granted hereunder, after written notice and public
hearing, for any of the following reasons:
284. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 669-10 VINELAND CODE § 669-12
1:1202
§ 669-13. Driving to solicit business prohibited.
No person shall operate an unengaged wrecker along a public street in the
City of Vineland at a slow rate of speed or in any other fashion calculated
for the obvious purpose of soliciting business.
§ 669-14. Owner's consent required to remove vehicle from City of
Vineland; exemption.
No person shall tow or remove, or cause to be towed or removed, any
vehicle from a location within the City of Vineland to a location outside the
City except as provided herein; provided, however, that if a towed vehicle
remains unclaimed at the premises of a licensee for more than 30 days, then
and in that event, the vehicle may be removed by a wrecker without the
owner's consent to a location outside the City of Vineland; provided further,
however, that, at least five days prior to any such removal, the owner is
notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the intent to remove
such vehicle to a location outside of the City of Vineland and the address of
such location.
§ 669-15. Written schedule of rates and charges.
(1) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement
made in an application for a license.
(2) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement
made in the conduct of any wrecker service.
(3) Failure to maintain insurance as set forth in § 669-4 hereof.
(4) Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
(5) Violation of any law or regulation of the State of New Jersey,
specifically including, but not limited to, violations of motor vehicle
laws and regulations.
A. Every owner and operator of a wrecker shall:
(1) Maintain a written schedule of all rates and charges in the wrecker
and shall make such schedule available to any person requesting
same at any time.
(2) Post a schedule of maximum fees and towing charges in an area
within the premises where customers are likely to be present.
(3) Whenever practicable, provide a copy of a full schedule of rates at
the time the wrecker services are rendered. In any event, a full
schedule of rates shall be annexed to each bill for wrecking
services.
B. Before any license is issued or renewed as provided in this chapter, a
representative of the Department of Licenses and Inspections shall
§ 669-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 669-15
1:1203
§ 669-16. Outdoor storage of disabled vehicle; time limited.
No licensee shall cause or suffer any disabled vehicle to be stored outdoors
upon premises owned or leased by the licensee for a period in excess of 30
days.
§ 669-17. Collection of parking or other fees prohibited.
No licensee under this chapter shall, in the course of providing service,
collect parking fees or fees for services other than those rendered by the
licensee.
§ 669-18. Miscellaneous.
Chapter 676
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Deceptive advertising — See Ch. 200.
Carnivals — See Ch. 269.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 516.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 630.
inspect the wrecker to determine whether the schedule and statement
prescribed by this section are conspicuously displayed on the wrecker.
A. Each wrecker used and operated pursuant to this chapter shall contain
certain designated equipment: brooms, flares, chains, fire
extinguishers, jumper cables, shovel, air tank, lug wrench, and such
other equipment as required by N.J.S.A. 39:3-1 et seq., and 49 CFR 393.
B. In addition to any other regulations, the licensee, upon request, shall
release personal belongings to the vehicle owner or authorized
designee.
C. Each licensed wrecker shall display a sticker issued by the Department
of Licenses and Inspections on the upper left side of the driver's door
panel and shall have the name, address and telephone number of the
licensee displayed on the vehicle in letters at least three inches in
height and in conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
§ 669-15 VINELAND CODE § 669-18
1:1204
ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulation
[Adopted 3-9-1954 by Ord. No. 116 (Ch. 433, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 676-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT and LICENSEE — Includes any individual or individuals,
copartners, corporations and associations. Wherever an act is required of a
corporation, the same shall be effected by its duly authorized officers.
ARTISAN LICENSE — A license issued to a person, corporation or
partnership, whether principal or agent, who shall sell goods, wares and
merchandise at a VDID-/City-sponsored event for which applications are
sought by the VDID and licenses issued by the Director of License and
Inspection for a period not to exceed the duration of the sponsored event.
At no time shall an artisan license be issued for a total time exceeding 14
days during any calendar year.[Added 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-32]
TRANSIENT MERCHANT/ITINERANT VENDOR — Persons, corporations or
partnerships, whether principal or agent, who engage in merchandising
business in New Jersey with the intent to close out or discontinue such
business within one year from the date of commencement, including those
who for the purpose of carrying on such business hire, lease or occupy
any building, structure or railroad car for the exhibition and sale of such
goods, wares and merchandise, but nothing in the article shall be construed
to affect the sale of fruits, vegetables and farm products, such as meat,
poultry, butter and eggs. Transient merchant/itinerant vendor shall not
include persons who shall sell goods, wares and merchandise at any VDID-
/City-sponsored events in which applications are sought by the VDID and
an artisan license is issued by the Director of License and Inspection for
a period not longer than the sponsored event. No licensee shall receive an
artisan license or licenses which in total exceeds a period of two weeks per
calendar year.[Added 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-32]
VINELAND DOWNTOWN IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT CORP. (VDID) — A
special improvement district corporation created pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:56-77.[Added 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-32]
§ 676-2. License required.
It shall not be lawful for any transient merchant or itinerant vendor, as
defined in an act of the New Jersey Legislature entitled an "Act to License
and Regulate the Business of Transient Merchants or Itinerant Vendors
in this State," N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 to 45:24-13, to engage in a merchandising
business in the City of Vineland with intent to close out or discontinue
such business within a period of one year from the date of commencement
without a license first had and obtained as directed by this article.
§ 676-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 676-3
1:1205
§ 676-3. Statement required. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No.
1065]
All transient merchants or itinerant vendors, as defined in § 676-2 of this
article, shall, before offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or
bankrupt stock, make a declaration under oath to the Director of the
Department of Licenses and Inspections of the City of Vineland as to the
number of days they propose to engage in such business, together with
a specific statement as to the location of personal property, by street and
number, and whether on the premises upon which such property is to be
sold or in warehouses or storage.
§ 676-4. Fee. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1065]
All transient merchants or itinerant vendors, as defined in this article, shall,
before offering for sale any personal property, pay to the Director of the
Department of Licenses and Inspections of the City of Vineland a sum of
$1,000, and, upon payment of such sum as specified herein, said merchant
or vendor shall be entitled to apply for and receive a license which shall
continue in favor of the person to whom it is issued for the period of 180
days from the day of issuance.
§ 676-5. Application for license. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No.
1065]
All applications for the license referred to in § 676-4 hereof shall be sworn
to and shall disclose the name or names and residence of the owners or
persons in whose interest such business is conducted and shall further state
the average quantity and kind, as nearly as can be, and the value of the
stock of goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock intended to be sold
or exposed for sale in said municipality. The application shall also give the
names and post office addresses of the persons or corporations from whom
or which goods making up the stock were or are to be purchased, and
the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections of the City of
Vineland, in arriving at the valuation, may require the submission of bills or
invoices of such goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock. A separate
license must be obtained for each branch, establishment or separate place
of business in which the trade, following, profession or occupation of a
transient merchant or itinerant vendor is carried on, and each license shall
authorize the person, corporation or partnership obtaining it to carry on,
pursue or conduct the business of a transient merchant or itinerant vendor
only at the location or place of business which is indicated thereby.
§ 676-6. Bond. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1065]
Before a license as herein provided shall issue, the applicant shall execute
and deliver to the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections
of the City of Vineland a good and sufficient bond with good and sufficient
surety or sureties, to be approved by said licensing official, equal in the
amount to 25% of the value of the stock of goods, wares, merchandise
§ 676-3 VINELAND CODE § 676-6
1:1206
or bankrupt stock as shown in the declarations and disclosure required
under the provisions of this article, but in no event shall said bond be less
than $1,000 in amount, said bond to remain in force for one year and be
conditioned to indemnify and pay said municipality any penalties or costs
incurred in the enforcement of any provisions of this article, and which
shall also, by its terms, be so conditioned as to indemnify or reimburse any
purchaser of goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock in a sum equal to
at least the amount of any payment or payments such purchaser may have
been induced to make through misrepresentation as to the kind, quality
or value of such goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, whether
said misrepresentations were made by the owners or by their servants,
agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through
any advertisement of any character whatsoever printed or circulated with
reference to said stock of goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock or
any part thereof.
§ 676-7. Sales tax certificate required. [Added 3-22-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-19]
Before a license shall be issued as herein provided for, the applicant shall
file with the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections a copy
of a valid certificate of authority issued to the applicant pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:32B-15, empowering the applicant to collect sales tax.
§ 676-8. Agent for applicant; condition of license issuance.
[Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1065]
Before a license shall be issued as herein provided for, the applicant shall
file with the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections of
the City of Vineland an instrument, in writing, nominating and appointing
said Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections his true and
lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice
of process for and on behalf of said applicant in respect to any matters
connected with or arising out of said license and the bond given as required
by the provisions of § 676-6 of this article or for the performance of the
conditions of said bond or for any breach thereof, which said instrument, in
writing, so nominating and appointing said Director of the Department of
Licenses and Inspections of the City of Vineland as such agent, shall contain
recitals to the effect that said applicant for said license consents and agrees
that service of any notice or process may be made upon said agent and,
when so made, shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served
upon the person applying for said license under this article, according to
the laws of New Jersey or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of
error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of service.
§ 676-9. Charitable or religious societies exempted.
Nothing in this article contained shall apply to or require the obtaining of
a license by any charitable or religious society that shall conduct sales of
goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock when the proceeds thereof
§ 676-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 676-9
1:1207
shall be applied to the payment of the expenses thereof and to the
charitable or religious object for which such charitable or religious society
exists.
§ 676-10. Revocation of license; hearing. [Amended 1-11-1977 by
Ord. No. 1065]
A license may be revoked by the Director of the Department of Licenses
and Inspections of the City of Vineland by reason of the violation of the
terms of the license, the violation of this article or falsification in applying
for a license. The licensed person must be granted a hearing by the City of
Vineland after at least three days' notice.
§ 676-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No.
1065; 8-28-1990 by Ord. No. 90-79285]
Any transient merchant or itinerant vendor of goods, wares, merchandise
or bankrupt stock, as defined in this article, who shall offer for sale or
sell any goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock without first paying
to the Director of the Department of Licenses and Inspections of the City
of Vineland the license fee as herein required; or who shall fail to secure
the license provided for herein; or who shall neglect or refuse to file the
statement provided for herein; or who shall make a false or fraudulent
representation therein or falsely represent by advertising or otherwise that
such goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock are, in whole or in
part, damaged goods saved from fire or make any false statement as to
the previous history or character of such goods, wares, merchandise or
bankrupt stock; or who shall fail to file the bond required under this article;
or who shall fail to nominate said Director of the Department of Licenses
and Inspections of the City of Vineland his agent upon whom service can
be made for the purpose mentioned herein; or who shall refuse or neglect
to comply with the requirements of this article in any part, shall be, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Vineland, punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 676-9 VINELAND CODE § 676-11
1:1208
ARTICLE II
VDID- or City-Sponsored Events
[Adopted 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-32 (Ch. 433, Art. III, of the
1990 Code)]
§ 676-12. VDID-/City-sponsored events.286
Prior to any VDID-/City-sponsored event, the VDID may, by resolution of
its Board of Directors, authorize the VDID to seek applicants for artisan
licenses for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise during the sponsored
event only. All applications shall require the applicant to certify that it shall
comply with N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15, if applicable, and further that it is not a
transient merchant/itinerant vendor as defined herein. The applicant shall
also comply with all of the rules and regulations of the VDID/City, which
shall include a requirement that all participating applicants for an artisan
license pursuant to this section provide a liability insurance certificate with
a general liability limited of $1,000,000 naming the VDID/City as additional
insureds. The VDID shall submit all approved applications to the Director of
the Department of License and Inspection of the City of Vineland, who shall
issue an artisan license for the sale of said goods, wares and merchandise
for the period of time commencing at the beginning of the event and
expiring at the conclusion of the event. There shall be no charge for said
license. Nothing herein shall prohibit the VDID from collecting a fee for
each application. Sections 676-5, 676-6, 676-7 and 676-8 shall not apply to
those vendors who have received a license pursuant to this section.
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 676-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 676-12
1:1209
Chapter 682
TREES
§ 676-12 VINELAND CODE § 676-12
1:1210
ARTICLE I
Public Property
[Adopted 1-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5]
§ 682-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names and in all areas owned by the City or
to which the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the City.
§ 682-2. Creation and establishment of City Tree Committee.
[Amended 10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-71]
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Committee for the City,
which shall be a subcommittee of the Environmental Commission, and shall
consist of five members.287
§ 682-3. Compensation.
Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
§ 682-4. Duties and responsibilities.
§ 682-5. Operation.
The Committee shall choose its own officers and keep a journal of its
actions. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to study, investigate,
counsel, develop and update annually and administer a plan for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or
disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in all other
public areas. Such a plan will be presented annually to City Council
and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official
comprehensive tree plan for the City of Vineland.
B. The Committee, when requested by City Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings of fact, and make recommendations upon
any special matter or question coming within the scope of its duties.
287. Editor's Note: Original Section 3, Terms of office, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-71.
§ 682-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 682-6
1:1211
§ 682-6. Street trees to be planted. [Amended 10-28-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-71]
§ 682-7. Spacing.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
classes listed in § 682-6 of this article, and no trees may be planted closer
together than the following:
§ 682-8. Distance from curb or sidewalk.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in § 682-6
of this article, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk
than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large
trees, four feet away.
§ 682-9. Distance from street corners and fireplugs.
No street tree shall be planted within less than 20 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs or curblines. No
street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fireplug.
§ 682-10. Public tree care.
The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or
to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
The City Tree Committee may remove or cause to be removed, by either the
Department of Public Works or a licensed arborist, any tree or part thereof
which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious
to sewers, electric lines, gas lines, waterlines or other public improvements,
A. A list of official street tree species for Vineland, New Jersey, shall be
maintained by the Vineland Environmental Commission. No species
other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees
without written permission of the City Tree Committee.
B. Trees shall be divided into three classes based on size at maturity.
(1) Large trees have a maturity height of 40 feet and over.
(2) Medium trees have a maturity height of 30 feet to 40 feet.
(3) Small trees have a maturity height of 20 feet to 30 feet.
A. Small trees: 30 feet.
B. Medium trees: 40 feet.
C. Large trees: 50 feet, except in special plantings designed or approved
by the Tree Committee.
§ 682-6 VINELAND CODE § 682-10
1:1212
or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or pest. This section does not
prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners, providing
that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with §§ 682-6
through 682-10 of this article.
§ 682-11. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or City
department to "top" any street tree, park tree or other tree on public
property, unless specifically exempt by state law. "Topping" is defined as the
severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter
within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
causes, or certain trees under utility wires, or other obstructions where
other pruning practices are impractical may be exempt from this article at
the determination of the City Tree Committee.
§ 682-12. Pruning; corner clearance.
§ 682-13. Interference with City Tree Committee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
City Tree Committee, or any of its agents, or servants, while engaging
in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or
removing of any street tree, park tree or tree on private grounds, as
authorized in this article.
§ 682-14. Arborist's permit and bond. [Amended 10-28-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-71]
No person or firm shall engage in pruning, treating, or removing street or
park trees within the City without first applying for and procuring a permit,
along with approval of the City Tree Committee for said activity. The permit
fee shall be $25 annually in advance; provided, however, that no permit
shall be required of any public service company or City employee doing such
A. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street right-of-way within the
City shall prune the branches so that such branches do not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that shall be a clear space of eight feet above the
surface of the sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or
dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace
to the safety of the public.
B. The City shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the
street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control
device or sign.288
288. Editor's Note: Original Section 14, Dead or diseased tree removal on private property,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-71.
§ 682-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 682-14
1:1213
work during the course of employment. Before any permit shall be issued,
each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in
the minimum amounts of $25,000 for bodily injury, of $10,000 for property
damage, indemnifying the City or any person injured or damaged resulting
from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described.
§ 682-15. Review by City Council.
City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of
the City Tree Committee. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order
of the City Tree Committee to City Council, who may hear the matter and
make the final decision.
§ 682-16. Exceptions.
§ 682-17. Violations and penalties.289
Any person violating any provision of this article, upon conviction or a plea
of guilt, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, General Penalty.
A. In the event the Department of Public Works determines that any tree is
in hazardous or dangerous condition, such hazard or danger may be
immediately removed without delay.
B. During the period of emergencies such as hurricane, windstorm, flood,
freeze, or other disasters, the requirements of this article may be
waived by the City. Said waiver must be for a specified time and may not
be for an indefinite period.
289. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 682-14 VINELAND CODE § 682-17
1:1214
Chapter 687
UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Industrial Commission — See Ch. 74.
Landis Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 80.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 300.
Drainage systems — See Ch. 320.
Fees — See Ch. 350, Art. II.
Sewers — See Ch. 585.
Water — See Ch. 710.
§ 682-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 682-17
1:1215

Part 1
[Adopted 9-9-M19u5n2icBipyaOl rEdle. cNtori.c 2 U4t(iClihty. 4O3p8e,r aPtairotn 1s, Of The 1990
Code)]
ARTICLE I
General Terms, Rules and Regulations
§ 687-1. Application for service; contracts; service connection
charge. [Amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074; 10-23-1979 by Ord.
No. 1182; 12-11-1979 by Ord. No. 1191]
§ 687-2. Temporary service. [Amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074;
3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-22]
Temporary service will be supplied where and when the electric utility
has available facilities and at the rate applicable to such service, with
an additional charge for service connection and disconnection upon
discontinuance of service. The charge for such connection and
A. A written application for service under one of the established rate
schedules of the Electric Utility may be required from each customer,
which application, when accepted and service granted, shall constitute
an agreement between the City of Vineland and the customer. The rate
schedule provisions apply to everyone lawfully receiving electric
service from the Electric Utility under the established rates, and receipt
of electric service shall constitute the receiver a customer of the
Electric Utility as the term is used herein, whether service is based
upon contract, agreement, accepted signed application or otherwise.
B. A copy of the rate schedule and general terms, rules and regulations
under which service is to be rendered will be furnished upon request at
the office of the Electric Utility. [Amended 1-14-1986 by Ord. No.
85-66]
C. Standard contracts shall be for the terms as specified in the statement
of the rates, but where large or special investment is necessary for the
supplying of service, contracts of longer terms than specified in the
rates or with special guaranty of revenue, or both, may be required to
safeguard such investment.
D. Whenever service is initiated to any customer in any particular location
or resumed after discontinuance of service, a service connection charge
of $15 will be made. This fee shall not be charged where a change in the
name of an account is requested by the customer, provided that the last
meter reading is used and therefore does not require a site visit or any
further effort on the part of the Electric Utility. A person who is
exempted from the fifteen-dollar service connection charge shall not be
automatically exempted from the deposit requirements of § 687-10 of
this Part 1. [Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-22; 2-23-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-8]
§ 687-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-2
1:1217
disconnection shall be based upon the cost of providing such service, but in
no case shall be less than $75.
§ 687-3. Inspection of customer premises.
The wiring and appliances in the premises of the customer must be installed
in accordance with the provisions of the current edition of the National
Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and such state
and municipal regulations as may be in force at the time application for
service is made. A certificate of inspection from the Underwriters must be
presented at the office of the Electric Utility before service will be rendered
at a new location.
§ 687-4. Load inspections.
§ 687-5. Notice of discontinuance.
Notice for the discontinuance of service must be given, in writing or in
person, by the customer at the office of the Electric Utility.
§ 687-6. Discontinuance of service. [Amended 3-22-1977 by Ord.
No. 1074]
A. It is a condition precedent to the supply of service under rates which
base the billing demand or minimum upon the customer's connected
load that the representatives of the Electric Utility shall have access to
the premises at reasonable times to inspect and count the connected
load.
B. Demands fixed upon the basis of connected load will remain in effect
until the customer makes increases in his connected load or until the
Electric Utility redetermines the demand by subsequent recounts,
which recounts will normally be made at approximately annual
intervals, subject to the right of the Electric Utility to make them as
frequently as it may elect. Recounts will be made upon the customer's
request, provided that no more than one other requested recount has
been made within the preceding 11 months.
A. The Electric Utility may discontinue its service upon five days' written
notice in case the customer is in arrears in the payment of bills.
B. The Electric Utility may discontinue its service upon reasonable notice
if entry to its meter or meters is refused or if access thereto is
obstructed or hazardous or for other violation of these rules and
regulations.
C. The Electric Utility may discontinue its service without notice if the
customer's installation has become dangerous or defective, if the
customer's equipment or use thereof might injuriously affect the
equipment of the Electric Utility or the service to other customers or if,
upon a reexamination of the customer's installation by a Fire
§ 687-2 VINELAND CODE § 687-6
1:1218
§ 687-7. Reconnection charge. [Amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No.
1074]
§ 687-8. Right of access; right to place instruments.
§ 687-9. Payments. [Amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074;
11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1231; 11-26-1985 by Ord. No. 85-56;
1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 85-66; 2-23-1988 by Ord. No. 88-10;
6-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-39]
Underwriters' inspector, as approved by local, state or federal law
having jurisdiction, a certificate of approval is refused.
A. Where the Electric Utility has discontinued service for nonpayment of
bills, an additional charge for reconnection shall be made. The charge
for such disconnection and reconnection shall not be less than $15.
B. In cases where service is temporarily discontinued at the request of the
customer, a disconnection and reconnection charge shall be based upon
the cost of providing such service, but in no case shall be less than $15.
[Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-22]
C. In cases where the customer requests a special reading or billing, the
charge for each reading or billing shall be $15. [Amended 3-12-1991
by Ord. No. 91-22]
A. The Utility shall have the right of access to the customer's premises at
all times for the purpose of reading meters, inspecting or repairing
apparatus used in connection with its service or removing its property.
B. The Electric Utility shall have the right, at its option and its own
expense, to place demand meters, reactive-component meters or other
instruments on the premises of any customer for the purpose of
measuring the demand and/or the power factor or for other tests of all
or any part of the customer's load.
A. Bills will be rendered by the Electric Utility monthly, in accordance with
the rate selected, applicable to the customer's service. The word
"month" as used herein and in the rate schedules is hereby defined to
be the elapsed time between two successive meter readings
approximately 30 days apart. In the event of the stoppage or the failure
of any meter to register the full amount of current consumed, the
customer will be billed for such period on an estimated consumption
based upon his use of current in a similar period of like use.
B. The net rates specified in the various schedules of the Electric Utility
are contingent upon payment within the time limit specified in said
schedules. The final date for payment of the net amount, which will be
shown on each bill, will not fall on a Sunday or a holiday. A delayedpayment
charge, as specified in the rate schedule on which the bills are
rendered, will be added to bills not paid within the time specified for
§ 687-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-9
1:1219
payment of the net amount. The Electric Utility may waive this
additional charge on a bill, provided that the customer's previous
accounts are paid in full and not more than one other such waiver has
been made on the bills of a preceding 11 months. The gross rate, which
is the net rate plus the additional delayed-payment charge, will apply on
bills when, at the time of payment, the account is in arrears for previous
billings.
(1) Senior citizens.
(a) The delayed-payment charge shall be waived to senior citizens
65 years of age or older, provided that a written application is
made and service is in the applicant's name. Proof of age must
be presented at time of application.
(b) If all conditions are met in Subsection B(1)(a), the senior
citizen customers as defined above shall receive net billing
only. This waiver of the delayed-payment charge shall apply to
the residential rate only.
(2) Disabled American veterans.
(a) The delayed-payment charge shall be waived to disabled
American veterans, provided that a written application is made
and service is in the applicant's name. Proof of disabled
American veteran status must be presented at time of
application. For purposes of this section, a "disabled American
veteran" is any veteran who has been or shall be declared by
the United States Veterans' Administration, or its successor, to
have a service-connected disability.
(b) If all conditions are met in Subsection B(2)(a), the disabled
American veteran customers, as defined above, shall receive
net billing only. This waiver of the delayed-payment charge
shall apply to the residential rate only.
(3) Permanently and totally disabled persons.
(a) The delayed-payment charge shall be waived to permanently
and totally disabled persons, provided that a written
application is made and service is in the applicant's name.
Proof of permanent and total disability status must be
presented at time of application. For purposes of this section, a
"permanently and totally disabled person" is any person who
has been or shall be declared by the United States Social
Security Administration, or its successor, to be permanently
and totally disabled.
(b) If all conditions of Subsection B(3)(a) are met, the permanently
and totally disabled customers defined above shall receive net
billing only. This waiver of delayed-payment charges shall
apply to the residential rate only.
§ 687-9 VINELAND CODE § 687-9
1:1220
§ 687-10. Deposits. [Amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074;
11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1231]
§ 687-11. Demand; determination. [Amended 4-26-1994 by Ord. No.
94-30]
Where charges specified in the established rates are based upon the
customer's demand, it is intended that such demand shall fairly represent
the capacity which the Electric Utility is required to stand ready to supply.
In case of installations which use service in such a manner that neither
the fixing of the demand by assessment under the standards rule nor its
measurement over the demand interval as specified in the applicable rate
results in a fair or equitable measure of the supply capacity required to
serve the customer's load, then the demand may be estimated from the
known character of use and the rating data of the equipment connected or
from special tests, the intent being that the demand so determined shall
fairly represent the customer's capacity requirement. The contract for such
loads shall not in any case be for less capacity than the Electric Utility is
required to supply.
§ 687-12. Power factor measurement.
The Electric Utility reserves the right to measure the power factor of the
customer's load. Such measurement shall be made at the point where the
electricity is metered by a test at a time of normal load or, at the option of
the Electric Utility, by permanently installed instruments.
§ 687-13. Billing changes.
Where demands are reassessed or power factor is recomputed or customers
are found to be on an improper rate as the result of an investigation made at
the customer's request or by routine inspection, the change of billing to the
C. A charge as provided in Chapter 280, Checks, Returned, will be made
when a customer's check is returned by the customer's bank as
uncollectible.290
A. A reasonable deposit or a suitable guaranty or security may be required
of the customer before service will be rendered or continued. The
deposit shall be not less than $100 nor more than the maximum
estimated amount which would accrue for a reasonable period of
service at the applicable rate or rates. Upon discontinuance of service,
the deposit will be refunded, less the amount of any indebtedness.
[Amended 1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 85-66]
B. The Electric Utility will allow simple interest on cash deposits at such
rate per annum as may be established by the Council of the City of
Vineland. Deposits shall cease to bear interest upon discontinuance of
service.
290. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 687-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-13
1:1221
new demand or power factor or to the proper rate may be applied within its
net payment period to the bill for the regular meter reading preceding such
investigation and will in any event apply to the bill for the month during
which the check is made.
§ 687-14. Service continuity.
The Electric Utility will use reasonable diligence to provide a continuous,
regular and uninterrupted supply of service; but, should the supply be
interrupted by the Electric Utility for the purpose of making repairs,
changes or improvements in any part of its system for the general good
of the service or safety of the public or should the supply of service be
interrupted or fail by reason of accident, strike, legal process, state
interference or any cause whatsoever, the Electric Utility shall not be liable
for damages, direct or consequential, resulting from such interruption or
failure.
§ 687-15. Fluorescent and neon lighting.
§ 687-16. Single-point delivery and separate billing.
The rates established by the Electric Utility for each class of service are
based upon the supply of service to one entire premises through a single
delivery and metering point. Separate supply for the same customer at
other points of consumption shall be separately metered and billed at the
available service rate selected by the customer.
§ 687-17. Rights reserved. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1231]
The City of Vineland Electric Utility (CVEU) reserves the right to make such
additional rules, regulations and restrictions concerning electric lighting
and power service as it may find advisable for the protection of the
municipal plant.
A. All fluorescent lighting fixtures, lamps and equipment installed on
customer's premises must be of the high-power-factor type, with
certified rating for each complete operating unit of not less than eightyfive-
percent power factor.
B. All neon lighting fixtures and equipment with a total rating in excess of
750 volt-amperes per meter installation must be equipped with
auxiliaries for maintaining a power factor of not less than 85%. These
auxiliaries may be incorporated in the transformers, or capacitortransformers
may be installed to correct the power factor of the entire
neon installation.
C. The Electric Utility reserves the right to test fluorescent, neon or
similar equipment before or after its installation.
§ 687-13 VINELAND CODE § 687-18
1:1222
§ 687-18. Extension of electric distribution lines. [Added 4-11-1972
by Ord. No. 841; amended 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30]
Extension of electric distribution lines requested by an applicant and
necessary to furnish an entire electric system to new residential buildings
and mobile homes within an approved subdivision having three or more
building lots or to new multiple-occupancy buildings shall be made
underground in accordance with provisions set forth in detailed rules and
regulations governing electric service installations established and
published by the Electric Utility, the differential in cost of said underground
system installation to be assumed and to be payable in advance by the
applicant, in full, or shared in such proportion with the Electric Utility as
may be established and published in said detailed rules and regulations
governing electric service installations.
§ 687-19. Other sources of energy. [Added 11-12-1980 by Ord. No.
1231]
The Electric Utility will not supply service to customers who have other
sources of energy supply except under schedules which specifically provide
for such service. The customer shall not be permitted to operate his own
generating equipment in parallel with the Electric Utility's service except on
written permission of the Electric Utility. In order to avoid undue jeopardy
to life and property in his own premises, in the City of Vineland electric
system and in the facilities of third parties, the customer shall not install his
own generating equipment until he has consulted the Electric Utility.
§ 687-20. Energy cost clause generally. [Added 11-12-1980 by Ord.
No. 1231; amended 12-8-1981 by Ord. No. 1281; 1-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 85-66; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30]
The energy cost clause, as set forth in §§ 687-31, 687-38 and 687-55, shall
apply to Rate R: residential service; Rate GLP: general light and power
service; and Rate WLP: wholesale light and power service. In addition, the
energy cost clause shall apply to any other established rates for electric
service, if so specified.
§ 687-21. Refund of overpayments. [Added 8-8-1989 by Ord. No.
89-47; amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-44]
A. The Electric Utility shall establish a procedure for refund of
overpayments to customers within the current fiscal period, said
procedure to be an addition to this article.
B. The Electric Utility shall apply a credit balance to active accounts
where an overpayment does exist.
C. The Electric Utility shall issue refund checks to customers addressed to
the last known address of record where said refund exceeds $5 and
there is no active Electric Utility account against which to charge said
credit.
§ 687-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-21
1:1223
D. The Electric Utility shall establish a policy of canceling the overpaid
balance of customer accounts less than or equal to $5 where there is a
remaining credit balance, which balance has accrued on the records for
a period in excess of one year, and no valid address of record is
available for refunding said balance of overpaid account funds.
E. The Director of the Department of Municipal Utilities shall be the
authorized municipal official with authority to authorize said
cancellation of customer accounts with $5 or less remaining therein
pursuant to Subsection D above.
§ 687-21 VINELAND CODE § 687-21
1:1224
ARTICLE II
Rate R: Residential Service
§ 687-22. Availability.
This rate shall be available in the City of Vineland.
§ 687-23. Applicability.
This rate is applicable to residential service through one meter to customers
in individual residences and in individual apartments for lighting, cooking,
heating, refrigeration, appliances and for single-phase motors of limited
capacity, including service for agricultural purposes incidental to the
domestic service. In residential premises, use for purposes other than
residential will be permitted only where such use is incidental to the
residential use.
§ 687-24. Rate. [Amended 3-24-1964 by Ord. No. 475; 9-8-1970 by
Ord. No. 772; 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. 798; 3-22-1977 by Ord. No.
1074; 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1231; 1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 85-66;
12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-1996; 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14;
4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30; 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-48;
3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
A. The following rates shall be effective April 1, 2018:
Rate
Kilowatt-Hours
Used per Month
$7 Minimum customer charge
$0.13028 Per kilowatt-hour for the first in
the billing months of October
through May, inclusive
500
$0.13028 Per kilowatt-hour for the first in
the billing months of June through
September, inclusive
600
$0.09181 Per kilowatt-hour in the billing
months of October through May,
inclusive, for all over
500
$0.14256 Per kilowatt-hour in the billing
months of June through
September, inclusive, for all over
600
§ 687-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-25
1:1225
§ 687-25. Minimum charge. [Amended 9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 772;
3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074; 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1231;
1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 85-66; 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-96;
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30;
7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-48]
The next minimum bill under the above rate shall be $7 per month, effective
September 1, 2017.
§ 687-26. Multiple dwellings.
This rate will apply where two or more individual apartments or dwelling
units on a single premises are served through one meter, provided that the
minimum charge and the number of kilowatt-hours in each block of the rate
are multiplied by the number of individual apartments or dwelling units,
whether occupied or not, served through one meter. Service to a multiple
dwelling may, at the option of the customer, be taken under the general light
and power service rate GLP.
§ 687-27. Water-heater service. [Amended 4-26-1960 by Ord. No.
341; 9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 772; 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074]
No allowances will be made for water-heating service.
§ 687-28. Delayed-payment charge. [Amended 11-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-56; 2-23-1988 by Ord. No. 88-10; 6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
89-39]
A. The above rate is net and is contingent upon payment of bills within 15
days of the date rendered. An additional charge of 5% of the current
amount billed, net of any payments applied thereon, will be added to
bills not paid within the specified payment time. [Amended 3-12-1991
by Ord. No. 91-22; 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-34]
B. Senior citizens.
(1) The delayed-payment charge shall be waived to senior citizens 65
years of age or older, provided that a written application is made
and service is in the applicant's name. Proof of age must be
presented at time of application.
(2) If all conditions are met in Subsection B(1), the senior citizen
customers as defined above shall receive net billing only. This
waiver of the delayed-payment charge shall apply to the residential
rate only.
C. Disabled American veterans.
(1) The delayed-payment charge shall be waived to disabled American
veterans, provided that a written application is made and service is
in the applicant's name. Proof of disabled American veteran status
must be presented at time of application. For purposes of this
§ 687-25 VINELAND CODE § 687-28
1:1226
§ 687-29. Contract term. [Amended 9-27-1955 by Ord. No. 188]
The contract term under this rate shall be variable.
§ 687-30. Terms and conditions.
Service under this rate is subject to the general terms, rules and regulations
as adopted by the City of Vineland Electric Utility.
§ 687-31. Energy cost clause. [Added 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. 798;
amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074; 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1231;
12-8-1981 by Ord. No. 1281; 1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 85-66;
4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30; 12-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-99;
5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-34; 12-23-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-67;
12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-82]
section, a "disabled American veteran" is any veteran who has been
or shall be declared by the United States Veterans' Administration,
or its successor, to have a service-connected disability.
(2) If all conditions are met in Subsection C(1), the disabled American
veteran customers as defined above shall receive net billing only.
This waiver of the delayed-payment charge shall apply to the
residential rate only.
D. Permanently and totally disabled persons.
(1) The delayed-payment charge shall be waived to permanently and
totally disabled persons, provided that a written application is
made and service is in the applicant's name. Proof of permanent
and total disability status must be presented at time of application.
For purposes of this section, a "permanently and totally disabled
person" is any person who has been or shall be declared by the
United States Social Security Administration, or its successor, to be
permanently and totally disabled.
(2) If all conditions of Subsection D(1) are met, the permanently and
totally disabled customers as defined above shall receive net billing
only. This waiver of the delayed-payment charge shall apply to the
residential rate only.
A. The energy cost clause (fuel adjustment factor) shall be computed
thrice annually, for service billed in the months of October through
December (winter rates), January through May (winter rates) and June
through September (summer rates). The fuel-adjustment factor shall
adjust monthly billings either upward or downward. When said fueladjustment
factor is above or below $0.02164 per kilowatt-hour, an
additional charge or deduction will be made to each kilowatt-hour
supplied under this rate schedule, except those applied to street and
traffic lighting. Such added charge or decreased charge, as the case
may be, will be the amount per kilowatt-hour by which such fuel
§ 687-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-31
1:1227
purchased power and interchanged power cost is estimated to be above
or below $0.02164 per kilowatt-hour. [Amended 7-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-48]
B. The increase or decrease in the cost of fuel consumed and of power
purchased or interchanged per kilowatt-hour sold, as determined by
budgeted funds and projected seasonal sales, will be applied to billings
in the summer- or winter-rate period applicable. Each month, the fueladjustment
factor calculated above shall be compared to actual fuel,
purchased power and interchange power costs and the difference
calculated. The difference between the fuel-adjustment factor and the
actual costs of fuel, purchase power and interchanged power will be
accumulated, as a recovery factor, such that the balance nets out over
or under recoveries against each other. The net balance will be
accumulated for the months of September through November
(inclusive), December through April (inclusive), and May through
August (inclusive). The net September through April balance will be
applied, as either an increase or decrease, to the fuel-adjustment
calculation (as described above) in the next accumulated period
immediately following the adjustment period. The net May through
August balance will be applied, as either an increase or decrease, to the
fuel-adjustment calculation (as described above) in the winter-rate
season immediately following the adjustment period. The cost per
kilowatt-hour for all calculations shall be carried out to the nearest onethousandth
of a mill. Kilowatt-hours sold, as used in making such
determinations, will not include the kilowatt-hours of a rate schedule to
which this adjustment clause does not apply. The minimum bill shall not
be reduced by reason of this energy cost clause, but the adjustment,
when positive, will be billed to all kilowatt-hours delivered.
C. In the event that, in the Utility's judgment, pass-through of 100% of the
accumulated seasonal differential in fuel costs in the rate season
immediately following the rate season in which the differential was
experienced will result in a fuel-adjustment factor which varies
substantially from the actual fuel costs during that subsequent season,
the Utility may defer pass-through of a portion of the net difference to
subsequent rate seasons. The specific proportion to be deferred shall be
determined by the Utility as necessary to avoid price distortions and
undue price volatility to customers.
§ 687-31 VINELAND CODE § 687-31
1:1228
ARTICLE III
Rate GLP: Commercial Rate Service
§ 687-32. Availability.
This rate shall be available in the City of Vineland.
§ 687-33. Applicability.
This rate is applicable to general lighting and power service requirements
of offices and professional, commercial or industrial establishments and
other applications outside the scope of the residential service rate.
Residence service, when used through the same meter and in conjunction
with general light and power service, will be supplied under this rate unless
the customer so separates and arranges his wiring that domestic use can be
separately metered.
§ 687-34. Rate. [Amended 9-27-1955 by Ord. No. 188; 9-8-1970 by
Ord. No. 772; 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074; 11-12-1980 by Ord. No.
1231; 1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 85-66; 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-96;
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30;
12-23-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-67; 7-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-31;
7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-48; 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
A. The following rates shall be effective April 1, 2018:
(1) Commercial rate service with no demand meter (three kilowatts or
less).
(a) Minimum customer charge per month: $20.
(b) Monthly energy charges:
[1] First 200 kilowatt-hours used per month: $0.11056 per
kilowatt-hour.
[2] Over 200 kilowatt-hours additional used in the same
month: $0.14956 per kilowatt-hour.
(2) Commercial rate service with demand meter.
(a) Minimum customer charge per month: $16.
(b) Monthly energy charges:
[1] Summer season. All kilowatt-hours used per month in the
billing months of June through September: $0.10026 per
kilowatt-hour.
[2] Winter season. First 15,000 kilowatt-hours used per month
in the billing months of October through May: $0.10026
per kilowatt-hour. Over 15,000 kilowatt-hours used per
§ 687-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-34
1:1229
§ 687-35. Determination of demand. [Amended 3-24-1964 by Ord.
No. 475; 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074; 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1231]
month in the months of October through May: $0.09526
per kilowatt-hour.
(c) Monthly demand charges:
[1] Summer season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand
in the billing months of June through September: $10.50
per kilowatt.
[2] Winter season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand in
the billing months of October through May: $10.25 per
kilowatt.
(3) Commercial rate farm irrigation service with demand meter.
(a) Minimum customer charge per month: $16.00.
(b) Monthly energy charges:
[1] Summer season. All kilowatt-hours used per month in the
billing months of June through September: $0.10856 per
kilowatt-hour.
[2] Winter season. First 15,000 kilowatt-hours used per month
in the billing months of October through May: $0.10856
per kilowatt-hour. Over $15,000 kilowatt-hours used per
month in the months of October through May: $0.10056
per kilowatt-hour.
(c) Monthly demand charges:
[1] Summer season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand
in the billing months of June through September: $3 per
kilowatt.
[2] Winter season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand in
the billing months of October through May: $2.50 per
kilowatt.
A. The demand, for billing purposes, shall be the highest thirty-minute
kilowatt demand occurring during the month as registered by a demand
indicator or meter adjusted for power factor as hereinafter provided,
but not less than three kilowatts. Effective July 1, 1996, all new demand
meters installed and any meter changes to existing accounts shall have
a fifteen-minute demand interval, and the demand for billing purposes
shall be the highest fifteen-minute kilowatt demand occurring during
the billing month. The City of Vineland Electric Utility may, at its option,
elect to forego measurement of demand when it is anticipated that the
demand will not exceed three kilowatts. When the demand is not
measured and the consumption exceeds 750 kilowatt-hours in a month,
§ 687-34 VINELAND CODE § 687-35
1:1230
§ 687-36. Minimum charge. [Amended 6-27-1961 by Ord. No. 384;
9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 772; 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074; 11-12-1980
by Ord. No. 1231; 1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 85-66; 12-12-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-96; 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No.
94-30; 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-48]
The above commercial rates are subject to the following minimum net
monthly charge per month, effective September 1, 2017:
§ 687-37. Power factor.
The above rate is based upon the maintenance by the customer of an
average power factor of 85%. The City of Vineland Electric Utility reserves
the right to determine, by test, the power factor of the customer's load
at the point where the electrical energy is metered, and, if the average
monthly power factor is less than 85%, the demand as determined under the
provisions of this rate shall be increased for billing purposes by multiplying
the demand by the required power factor and dividing the product by the
measured power factor.291
§ 687-38. Energy cost clause. [Amended 3-24-1964 by Ord. No. 475;
9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 772; 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074; 11-12-1980
by Ord. No. 1231; 12-8-1981 by Ord. No. 1281; 1-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 85-66; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30; 12-10-1996 by Ord. No.
the billing demand will be determined by dividing the measured
kilowatt-hours by 200. If the monthly consumption exceeds 750
kilowatt-hours in three of the 12 months ended with the current month,
a demand-measuring meter shall be installed, or the customer may
request that a demand-measuring meter be installed at any time.
[Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-45]
B. For customers presently being so served and for the existing heating
load presently so served, permanently installed electrical space-heating
equipment which is the sole source of space and comfort heating and
which is less than the total of all other connected loads may be so
connected as to be excluded from demand registration. Customers
connected after May 1, 1977, and additional loads connected by
existing customers after such date will not be served under this demand
exclusion provision.
A. Commercial rate service with no demand meter - minimum charge: $20.
B. Commercial rate service with demand meter - minimum charge: $16.
C. Commercial rate farm irrigation service with demand meter - minimum
charge: $16.
291. Editor's Note: Original § 438-38, Primary metering, as amended 4-26-1994 by Ord. No.
94-30 and which immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-9-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-50.
§ 687-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-38
1:1231
96-99; 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-34; 12-23-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-67; 12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-82]
A. The energy cost clause (fuel adjustment factor) shall be computed
thrice annually, for service billed in the months of October through
December (winter rates), January through May (winter rates) and June
through September (summer rates). The fuel-adjustment factor shall
adjust monthly billings either upward or downward. When said fueladjustment
factor is above or below $0.02164 per kilowatt-hour, an
additional charge or deduction will be made to each kilowatt-hour
supplied under this rate schedule, except those applied to street and
traffic lighting. Such added charge or decreased charge, as the case
may be, will be the amount per kilowatt-hour by which such fuel
purchased power and interchanged power cost is estimated to be above
or below $0.02164 per kilowatt-hour. [Amended 7-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-48]
B. The increase or decrease in the cost of fuel consumed and of power
purchased or interchanged per kilowatt-hour sold, as determined by
budgeted funds and projected seasonal sales, will be applied to billings
in the summer- or winter-rate period applicable. Each month, the fueladjustment
factor calculated above shall be compared to actual fuel,
purchased power and interchange power costs and the difference
calculated. The difference between the fuel-adjustment factor and the
actual costs of fuel, purchase power and interchanged power will be
accumulated, as a recovery factor, such that the balance nets out over
or under recoveries against each other. The net balance will be
accumulated for the months of September through November
(inclusive), December through April (inclusive), and May through
August (inclusive). The net September through April balance will be
applied, as either an increase or decrease, to the fuel-adjustment
calculation (as described above) in the next accumulated period
immediately following the adjustment period. The net May through
August balance will be applied, as either an increase or decrease, to the
fuel-adjustment calculation (as described above) in the winter-rate
season immediately following the adjustment period. The cost per
kilowatt-hour for all calculations shall be carried out to the nearest onethousandth
of a mill. Kilowatt-hours sold, as used in making such
determinations, will not include the kilowatt-hours of a rate schedule to
which this adjustment clause does not apply. The minimum bill shall not
be reduced by reason of this energy cost clause, but the adjustment,
when positive, will be billed to all kilowatt-hours delivered.
C. In the event that, in the Utility's judgment, pass-through of 100% of the
accumulated seasonal differential in fuel costs in the rate season
immediately following the rate season in which the differential was
experienced will result in a fuel-adjustment factor which varies
substantially from the actual fuel costs during that subsequent season,
the Utility may defer pass-through of a portion of the net difference to
subsequent rate seasons. The specific proportion to be deferred shall be
§ 687-38 VINELAND CODE § 687-38
1:1232
§ 687-39. Delayed payment charge. [Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-22; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30; 5-8-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-34]
The above rate is net and is contingent upon payment of bills within 15 days
of the date rendered. An additional charge of 6% of the current amount
billed, net of any payments applied thereon, will be added to bills not paid
within the specified payment time.
§ 687-40. Contract term.
The contract term under this rate shall be annual.
§ 687-41. Terms and conditions.
Service under this rate is subject to the general terms, rules and regulations
as adopted by the City of Vineland Electrical Utility.
determined by the Utility as necessary to avoid price distortions and
undue price volatility to customers.
§ 687-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-41
1:1233

ARTICLE IV
Street-, Traffic- and Night-Lighting Service
[Added 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-96]
§ 687-42. Availability.
These rates shall be available in the City of Vineland.
§ 687-43. Applicability.
These rates are applicable to all streetlighting, highway lighting, traffic
lighting and night-lighting customers. Poles and equipment are owned and
maintained by the City of Vineland Electric Utility.
§ 687-44. Streetlighting rates. [Amended 2-13-1990 by Ord. No.
90-3]
A. The following streetlighting rates shall be effective September 1, 2017
(retroactive): [Amended 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30; 5-10-1994
by Ord. No. 94-34; 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-45; 7-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-35; 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-48]
(1) Streetlights:
Fixture Wattage/Lamp
Description
Lamp Size
(lumens)
Charge per
Month
50 W HPS Cobrahead* 3,600 $8.50
70 W MPS Cobrahead 5,300 $9.50
100 W HPS Cobrahead 8,600 $11.25
100 W HPS Traditionaire 8,600 $14
150 W HPS Cobrahead 14,000 $14
250 W HPS Cobrahead 24,000 $18
400 W MH Cobrahead 31,000 $25.50
* Maintenance only
(2) Mercury vapor: (maintenance only)
Fixture Wattage/Lamp
Description
Lamp Size
(lumens)
Charge per
Month
100 W Cobrahead* 3,500 $9.25
175 W Cobrahead* 6,800 $12.50
250 W Cobrahead* 11,000 $15.75
400 W Cobrahead* 20,000 $21.75
* Maintenance only
§ 687-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-44
1:1235
(3) Induction (i): (maintenance only)
Fixture Wattage/Lamp
Description
Lamp Size
(lumens)
Charge per
Month
80 W i Cobrahead * 6,800 $9.50
100 W i Cobrahead * 8,600 $12
150 W i Cobrahead * 13,000 $14.25
200 W i Cobrahead * 16,000 $17
250 W i Cobrahead * 21,250 $20
* Maintenance only
(4) LED:
Fixture Wattage/Lamp
Description
Lamp Size
(lumens)
Charge per
Month
60 W LU5 Barn Light Type V 5,600 $9.50
74 W Cobrahead w/Hse Side
Shield Type V
8,200 $10.25
70 W LED Contemp Type R2
(Post Top)
3,565 $13.50
70 W LED Traditionaire (Post
Top)
5,610 $16
60 W LED Acorn (Post Top)
VDID Fixture
8,640 $27.50
54 W LED Cobrahead 5,450 $8
74 W LED Cobrahead 8,200 $9
108 W LED Cobrahead 12,280 $12
165 W LED Cobrahead 16,475 $14.25
215 W LED Cobrahead 23,560 $18.50
(5) Floodlights:
Fixture Wattage/Lamp
Description
Lamp Size
(lumens)
Charge per
Month
300 i Flood * 24,600 $20.50
150 W HPS Flood 14,000 $15
250 W HPS Flood 25,000 $20.75
400 W HPS Flood 40,000 $27.75
1000 W HPS Flood 100,000 $60
250 W MH Flood 13,500 $21.75
§ 687-44 VINELAND CODE § 687-44
1:1236
§ 687-45. Streetlighting surcharges and discounts. [Amended
2-13-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3]
Fixture Wattage/Lamp
Description
Lamp Size
(lumens)
Charge per
Month
400 W MH Flood 31,000 $28.75
1000 W MH Flood 80,000 $60
130 W LED Flood UFLD A40 14,600 $18
256 W LED UFLD B100 33,000 $30
* Maintenance only
(6) The above rates for mercury vapor lamps apply only to units
existing and installed prior to February 1, 1980. No new units of the
above mercury vapor sizes will be installed after this date. Any
existing mercury vapor lights retired will be replaced by sodium
vapor.
(7) The lumen lamp sizes are approximate ratings.
A. The following shall be effective January 1, 1990 (retroactive):
(1) Streetlighting surcharges:
(a) Thirty-foot metal standard: $2 per month.
(b) URD connection: $1 per month.
(2) Streetlighting discounts (apply to City of Vineland streetlight
billing):
Lamp Size
(lumina) Class
Discount per
Month
11,000 Utility/county $9.00
11,000 Utility/state $9.25
16,000 Utility/county $7.50
(3) In any year, if the state or county fails to reimburse the Utility for
the above lamps, the discount will no longer apply to the City of
Vineland streetlight billing.
B. The following shall be effective February 1, 1990 (retroactive):
(1) Streetlighting surcharges:
(a) Thirty-foot metal standard: $2.50 per month.
(b) URD connection: $1.25 per month.
§ 687-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-45
1:1237
(2) Streetlighting discounts (apply to City of Vineland streetlight
billing):
Lamp Size
(lumina) Class
Discount Per
Month
11,000 Utility/county $11.00
11,000 Utility/state $11.00
16,000 Utility/county $10.50
(3) In any year, if the state or county fails to reimburse the Utility for
the above lamps, the discount will no longer apply to the City of
Vineland streetlight billing.
(4) Additional discount. The City of Vineland street and traffic lighting
rates will increase approximately 15% and will be discounted 10%
for a net increase of approximately 5%. This discount will be shown
on each monthly billing to the City of Vineland.
C. The following shall be effective January 1, 1991:
(1) Streetlighting surcharges:
(a) Thirty-foot metal standard: $3 per month.
(b) URD connection: $1.50 per month.
(2) Streetlighting discounts (apply to City of Vineland streetlight
billing):
Lamp Size
(lumina) Class
Discount Per
Month
11,000 Utility/county $12.75
11,000 Utility/state $12.75
16,000 Utility/county $12.00
(3) In any year, if the state or county fails to reimburse the Utility for
the above lamps, the discount will no longer apply to the City of
Vineland streetlight billing.
(4) Additional discount. The City of Vineland street and traffic lighting
rates will increase approximately 15% and will be discounted 10%
for a net increase of approximately 5%. This discount will be shown
on each monthly billing to the City of Vineland.
D. The following shall be effective January 1, 1992:
(1) Streetlighting surcharges:
(a) Thirty-foot metal standard: $3.25 per month.
§ 687-45 VINELAND CODE § 687-45
1:1238
(b) URD connection: $1.75 per month.
(2) Streetlighting discounts (apply to City of Vineland streetlight
billing):
Lamp Size
(lumina) Class
Discount Per
Month
11,000 Utility/county $14.25
11,000 Utility/state $14.25
16,000 Utility/county $13.50
(3) In any year, if the state or county fails to reimburse the Utility for
the above lamps, the discount will no longer apply to the City of
Vineland streetlight billing.
(4) Additional discount. The City of Vineland street and traffic lighting
rates will increase approximately 12% and will be discounted 7%
for a net increase of approximately 5%. This discount will be shown
on each monthly billing to the City of Vineland.
E. The following shall be effective January 1, 1993:
(1) Streetlighting surcharges:
(a) Thirty-foot metal standard: $3.50 per month.
(b) URD connection: $2 per month.
(2) Streetlighting discounts (apply to City of Vineland streetlight
billing):
Lamp Size
(lumina) Class
Discount Per
Month
11,000 Utility/county $15.25
11,000 Utility/state $15.25
16,000 Utility/county $14.50
(3) In any year, if the state or county fails to reimburse the Utility for
the above lamps, the discount will no longer apply to the City of
Vineland streetlight billing.
(4) Additional discount. The City of Vineland street and traffic lighting
rates will increase approximately 7.5% and will be discounted 2.5%
for a net increase of approximately 5%. This discount will be shown
on each monthly billing to the City of Vineland.
F. The following shall be effective January 1, 1994:
(1) Streetlighting surcharges:
§ 687-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-45
1:1239
§ 687-46. Traffic lighting rates.
(a) Thirty-foot metal standard: $3.75 per month.
(b) URD connection: $2.25 per month.
(2) Streetlighting discounts (apply to City of Vineland streetlight
billing):
Lamp Size
(lumina) Class
Discount Per
Month
11,000 Utility/county $16.25
11,000 Utility/state $16.25
16,000 Utility/county $15.50
(3) Additional discount. The City of Vineland street and traffic lighting
rates will increase approximately 6.4% and will be discounted 1.4%
for a net increase of approximately 5%. This discount will be shown
on each monthly billing to the City of Vineland.
A. The following rates shall be effective January 1, 1990:
(1) Landis Avenue from Myrtle Street to West Avenue:
(a) Lamps: $1.15 per month.
(b) No-turn signals: $0.58 per month.
(2) Other traffic signals:
(a) Lamps: $0.81 per month.
(b) Atlantic Electric territory (CVEU maintained): $0.29 per
month.
(3) Blinker lights:
(a) Signals: $1.32 per month.
(b) Stop flashers: $3.45 per month.
(c) County billed (CVEU maintained): $0.29 per month.
B. The following rates shall be effective January 1, 1991:
(1) Landis Avenue from Myrtle Street to West Avenue:
(a) Lamps: $1.32 per month.
(b) No-turn signals: $0.66 per month.
(2) Other traffic signals:
(a) Lamps: $0.93 per month.
§ 687-45 VINELAND CODE § 687-46
1:1240
(b) Atlantic Electric territory (CVEU maintained): $0.33 per
month.
(3) Blinker lights:
(a) Signals: $1.52 per month.
(b) Stop flashers: $3.97 per month.
(c) County billed (CVEU maintained): $0.33 per month.
C. The following rates shall be effective January 1, 1992:
(1) Landis Avenue from Myrtle Street to West Avenue:
(a) Lamps: $1.48 per month.
(b) No-turn signals: $0.74 per month.
(2) Other traffic signals:
(a) Lamps: $1.04 per month.
(b) Atlantic Electric territory (CVEU maintained): $0.37 per
month.
(3) Blinker lights:
(a) Signals: $1.70 per month.
(b) Stop flashers: $4.44 per month.
(c) County billed (CVEU maintained): $0.37 per month.
D. The following rates shall be effective January 1, 1993:
(1) Landis Avenue from Myrtle Street to West Avenue:
(a) Lamps: $1.59 per month.
(b) No-turn signals: $0.80 per month.
(2) Other traffic signals:
(a) Lamps: $1.11 per month.
(b) Atlantic Electric territory (CVEU maintained): $0.40 per
month.
(3) Blinker lights:
(a) Signals: $1.83 per month.
(b) Stop flashers: $4.78 per month.
(c) County billed (CVEU maintained): $0.40 per month.
E. The following rates shall be effective January 1, 1994:
§ 687-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-46
1:1241
§ 687-47. Installation fees.
(1) Landis Avenue from Myrtle Street to West Avenue:
(a) Lamps: $1.69 per month.
(b) No-turn signals: $0.85 per month.
(2) Other traffic signals:
(a) Lamps: $1.19 per month.
(b) Atlantic Electric territory (CVEU maintained): $0.42 per
month.
(3) Blinker lights:
(a) Signals: $1.95 per month.
(b) Stop flashers: $5.08 per month.
(c) County billed (CVEU maintained): $0.42 per month.
A. The City of Vineland will be exempt from installation fees for all
streetlighting, traffic lighting and night-lighting installations. All other
customers will be required to pay installation fees for the above
installations requiring the setting of poles or the installation of circuits
based upon labor and material costs incurred. This fee schedule shall
be updated annually and will be approved by the Director of the Electric
Utility.
B. The installation charge on existing poles with secondary circuits will be
$75.
§ 687-46 VINELAND CODE § 687-47
1:1242
ARTICLE V
Rate WLP: Industrial Rate Service
§ 687-48. Availability.
This rate shall be available in the City of Vineland.
§ 687-49. Applicability. [Amended 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-96]
This rate is applicable to general lighting and power customers having a
connected load of not less than 250 kilowatts. This stipulation will apply
to any new customers or installations effective January 1, 1990. Industrial
lighting incidental to power and combined with the power service shall
be taken through transformers furnished, installed and maintained by the
customers.
§ 687-50. Rate. [Amended 11-22-1955 by Ord. No. 198; 9-8-1970 by
Ord. No. 772; 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074; 11-12-1980 by Ord. No.
1231; 1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 85-66; 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-96;
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30;
12-23-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-67; 5-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-34;
7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-48; 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
A. The following rates shall be effective April 1, 2018:
(1) Industrial rate service: secondary voltage.
(a) Minimum customer charge: $450 per month.
(b) Monthly energy charges.
[1] Summer season:
[a] First 70,000 kilowatt-hours used in the billing months
of June through September: $0.09926 per kilowatthour.
[b] Over 70,000 kilowatt-hours used in the billing months
of June through September: $0.09106 per kilowatthour.
[2] Winter season:
[a] First 70,000 kilowatt-hours used in the billing months
of October through May: $0.09926 per kilowatt-hour.
[b] Over 70,000 kilowatt-hours used in the billing months
of October through May: $0.08306 per kilowatt-hour.
(c) Monthly demand charges:
[1] Summer season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand
in the billing months of June through September: $11.25
per kilowatt.
§ 687-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-50
1:1243
§ 687-51. Industrial service, modified market rate. [Added
12-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-99; 4-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-18;
9-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-65]
[2] Winter season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand in
the billing months of October through May: $10.75 per
kilowatt.
(2) Industrial rate service: primary voltage.
(a) Minimum customer charge: $500 per month.
(b) Monthly energy charges.
[1] Summer season:
[a] First 70,000 kilowatt-hours used in the billing months
of June through September: $0.09606 per kilowatthour.
[b] Over 70,000 kilowatt-hours used in the billing months
of June through September: $0.08906 per kilowatthour.
[2] Winter season:
[a] First 70,000 kilowatt-hours used in the billing months
of October through May: $0.09606 per kilowatt-hour.
[b] Over 70,000 kilowatt-hours used in the billing months
of October through May: $0.07856 per kilowatt-hour.
(c) Monthly demand charges:
[1] Summer season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand
in the billing months of June through September: $10.75
per kilowatt.
[2] Winter season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand in
the billing months of October through May: $10.25 per
kilowatt.
A. In addition to the service available under § 687-50, industrial service
shall be available, effective April 1, 2018, under written contract
between the City of Vineland and the customer, under rates, terms and
conditions as follows: [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
(1) Modified Market rate service: $10,000 per month.
(2) Demand charge:
(a) Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand: $24.
(3) Energy charge:
§ 687-50 VINELAND CODE § 687-51
1:1244
§ 687-52. Modified market rate, incremental energy rider.
[Amended 4-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-18; 9-26-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-65]
(a) Each kilowatt-hour of usage: $0.025 per kilowatt-hour.
(4) Energy charge adder:
(a) Each kilowatt-hour of usage: $0.0025 per kilowatt-hour.
B. Charges will be calculated and billed monthly.
C. Service under WLP: Modified market rate shall be subject to §§ 687-53,
687-54, 687-57 and 687-59, and to such other items and conditions as
may be set forth in the written contract between the City of Vineland
and the customer.
D. This rate is generally available to industrial customers.
E. The energy charge shall be subject to an energy cost clause adjustment
as established by mutual agreement between the City of Vineland and
the customer and shall be in effect for a specified period of time until
amended.
A. This rider shall be available only to those customers taking service
under the modified market rate, as follows:
(1) Demand charge: [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
(a) Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand: $15.
(2) Energy charge:
(a) Each kilowatt-hour of usage: $0.025 per kilowatt-hour.
(3) Energy charge adder:
(a) Each kilowatt-hour of usage: $0.0025 per kilowatt-hour.
B. The rate set forth in this rider shall apply only when and to the extent
the customer increases demand above a base level as established by
contract.
C. This rate shall be available to the customer for terms not to exceed five
years.
D. The energy charge shall be subject to an energy cost clause adjustment
as established by mutual agreement between the City of Vineland and
the customer and shall be in effect for a specified period of time until
amended.
§ 687-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-53
1:1245
§ 687-53. Determination of demand. [Amended 4-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-30; 12-23-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-67]
The monthly billing demand shall be the highest fifteen-minute kilowatt
demand occurring during the month as registered by a demand indicator
or meter but shall be not less than 2/3 of the highest demand of the
immediately preceding 11 months. In no case shall the monthly billing
demand be less than 50 kilowatts.
§ 687-54. Power factor. [Amended 3-27-1977 by Ord. No. 1074;
11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1231]
The above rate is based upon the maintenance by the customer of an
average power factor of 89%. The City of Vineland Electric Utility reserves
the right to determine, by test, the power factor of a customer's load
at the point where the electrical energy is metered, and, if the average
monthly power factor is less than 89%, the demand as determined under the
provisions of this rate shall be increased for billing purposes by multiplying
the demand by the required power factor and dividing the product by the
measured power factor.292
§ 687-55. Energy cost clause. [Amended 3-24-1964 by Ord. No. 475;
9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 772; 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1074; 11-12-1980
by Ord. No. 1231; 12-8-1981 by Ord. No. 1281; 1-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 85-66; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30; 12-10-1996 by Ord. No.
96-99; 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-34; 12-23-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-67; 12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-82]
A. The energy cost clause (fuel adjustment factor) shall be computed
thrice annually, for service billed in the months of October through
December (winter rates), January through May (winter rates) and June
through September (summer rates). The fuel-adjustment factor shall
adjust monthly billings either upward or downward. When said fueladjustment
factor is above or below $0.02164 per kilowatt-hour, an
additional charge or deduction will be made to each kilowatt-hour
supplied under this rate schedule, except those applied to street and
traffic lighting. Such added charge or decreased charge, as the case
may be, will be the amount per kilowatt-hour by which such fuel
purchased power and interchanged power cost is estimated to be above
or below $0.02164 per kilowatt-hour. [Amended 7-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-48]
B. The increase or decrease in the cost of fuel consumed and of power
purchased or interchanged per kilowatt-hour sold, as determined by
budgeted funds and projected seasonal sales, will be applied to billings
in the summer- or winter-rate period applicable. Each month, the fueladjustment
factor calculated above shall be compared to actual fuel,
purchased power and interchange power costs and the difference
292. Editor's Note: Original § 438-54, Primary metering, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-50.
§ 687-53 VINELAND CODE § 687-55
1:1246
§ 687-56. Minimum charge. [Amended 9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 772;
4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30; 12-23-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-67]
The minimum net monthly charge under this rate shall be the amount of
the monthly demand charge, plus the minimum customer charge of $350
for secondary voltage customers and $400 for primary voltage customers.
In no case shall the minimum net monthly charge be less than the minimum
customer charge as specified above.
§ 687-57. Delayed payment charge. [Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-22; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30; 5-8-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-34]
The above rate is net and is contingent upon payment of bills within 15 days
of the date rendered. An additional charge of 5% of the current amount
billed, net of any payments applied thereon, will be added to bills not paid
within the specified payment time.
calculated. The difference between the fuel-adjustment factor and the
actual costs of fuel, purchase power and interchanged power will be
accumulated, as a recovery factor, such that the balance nets out
over or under recoveries against each other. The net balance will
be accumulated for the months of September through November
(inclusive), December through April (inclusive), and May through
August (inclusive). The net September through April balance will be
applied, as either an increase or decrease, to the fuel-adjustment
calculation (as described above) in the next accumulated period
immediately following the adjustment period. The net May through
August balance will be applied, as either an increase or decrease,
to the fuel-adjustment calculation (as described above) in the winterrate
season immediately following the adjustment period. The cost per
kilowatt-hour for all calculations shall be carried out to the nearest
one-thousandth of a mill. Kilowatt-hours sold, as used in making such
determinations, will not include the kilowatt-hours of a rate schedule to
which this adjustment clause does not apply. The minimum bill shall not
be reduced by reason of this energy cost clause, but the adjustment,
when positive, will be billed to all kilowatt-hours delivered.
C. In the event that, in the Utility's judgment, pass-through of 100% of the
accumulated seasonal differential in fuel costs in the rate season
immediately following the rate season in which the differential was
experienced will result in a fuel-adjustment factor which varies
substantially from the actual fuel costs during that subsequent season,
the Utility may defer pass-through of a portion of the net difference to
subsequent rate seasons. The specific proportion to be deferred shall be
determined by the Utility as necessary to avoid price distortions and
undue price volatility to customers.
§ 687-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-58
1:1247
§ 687-58. Contract terms and conditions. [Amended 8-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-50]
The contract term under this rate shall be annual. Service under this rate is
subject to the general terms, rules and regulations as adopted by the City
of Vineland Electric Utility.
§ 687-59. Industrial service: transmission service rate. [Amended
8-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-50]
§ 687-60. Transmission service rate, availability and applicability.
[Added 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-50]
This rate is available to general lighting and power customers having a
connected load of not less than 2,500 kilowatts. The service level for this
transmission service rate shall be 69 kilovolts. All transformers, switchgear,
interconnection and associated equipment shall be furnished, installed and
maintained by the customer according to VMEU specifications and
guidelines. Any backup power requirements shall be available by contract.
A. The following rates shall be effective April 11, 2018: [Amended
3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17; 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
(1) Transmission service rate.
(a) Minimum customer charge: $2,500 per month.
(b) Monthly energy charges. [Amended 4-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-20]
[1] Summer season. All energy used in the billing months of
June through September: $0.0878 per kilowatt-hour.
[2] Winter season. All energy used in the billing months of
October through May: $0.0778 per kilowatt-hour.
(c) Monthly demand charges.
[1] Summer season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand
in the billing months of June through September: $10.50
per kilowatt.
[2] Winter season. Each kilowatt of monthly billing demand in
the billing months of October through May: $9.50 per
kilowatt.
B. This rate is not subject to an additional energy clause adjustment at the
present time. VMEU reserves the right to impose seasonal energy
clause adjustments in subsequent seasons after the effective date.
§ 687-58 VINELAND CODE § 687-60
1:1248
ARTICLE VI
WLP Time-of-Day Rate and WLP Interruptible Rate
[Added 3-22-1988 by Ord. No. 88-18]
§ 687-61. WLP economic development rider. [Amended 4-26-1994
by Ord. No. 94-30]
This rider to the WLP rate provides credit to the customer charge and
the demand portion of the electric bill. These credits are graduated over
a five-year period in an abatement program. This service option may be
contracted for in accordance with the eligibility criteria in Schedule ED.293
§ 687-62. Curtailable rider, qualifications and demand. [Amended
4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30]
This rider to the WLP rate provides a credit for those firm customers who
reduce load when called upon by the Utility. In order to qualify, customers
must be WLP primary voltage level customers. Further qualifications
require a minimum billing demand of 250 kilowatts in three consecutive
summer season months. The rider shall be effective May 1, 1988. As used
in this article, "curtailable demand" shall be defined as load which can be
dropped upon request of the Utility. Load level will be determined jointly by
the Utility and the customer based on usage history and the customer's load
profile. Demands will be averaged over thirty-minute intervals; however, the
demand interval will change to 15 minutes effective January 1, 1995.
§ 687-63. Curtailable credit. [Amended 3-14-1989 by Ord. No.
89-15]
The demand charge under the WLP rate will be forgiven for each kilowatt
curtailed. Credit will only be applicable in any month when the customer
curtails each time called upon in that billing month. No credit will be
given in a billing month if the customer fails to curtail when called. The
credit amount will be based on the lowest level of curtailment during a
billing month. The customer must curtail power during the entire period
requested. If demand exceeds the original level when called at any time
during the curtailment period, no credit will be given.
§ 687-64. Number of curtailments.
The maximum number of curtailments in any billing month will be five with
a maximum duration of 11 hours each.
§ 687-65. Notice of curtailment.
The Utility will attempt to notify the customer by phone one hour prior
to a curtailment period. The customer will designate a person responsible
to respond to a call for curtailment in all hours. The customer will also
293. Editor's Note: Schedule ED is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 687-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-65
1:1249
provide a telephone number where curtailment notice can be made. A
dedicated phone line for this purpose is preferred. Depending on the size of
the curtailable load, the customer may be required to provide a dedicated
phone line or electronic mail terminal.
§ 687-66. Backup and maintenance service. [Added 2-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-3]
A. Availability (effective February 1, 1990, retroactive). This rate is
available by contract to any qualifying facility owner or steam host of
such a facility in the City of Vineland Electric Utility's (CVEU's) service
territory requiring firm backup and/or maintenance service. The CVEU
reserves the right to limit the amount of backup capacity available to
10% of the CVEU's installed generating capability.
B. Monthly rate.
(1) The customer charge shall be $400. [Amended 3-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-14; 12-23-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-67]
(2) Unit capacity reservation charge.
(a) Subject to the conditions of this section, the unit capacity
reservation charge will be as follows: [Amended 4-26-1994
by Ord. No. 94-30]
[1] Subtransmission/transmission voltage level: $2.15 per
kilowatt.
[2] Primary service voltage level: $2.27 per kilowatt.
[3] Secondary service voltage level: $3.96 per kilowatt.
(b) This monthly rate is calculated assuming that the qualifying
facility has a forced outage rate of 20%.
(3) For all new qualifying facilities, the CVEU will assume a forced
outage rate of 20% for the first year in which backup or
maintenance service is supplied. For subsequent calendar years,
the Utility will use historical data to determine whether the forced
outage rate has been greater than 20%. If the forced outage rate
has been greater than 20%, the customer's monthly rate shall be
increased by $0.05 for every 1% that the forced outage rate
exceeds 20%.
(4) For established qualifying facilities that require backup or
maintenance service, the CVEU will use historical data to calculate
the forced outage rate, but in no case shall such rate be based upon
a forced outage rate of less than 20%. If the forced outage rate has
been greater than 20%, the last sentence of the preceding
Subsection B(3) shall apply from the initial service date of the
backup or maintenance service. For subsequent years, sentence
two of the preceding Subsection B(3) shall apply.
§ 687-65 VINELAND CODE § 687-66
1:1250
(5) In addition, this service shall be subject to the charges set forth
below.
C. Backup service. During any month in which the qualifying facility
experiences an unscheduled outage that requires the CVEU to provide
energy, the customer will be required to pay all energy and demand
charges for metered electric use calculated in accordance with the
CVEU's WLP rate schedule, in addition to the monthly unit capacity
reservation charge. [Amended 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30]
D. Maintenance service.
(1) During any month in which the qualifying facility experiences an
outage because of scheduled maintenance during the CVEU's
winter period of November through May, the customer will be
required to pay all energy charges calculated under the CVEU's
WLP rate schedule, in addition to the monthly unit capacity
reservation charge.
(2) At its option, the CVEU may require that the customer schedule its
maintenance outage in other than the CVEU's summer period
months of June through October. If the CVEU so requires, the
maintenance service rate shall not be available for any scheduled
maintenance during the Utility's summer period but shall be billed
under the backup service provision. In the event that scheduled
maintenance is extended into the CVEU's summer period,
regardless of any fault of the customer, such scheduled
maintenance service occurring during the summer period shall be
billed in accordance with the charges for backup service. The
customer shall provide the CVEU with a written schedule of its
planned yearly maintenance prior to the execution of any initial
contract hereunder and no later than January 1 for every year
thereafter. All schedules for planned maintenance shall be subject
to the approval of the CVEU. At its discretion, the CVEU may permit
the customer to alter its approved maintenance schedule, provided
that such alterations do not shift maintenance from the CVEU's
winter period to the summer period.
E. Partial requirements service. All electrical service required by the
customer, other than maintenance and backup services, shall be billed
in accordance with the CVEU's WLP rate schedule.
F. Contract requirement. All service delivered under this schedule shall be
subject to contract for a minimum of one year.
G. Minimum annual charge. The minimum annual charge paid under this
rate schedule shall be the monthly capacity reservation charge and the
monthly customer charge times 12 months. The minimum annual
charge under the WLP rate shall not apply to any service under this
schedule.
§ 687-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-66
1:1251
§ 687-67. Wheeling service. [Added 2-13-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3]
H. Backup and maintenance capacity. For the purpose of determining the
capacity reservation charge, the maximum amount of capacity available
to a customer under this rate shall be specified in the contract,
calculated in accordance with this schedule. For all customers, the
maximum amount of capacity reserved shall be equal to the qualifying
facility's nameplate rating or the amount of service contracted for with
the qualifying facility, whichever applies. At its option, the CVEU may
but is not obligated to deliver backup or maintenance services in excess
of the amount specified in the contract, and such service shall be billed
in accordance with the WLP rate schedule without any additional
capacity reservation charge.
I. Special facilities. The CVEU, at its option, in order to deliver service
under this rate may require the installation of facilities, such as
metering equipment, that are in addition to the standard facilities that
the CVEU would normally install to provide firm power service. Such
facilities shall be provided by the customer. The CVEU shall be granted
access to inspect any facilities at the customer's site at all times,
without restriction or limitation, to assure compliance with the terms of
this rate.
J. Forced outage. A "forced outage" shall be the occurrence at a qualifying
facility of any condition or component failure which requires the
generation unit to be removed or kept from service during scheduled
operation.
K. Forced outage rate. The "forced outage rate" shall be the number of
forced outage hours divided by the sum of forced outage hours and
service hours, as expressed in percent, as follows:
FOR% = FOH/(FOH + SH) x 100
Where:
FOH = Forced outage hours; all hours which require the
generation unit to be removed or kept from service during
scheduled operation.
SH = Service hours; all hours during which a generation unit
is electrically connected to the system to meet the
customer's load requirements.
L. Power factor. The customer shall maintain its power factor in
accordance with the provisions of the CVEU's WLP rate and shall be
subject to all adjustments thereunder.
A. Availability (effective January 1, 1990, retroactive). This rate is
available by contract only to qualifying facilities in the City of Vineland
Electric Utility's (CVEU's) service territory to transmit their energy
production to the CVEU's interconnection points with Atlantic Electric.
Wheeling of energy to other locations within the CVEU's service
§ 687-66 VINELAND CODE § 687-67
1:1252
territory is not permitted. The CVEU returns the right to limit the
total amount of wheeling kilowatts available to 10% of the installed
transmission plant capacity. Any contract for wheeling shall be subject
to all guidelines and requirements established by the PJM Power Pool,
Atlantic Electric and the CVEU.
B. Annual rate. [Amended 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-30]
(1) The customer charge shall be $3,600.
(2) Annual capacity charge. Subject to the conditions of this rate
schedule, the capacity charge per year will be as follows:
(a) Primary service voltage level: $40.15 per kilowatt.
(3) Billing will be based on the greatest demand placed on the CVEU
system and divided into 12 equal monthly payments to be
recovered in the months following the establishment of the billing
demand. Payment will be made subject to the same terms as
required of the CVEU in interchange transactions with Atlantic
Electric, which requires payment within 10 days of the receipt of
the bill.
C. Special conditions of service.
(1) The qualifying facility requesting wheeling service shall be solely
responsible for making all arrangements with third parties which
may be required for the continued transmission of power and
energy for their transaction, and the CVEU shall not be responsible
for any effects or changes that such third parties may have on the
ability of the CVEU to provide wheeling service.
(2) The qualifying facility requesting wheeling service is responsible
for any CVEU system upgrades necessary to comply with the PJM
Power Pool or Atlantic Electric operating and reliability
requirements due to wheeling of the customer's energy to the
CVEU's interconnection with Atlantic Electric.
(3) The CVEU shall be compensated for losses due to the wheeling
transaction by being repaid in-kind at the time of the transaction,
unless other arrangements are mutually agreeable.
(4) The customer requesting wheeling service shall notify the CVEU in
advance of any proposed power transfer under the agreement.
(5) The CVEU will use its best efforts to supply transmission and
distribution capacity as requested. However, said service is not
guaranteed against irregularities, forced outages, repairs or
installation of equipment, maintenance and investigation and
inspection of CVEU facilities, orders or restraints of law or public
authorities or other cause(s) reasonably beyond the control of the
CVEU, including but not limited to fire, flood, accident, hurricane,
lightning, ice, explosion, riot, commotion, invasion, war,
§ 687-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-67
1:1253
insurrection or other acts of nature or public enemies. The CVEU
shall, if time and circumstances permit, notify the customer in
advance of such interruptions with an explanation of the cause,
duration and magnitude of the interruptions and any pertinent
information available. If details are unavailable at the time of
notification, details shall be given as soon thereafter as practicable.
During a period of curtailment, the CVEU will use its best efforts
to provide transmission service to the extent possible without
interfering with the CVEU's obligation to provide service to any of
its other customers.
(6) The CVEU may suspend wheeling service during any emergency
declared by the PJM Power Pool, Atlantic Electric or the CVEU.
(7) A customer shall cease to wheel when requested to do so by the
CVEU. In the event that the customer does not comply with this
request, the customer requesting wheeling service, as a condition
of such request, shall protect, indemnify and hold the CVEU, its
agents, servants, employees and assigns free and harmless from all
claims, demands, causes and actions, suits or other proceedings
(including all costs in connection therewith and in connection with
the defense thereof, including reasonable attorney's fees) of every
kind and character whatsoever, including, in tort, arising in favor of
any person whomsoever.
D. Contract requirement. All service delivered under this schedule shall be
subject to contract for a minimum of one year.
E. Minimum annual charge. The annual minimum charge paid under this
rate schedule shall be the annual capacity charge and the annual
customer charge.
F. Special facilities. The CVEU, at its option, in order to deliver service
under this rate may require the installation of facilities, such as
metering equipment, that are in addition to the standard facilities that
the CVEU would normally install to provide firm power service. Such
facilities shall be provided by the customer. The CVEU shall be granted
access to inspect any facilities at the customer's site at all times,
without restriction or limitation, to assure compliance with the terms of
this rate.
G. Power factor. The customer shall maintain its power factor in
accordance with the provisions of the CVEU's rate WLP and shall be
subject to all adjustments thereunder.
§ 687-67 VINELAND CODE § 687-67
1:1254
ARTICLE VII
Demand Side Management Rates and Incentives
[Added 11-9-1994 by Ord. No. 94-83]
§ 687-68. (Reserved)294
§ 687-68.1. Aggregation of retail customer demand response.
[Added 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2009-88]
§ 687-68.2. Ancillary services provided by demand response
resources. [Added 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2009-88]
A. The Vineland Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized designee is the
sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail
customers served by the Vineland Municipal Electric Utility directly
into any Commission-approved independent system operator's or
regional transmission organization's organized electric markets as of
June 1, 2012.
B. Retail customers served by the Vineland Municipal Electric Utility
wishing to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved
independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's
organized electric markets may do so up to June 1, 2012, then
thereafter only by participating in the program established by the
Vineland Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized designee. Retail
customers are not permitted to participate in the demand response
program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of
the Vineland Municipal Electric Utility.
A. As of June 1, 2012, Vineland Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized
designee is the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf
of retail customers served by Vineland Municipal Electric Utility
directly into any Commission-approved independent system operator's
or regional transmission organization's organized markets for energy
imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power
and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary
services (or its functional equivalent in the Commission-approved
independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's
tariff).
B. Retail customers served by the Vineland Municipal Electric Utility
wishing to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved
independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's
organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves,
supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or
regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator's
294. Editor’s Note: Former § 687-68, Heat pump rebate program, as amended, was repealed
3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9.
§ 687-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-68.2
1:1255
§ 687-68.3. Renewable energy uplift charge. [Added 4-26-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-13]
or regional transmission organization's tariff), may do so up to June 1,
2012, then thereafter only by participating in the program established
by the Vineland Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized designee.
Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the demand
response program of any other entity without the express prior
authorization of the Vineland Municipal Electric Utility.
A. Availability. This rate is available to qualifying renewable distributed
generation facilities in the Vineland Municipal Electric Utility's
(VMEU's) service territory to transmit energy through VMEU's delivery
system to PJM Interconnection (PJM). Service under the GLP demand
rate or WLP rate (depending on load characteristics) is a
prequalification to service under this rate. Metering and
interconnection requirements must be satisfied as described in
Subsection B prior to taking service. Transmittal of energy to other
locations within the VMEU's service territory is not permitted. The
VMEU retains the right to limit the total amount of energy transmitted
through its delivery system to maintain the quality of service
throughout its network. Any energy transmitted through VMEU's
delivery system is subject to all guidelines and requirements
established by PJM and the VMEU. The customer is responsible for any
arrangements and charges necessary for participation in PJM markets
or continued transmittal of their energy, and VMEU shall not be
responsible for any additional PJM or other third-party costs associated
with the delivery and marketing of customer-generated energy. VMEU
reserves the right to bill the customer for such costs should they be
imposed on VMEU.
B. Metering and interconnection. The customer must comply with all
components of its executed interconnection agreement with VMEU. The
interconnection agreement is subject to periodic review to demonstrate
compliance. The customer shall be subject to metering requirements
established in its interconnection agreement; should such requirements
not be established in the interconnection agreement, the customer may
be subject to additional charges for installation of metering equipment
compliant with VMEU metering policy sufficient to provide hourly load
information on the customer's energy production and any additional
metering requirements established under the applicable GLP demand
rate or WLP rate.
C. Uplift energy charge monthly rate per kWh. For each kWh metered at
the point of interconnection: $0.0396051 per kWh. [Amended
3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
D. Special conditions of service.
(1) The qualifying renewal distributed generating facility requesting
uplift service is responsible for any VMEU system upgrades
§ 687-68.2 VINELAND CODE § 687-68.3
1:1256
necessary to comply with ongoing PJM or Atlantic Electric
operating and reliability requirements due to transmittal of the
customer's energy to the VMEU's interconnection with PJM.
(2) Where applicable, the VMEU shall be compensated for losses due
to the transaction by being repaid in kind at the time of the
transaction, unless other arrangements are mutually agreeable.
(3) The customer requesting uplift service shall notify the VMEU in
advance of any proposed power transfer under the agreement
other than participation in the standard PJM markets.
(4) The VMEU will use its best efforts to supply transmission and
distribution capacity as requested. However, said service is not
guaranteed against irregularities, forced outages, repairs or
installation of equipment, maintenance and investigation and
inspection of VMEU facilities, PJM's inability to accept energy,
orders or restraints of law or public authorities or other cause(s)
reasonably beyond the control of the VMEU, including but not
limited to fire, flood, earthquake, accident, hurricane, lightning,
ice, explosion, riot, commotion, invasion, war, insurrection,
terrorism or other acts of nature or public enemies. The VMEU
shall, if time and circumstances permit, notify the customer in
advance of such interruptions with an explanation of the cause,
duration and magnitude of the interruptions and any pertinent
information available. If details are unavailable at the time of
notification, details shall be given as soon thereafter as practicable.
During a period of curtailment, the VMEU will use its best efforts to
provide service to the extent possible without interfering with the
VMEU's obligation to provide service to any of its other customers.
(5) The VMEU may suspend uplift service during any emergency
declared by the PJM, Atlantic Electric or the VMEU.
(6) The customer shall cease to uplift when requested to do so by the
VMEU. In the event that the customer does not comply with this
request, the customer requesting uplift service, as a condition of
such request, shall protect, indemnify and hold the VMEU, its
agents, servants, employees and assigns free and harmless from all
claims, demands, causes and actions, suits or other proceedings
(including all costs in connection therewith and in connection with
the defense thereof, including reasonable attorneys' fees) of every
kind and character whatsoever, including, in tort, arising in favor of
any person whomsoever.
E. Contract requirement. All service delivered under this schedule shall be
subject to contract for a minimum of one year and automatically renew
for one year unless terminated by either party at least 30 days in
advance of the end of the term.
F. Minimum annual charge. The annual minimum charge paid under this
rate schedule shall be the annual customer charge and the annual
§ 687-68.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-68.3
1:1257
facility charge and any minimum charges associated with the
customer's standard service under rate GLP with demand or WLP rate.
G. Special facilities. The VMEU, at its option in order to deliver service
under this rate, may require the installation of facilities, such as
metering equipment, that are in addition to the standard facilities that
the VMEU would normally install to provide firm power service. Such
facilities shall be provided by the customer. The VMEU shall be granted
access to inspect any facilities at the customer's site at all times,
without restriction or limitation, to assure compliance with the terms of
this rate.
H. Power factor. The customer shall maintain its power factor in
accordance with the provisions of the customer's standard service rate
GLP with demand or WLP rate and shall be subject to all adjustments
thereunder.
§ 687-68.3 VINELAND CODE § 687-68.3
1:1258
ARTICLE VIIA
Water Utility Discount
[Added 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-5]
§ 687-68.4. Electric service discount to Water Utility; expiration.
[Amended 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-43; 8-13-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-33; 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-29; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-51; 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-41; 1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
2017-92; 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-73]
A discount of 50% shall be applied to rates for electric service to facilities of
the City of Vineland Water Utility. This discount shall be extended and be in
effect for any bills rendered through December 31, 2019. At that time, this
discount shall no longer be in effect.
§ 687-68.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-68.4
1:1259

Part 2
M[Audnoicpitpeadl 1E2le-2ct6r-i1c9 U8t4ilBityy OAnrdd. WNaot. e8r4-S-6e0we(Cr hU. t4il3it8y, APdamrt i2n,i sOtrf aTthioen
1990 Code); Amended In Its Entirety 7-14-2009 By Ord. No.
2009-43]
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Municipal Utilities
§ 687-69. Establishment; head.
There is hereby established a Department of Municipal Utilities of the City
of Vineland, the head of which shall be the Director. The following utilities
shall be embraced and allocated within the Department of Municipal
Utilities:
§ 687-70. Appointment of Director; term of office.
§ 687-71. Qualifications of Director. [Amended 1-24-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-2]
The Director shall have a minimum of a bachelor's degree from an
accredited institution, in addition to five years of supervisory experience in
project management for commercial electrical construction projects. In lieu
of a bachelor's degree, qualified candidates shall have not less than 10 years
managerial experience in the commercial electrical profession, which shall
include procurement and purchasing, budgeting, and personnel matters.
A. Electric Utility.
B. Water-Sewer Utility.
A. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Vineland
with the advice and consent of the City Council, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:69A-32.
B. The Director shall be appointed for and shall serve during the term of
office of the Mayor appointing him and until the appointment and
qualification of his successor.
C. The position of Director of the Department of Municipal Utilities shall
be considered a full-time position.
D. The salary of the Director shall be fixed by the City Council in the
compensation schedules heretofore adopted or hereafter to be adopted
in the Schedule of Classified/Unclassified Positions and Applicable
Salary Ranges in the Civil Service of the City of Vineland. [Amended
2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
§ 687-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-72
1:1261
§ 687-72. Duties of Director. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
The Director of the Department of Municipal Utilities shall provide general
supervision to the Department and its employees and further shall:
§ 687-73. Electric Utility. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
Under the general supervision of the Director, the Electric Utility shall
consist of the following Divisions:
§ 687-74. Division of Electric Generation.
Within the Electric Utility, there shall be a Division of Electric Generation.
Under the direct supervision of the Superintendent of Electric Generation,
the Division shall:
A. Direct the operations and activities of all utilities, divisions, offices, and
the Customer Service Center, including but not limited to the Electric
Utility, Water-Sewer Utility, the activities of the engineering staff, the
storeroom and related office staff, and coordinate the work of all
divisional activities.
B. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of the Department
consistent with applicable statutes and ordinances.
C. Appoint, direct and supervise the subordinate officers and employees of
the Department.
D. Approve or disapprove pay rolls, bills and claims chargeable to the
Department appropriation.
E. Provide such information and reports on the work of the Department as
may from time to time be required by the Mayor.
F. Establish policies and procedures for the administration of all divisions
of the Department.
G. Be responsible for all financial and budgetary matters of the
Department.
H. Perform such other duties as directed by the Mayor.
A. The Division of Electric Generation which shall be directly supervised
by the Superintendent of Electric Generation.
B. The Division of Electric Distribution which shall be directly supervised
by the Superintendent of Electric Distribution.
C. The Division of Electric Engineering which shall be directly supervised
by the Superintendent of Engineering Services (Chief Engineer).
D. The Division of Interconnection which shall be directly supervised by
the Superintendent of PJM Interconnection.
§ 687-72 VINELAND CODE § 687-74
1:1262
§ 687-75. Division of Electrical Distribution.
Within the Electric Utility, there shall be a Division of Electrical
Distribution. Under the direct supervision of the Superintendent of
Electrical Distribution, the Division shall:
A. Be responsible for the production of electricity, including all necessary
functions, such as the procurement and storage of necessary
equipment, components and supplies and the construction and
maintenance of the electric generation systems.
B. Be responsible for preparation of specifications for contracts relating to
electric generation maintenance.
C. Provide such information reports on the work of the Division as may be
required by the Director or Mayor. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
D. Recommend revisions in the established ordinances, resolutions, rules
and regulations as deemed necessary and proper for the introduction,
transmission, distribution, use and supply of light, heat, or power and
the protection of the buildings, machinery, apparatus, wires, poles,
piping and conduits and other works and appurtenances used in
connection therewith and for the fixing and collecting of all rates, rents
or charges for supplying light, heat or power for private or commercial
uses in the City of Vineland franchised territory and for the imposition
of penalties upon the nonpayment thereof. [Added 2-14-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-10]
E. Provide for the care, storage, use and maintenance of motor vehicles
and motorized equipment owned by the City of Vineland in the custody
of the Electric Utility, Generation Division, and provide for the care,
storage, use and maintenance of all generation and transmission
equipment, and land owned by the City of Vineland and in the custody
of the Electric Utility. [Added 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
A. Be responsible for providing electric service, including all necessary
functions, such as procurement and storage of necessary equipment,
components and supplies and construction and maintenance of
distribution systems.
B. Be responsible for the preparation of specifications for contracts
relating to electrical transmission and distribution systems.
C. Provide such information repmis on the work of the Division as may be
required by the Director or Mayor. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
D. Recommend to the Director, Mayor and City Council extensions of the
generation and transmission systems, through the construction,
maintenance and operation of additions and extensions to the plant and
distribution system of the Electric Utility and to recommend to the
§ 687-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-75
1:1263
§ 687-76. Division of Electric Engineering.
Within the Electric Utility, there shall be a Division of Electric Engineering.
Under the direct supervision of the Superintendent of Engineering Services
(Chief Engineer), the Division shall:
§ 687-77. Division of Interconnection. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-10]
Within the Electric Utility, there shall be a Division of Interconnection.
Under the direct supervision of the Superintendent of Interconnection, the
Division shall provide for the planning and procurement of purchased power
to fill the needs of the Electric Utility and City of Vineland. The Division shall
Director, Mayor and City Council to do such acts and things as may
be necessary or convenient within the powers conferred by N.J.S.A.
40:62-12 et seq. [Added 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
E. Provide for the care, storage, use and maintenance of motor vehicles
and motorized equipment owned by the City of Vineland in the custody
of the Electric Utility, Distribution Division, and provide for the care,
storage, use and maintenance of all distribution equipment, and land
owned by the City of Vineland and in the custody of the Electric Utility.
[Added 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
A. Be responsible for providing interconnect services with other electric
utilities, including all necessary functions, such as procurement and
storage of necessary equipment, components and supplies and
construction and maintenance of distribution systems.
B. Be responsible for the preparation of specifications for contracts
relating to sources of generation supply and other engineering services
required by the Department.
C. Be responsible for the reviewing of specifications for the Divisions of
Electric Generation and Electrical Distribution for continuity and
standardization.
D. Be responsible for supplying engineering services and maintaining
records and prints for the Divisions of Electric Generation and
Electrical Distribution for continuity and standardization.
E. Provide such information reports on the work of the Division as may be
required by the Director or Mayor. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
F. Provide for the care, storage, use and maintenance of motor vehicles
and motorized equipment owned by the City of Vineland in the custody
of the Electric Utility, Electric Engineering Division, and provide for the
care, storage, use and maintenance of all engineering equipment
owned by the City of Vineland and in the custody of the Electric Utility.
[Added 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
§ 687-75 VINELAND CODE § 687-77
1:1264
also manage PJM interconnection activities, including load, scheduling,
generation dispatch, interconnection emergency procedures and billing.
§ 687-78. Water-Sewer Utility.
A. Under the general supervision of the Director, and the direct
supervision of the Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility, the Water-
Sewer Utility shall: [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
(1) Operate, maintain, repair and manage the Water-Sewer Utility in
compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws and
ordinances.
(2) Enforce the provisions of Chapter 687, Part 4, Water-Sewer Utility,
as amended.
B. The Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility shall receive an annual
salary to be paid in the same manner as salaries of all other City
employees with a salary range as set forth in Ordinance No. 8 and
amendments thereto. The position of Superintendent of the Water-
Sewer Utility shall be considered full-time.
C. The Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility shall be a certified
public works manager as defined by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6g subject to
the City of Vineland residency requirements. The Superintendent of the
Water-Sewer Utility shall also possess a thorough knowledge of the
potable water systems within the City of Vineland and their operation,
drainage systems, road network and heavy equipment maintenance and
operation. The Superintendent of Water-Sewer Utility shall also have
the ability to efficiently organize and schedule work to give clear
assignment and instructions to groups and individuals, to prepare
suitable reports and to keep needed records and files. Further, the
Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility shall hold a valid license or
licenses of the appropriate grade and class, as required by the State of
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, and in
compliance with N.J.S.A. 58:11-64 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:10-13.10 for the
appropriate class public water system or systems owned and operated
by the City of Vineland. Persons with mental or physical disabilities are
eligible as long as they can perform the essential functions of the job
after reasonable accommodation is made to their known limitations. If
the accommodation cannot be made because it would cause the
employer undue hardship, such persons may not be eligible.
D. Provide for the care, storage, use and maintenance of motor vehicles
and motorized equipment owned by the City of Vineland in the custody
of the Water-Sewer Utility and provide for the care, storage, use and
maintenance of all generation and transmission equipment, and land
owned by the City of Vineland and in the custody of the Water-Sewer
Utility.
§ 687-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-78
1:1265
E. The Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility shall, in addition to the
functions, powers and duties that are hereby or may hereafter be
conferred and imposed upon him or her by law and City Ordinance
pursuant to the policies adopted by the Director: [Amended
2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
(1) Direct the operations of the Water-Sewer Utility, including the
activities of the staff, and coordinate the work of all activities
within the Utility.
(2) Report to the Director, in such form as shall be prescribed by the
Director on the operations of the Utility and make such other
reports as may be requested by the Director, Mayor and City
Council.
(3) Assist in executing plans for the effective utilization of available
funds, personnel, equipment, materials and supplies.
(4) Organize and develop suitable work programs for the varied
functions of the Water-Sewer Utility.
(5) Give suitable assignments and instructions to individuals and
groups and supervise their work.
(6) Make investigations of complaints and take proper action to see
that needed repairs are made within a minimum of delay.
(7) Inspect work in progress, or completed assignments to assure that
proper procedures are followed.
(8) Keep all records and files pertaining to the Water-Sewer Utility as
are required by law and necessary for the proper function of the
Division.
(9) Prepare and obtain approval and implement a capital improvement
program for the City's potable water system in coordination with
the City Engineer, the Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment,
Chief Financial Officer and Business Administrator.
(10) Prepare and assist in the preparation of loan and grant applications
to state and federal government agencies for Water-Sewer Utility
projects and inform the Director, Mayor and City Council of all
available financial aid.
(11) Provide technical assistance, labor and equipment to other
divisions within the Department and other Departments within the
City of Vineland as expeditiously as possible, based upon the
priority of the assistance needed.
(12)Work in conjunction with the Chief Financial Officer on all financial
and budgetary matters of the Water-Sewer Utility.
§ 687-78 VINELAND CODE § 687-78
1:1266
§ 687-79. Customer Service Center. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-10]
Within the Department of Municipal Utilities, there shall be a Customer
Service Center. Under the general supervision of the Director and the direct
supervision of the Supervisor of Accounts, the Customer Service Center
shall:
(13) Approve or disapprove pay rolls, bills and claims chargeable to the
Water-Sewer Utility budget.
(14) Periodically review and recommend water rates, rules and tariffs to
the Director, Mayor and City Council in order to maintain fiscal
integrity and self-liquidating status of the Water-Sewer Utility.
(15) Provide for the care, storage, use and maintenance of motor
vehicles and motorized equipment owned by the City of Vineland in
the custody of the Water-Sewer Utility and provide for the care,
storage, use and maintenance of all water and sewer equipment
and land owned by the City of Vineland and in the custody of the
Water-Sewer Utility.
A. Maintain a system of accounts, as prescribed by the City Comptroller
and any applicable federal and state regulatory agencies, for the
receipt of payments and credits for all municipal utilities bills and
charges to customers.
B. Develop and maintain a system for the collection of delinquent
municipal utilities service bills and enforcement of municipal utilities
service liens.
C. Be responsible for the provision of customer service, including
initiation of new service, service discontinuance, service changes and
customer inquiry.
D. Provide for the uniform collection and enforcement of the rates, rents
or charges for electric light, heat or power, and water and the
enforcement of the municipal lien against the property and premises
where such light, heat, power or water is furnished, and the interest
drawn therefrom, as established by Part 1 of this chapter, which
established the general terms, rules and regulations.
§ 687-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-79
1:1267

ARTICLE IX
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-79
1:1269

Part 3
[Adopted 8-22-1N9o8n9-UBtyilOitryd-G. Nenoe. r8a9t-e4d9 E(lCehc.t r4ic3 8P,o Pwaerrt 3, Of The 1990
Code)]
ARTICLE X
Minimum Standards for Purchase of Power
§ 687-80. Wheeling charge established; negotiation terms for
cogeneration contracts; rates. [Amended 8-13-1991 by Ord. No.
91-56]
The City of Vineland Electric Utility hereby identifies a wheeling charge to
be established pursuant to procedures of the City of Vineland Electric Utility
for all tariff customers; establishes negotiation terms for cogeneration
contracts; and establishes the basis for the request for proposals from
cogenerators, as set forth in Exhibit A, attached hereto and made a part
hereof.295
§ 687-81. Right to amend rates. [Amended 8-13-1991 by Ord. No.
91-56]
The City of Vineland Electric Utility shall have the right to enter into
a separate agreement with a cogenerator by ordinance approved by the
Mayor and City Council, which may amend the rates and terms as set forth
in Exhibit A.
§ 687-82. Compliance with Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
regulations.
The specific terms of this Part 3 dependent upon the FERC regulations shall
be revised pursuant to said terms to avoid any inconsistency therewith since
the City of Vineland Electric Utility is ultimately subject to said FERC laws
as currently issued.
§ 687-83. Filing with Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and
state.
A copy of this Part 3 shall be filed with the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC) and the State of New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
295. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file and available at the City Clerk's office.
§ 687-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-83
1:1271

ARTICLE XI
Enabling Agreements With Power Suppliers
[Added 7-25-1995 by Ord. No. 95-44]
§ 687-84. Authority to negotiate.
The Vineland Municipal Electric Utility is authorized to take such actions
that it deems reasonable, necessary and prudent to request offers from
power suppliers, evaluate the offers and negotiate agreements with utilities
and power marketers.
§ 687-85. Reporting to and approval of City Council.
The Vineland Municipal Electric Utility shall report to the Council upon
completion of its negotiations and submit any agreements to City Council
for approval.
§ 687-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-85
1:1273

Part 4
[Adopted 3-1-1958 By OWradt.e Nr-oS.e 2w7e8r (UCthil.i t4y38, Part 4, Of The 1990
Code)]
ARTICLE XII
Water Service Applications
§ 687-86. Contract with users.
The following rates, rules and regulations shall form part of the contract
with all users of the water services of the City of Vineland Water-Sewer
Utility and shall be subscribed to by all persons applying for water service
from said Utility.
§ 687-87. Application; owner's signature.
The owner or owners of property or person or persons acting as their
agent must sign all applications for water service or the extension of the
distribution system, or such application will not be valid.
§ 687-88. Grant of application.
All applications shall be made to the Water-Sewer Utility, and if granted,
the applicant or his duly authorized agent will sign a contract including
his assent to these rules, rates and regulations, and at the same time, said
applicant shall pay all charges of the Utility up to the commencement of
the succeeding terms, including all the charges of the Utility incidental to
the introduction and extension of the service applied for. The contract shall
state the date, the name of the party, the kind and extent of the service
applied for, the description and location of the property to be supplied and
the rates and terms of payment. All water service taps are to be made by
the Utility or its authorized agent in every case, with charges as per the
schedule according to the size tap desired, it being expressly understood
that curb stops, valves, curb boxes or roadway boxes are to be owned by the
City.
§ 687-89. Extension of water distribution system. [Amended
3-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-16]
A. Applications for the extension of the water distribution system shall be
made only where sufficient demand for service warrants. City Council
shall set the terms and conditions upon which such applications will be
granted. Extensions of new mains will generally be made as local
improvements with benefits from the same assessable to owners of
abutting property in accordance with applicable law.
B. Complete on-site inspection for the installation of any water main
extension is required. At no time will extension of the water distribution
system be allowed without an inspector on site. The Water-Sewer Utility
will provide an inspector, and the applicant will be billed on a time-andmaterials
basis, including but not limited to inspection, plan design and
§ 687-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-89
1:1275
§ 687-90. Termination of service; notice in writing required.
All applications for water service shall continue in force from year to year
unless notice, in writing, is given to the Water-Sewer Utility of a desire to
terminate the service.
§ 687-91. Application and fee prerequisite to tapping.
The Water-Sewer Utility will not tap its water main and run service to tree
lines until application is properly executed and the tapping fee, as per the
schedule, is paid in advance.
§ 687-92. Meters required.
All water taps made and services installed after the passage of this Part 4
must be metered, except in cases where the applicant desires to have water
for building purposes on flat-rate charges, and this supply must be metered
if the Water-Sewer Utility so directs.
§ 687-93. Stop and waste valve.
Each consumer must have installed at his own expense a stop and waste
valve on the service pipe inside the building, said valve to be installed within
one foot of where the service pipe enters said building, said valve so located
and arranged that the water supply may be shut off without difficulty.
§ 687-94. Change in plumbing; written application required.
Before any change is made in the plumbing affecting the meter installation
or the main stop and waste valve of any premises supplied with water by
the Water-Sewer Utility, a written application for such change in plumbing
must be made to the Utility.
§ 687-95. Separate service for each property. [Amended 8-26-1986
by Ord. No. 86-46]
review, as-built drawings and related secretarial functions. If the Water-
Sewer Utility inspector is unavailable due to another project
commitment, the applicant may select an engineering firm from a list
prequalified by the Utility for the calendar year. The applicant must
supply the name of the engineering firm chosen before construction
begins. Any firm involved with the design of the applicant's new
subdivision will be ineligible to provide inspection. The engineering
firm shall bill the applicant directly for services. The Water-Sewer
Utility shall review the engineering firm's inspection and shall bill
the applicant on a time-and-materials basis. A performance bond will
be required prior to the commencement of water main installation.
A maintenance bond will also be required for a period of one year,
beginning at a mutually agreed upon completion date of the water main
extension.
§ 687-89 VINELAND CODE § 687-95
1:1276
§ 687-95.1. Procedures of Hydrant Flow Testing. [Added 8-13-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-52]
A. Water taps made for residential domestic water use shall not exceed
one inch in accordance with the Water-Sewer Utility Water
Conservation Plan on file with the State of New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. The two options for water taps for duplex residential dwellings are as
follows:
(1) Each side of the dwelling may be provided with its own one-inch
tap.
(2) A one-and-one-half-inch tap may serve both sides. Where a single
one-and-one-half-inch tap is made, the one-and-one-half-inch meter
shall be located in a meter box or vault located outside the building
and as close as possible to the curb stop.
C. In all cases, the size of the service pipe entering the building shall be
equal to the size of the tap made for the same.
A. The attached rules and regulations be and are hereby adopted and are
to be followed for any hydrant flow testing in the City of Vineland.296
B. An application in the form and substance authorized by the Director of
the Vineland Municipal Utilities be completed as attached hereto.297
C. A fee of $300 per hydrant flow test be submitted with all completed
applications.
296. Editor's Note: Said rules and regulations are on file in the City offices.
297. Editor's Note: Said application is available in the City offices.
§ 687-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-95.1
1:1277

ARTICLE XIII
Discontinuance of Supply
§ 687-96. Notice required.
Any consumer wishing to discontinue water service shall give notice thereof
at the office of the Water-Sewer Utility. The charges will continue until such
notice is given. On receipt of said notice, the Utility will turn off the service
at the curb stop and record the date thereof, whereupon the charge to the
consumer will cease, but in no case will an abatement of an advance-billed
flat-rate charge be taken into consideration for a shorter period than one
month nor for part of a month.
§ 687-97. Temporary vacancies. [Amended 12-11-1973 by Ord. No.
916; 8-26-1986 by Ord. No. 86-46; 2-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-9;
8-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-43; 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-64;
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-82; 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-95]
In the case of a temporary vacancy by the owner or occupant of any
premises, the Water-Sewer Utility will turn off the water upon written
request of the owner or an authorized agent for a charge of $25. Upon
written request of the owner or an authorized agent, the water will be
turned on again for a charge of $25. Water turned off at the owner's request
shall not impair the contract then existing between the City and the owner.
§ 687-98. Cessation of water charges. [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-62]
Where water has been turned off by written request from the property
owner in accordance with the description in § 687-97, it is recorded in the
Water-Sewer Utility books, and the charges cease from that date, but where
water recorded as turned off is at any time found on, it is expressly agreed
by the consumer that the Utility may charge for the use of water from the
time it is recorded as being turned off in addition to any arrears chargeable
against the premises.
A. Disconnection of service line. Any consumer wishing to disconnect the
service line from a water main at the curb stop for the purposes of the
demolition of structures receiving water service shall first make
application to the Department of Licenses and Inspections for a
demolition permit in accordance with Chapter 635, § 635-2, of the Code
of the City of Vineland. Only City of Vineland personnel or their assigns
may disconnect any service line from a City of Vineland water main. The
cost for such disconnection shall be $175, paid at the time of
application for a demolition permit. [Added 11-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-69]
§ 687-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-99
1:1279
§ 687-99. Disconnection or reconnection during nonbusiness hours.
[Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 88-62; 2-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-9]
Where disconnection or reconnection of service is requested for the
convenience of the property owner beyond the normal working hours of
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday, the same will be done at
the expense of the property owner on a time-and-materials basis. There
will be no charge for an emergency disconnection or reconnection during
nonbusiness hours, unless the account was originally disconnected for
nonpayment. (See § 687-159.)
§ 687-99 VINELAND CODE § 687-99
1:1280
ARTICLE XIV
Inspection of Fixtures and Meters
§ 687-100. Right of entry.
The Superintendent or any authorized employee of the Water-Sewer Utility
or any person or persons delegated by the City Council for that purpose
may at all reasonable hours enter the premises of any water consumer
and examine the pipes, fixtures and meter, read the meter and make tests
or repairs or remove or replace the meter when deemed necessary by
the Utility. Leakage and wastage of water discovered by such inspection
must be immediately remedied. No consumer shall supply water to other
premises.
§ 687-101. Opening of curb stops.
§ 687-102. Water main valves.
No person or persons, except a duly authorized employee of the Water-
Sewer Utility, shall open or close any valve in the water mains of the City.
§ 687-103. Interference with meters.
No person, other than an employee of the Water-Sewer Utility, shall remove,
replace or in any manner interfere with a meter attached to a water pipe
used or intended to be used to supply water to any premises. This applies
whether the meter is set within or without a building or whether or not
owned by the City.
§ 687-104. Damages; rebates.
No person shall be entitled to damages or the rebate of any portion of
payments due for any stoppage of supply occasioned by accident, addition
or repair to any portion of the water system.
A. Under no circumstances shall curb stops be opened or closed by any
person not an authorized employee of the Water-Sewer Utility, except
that a licensed plumber may open or close a curb stop to test his work
or to make necessary repairs.
B. In all cases where a licensed plumber tests his work or makes repairs in
unoccupied premises, he shall, on completion of his work, leave the
curb stop closed, and upon failure or neglect to do so, he shall be liable
for all damages occasioned thereby and be liable to such fine or penalty
as may be imposed under the provisions of ordinances enacted by the
City Council. Any authorized person who shall turn on water at the
curb, for building or any other purpose, will be dealt with according to
law.
§ 687-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-105
1:1281
§ 687-105. Boilers, liability for collapse.
All consumers having boilers upon their premises, depending upon the
pressure in the water mains and pipes of the Water-Sewer Utility to keep
them supplied, are hereby cautioned against the danger of collapse, and
all such damage must be borne exclusively by the consumer. Under no
circumstances will the Utility be responsible for any accidents to pipes,
fixtures or property caused by turning on or off water for any cause
whatever. To provide against accident to hot-water boilers or heaters, a
safety valve should be installed to relieve excessive steam pressure or a
tank should be provided, so arranged as to keep the supply of water in such
boiler or heater when the water supply is discontinued from the main.
§ 687-105 VINELAND CODE § 687-105
1:1282
ARTICLE XV
Meters
[Amended 8-26-1986 by Ord. No. 86-46; 7-26-1988 by Ord. No.
88-62; 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-68; 8-27-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-56]
§ 687-106. Location and installation.
The Water Utility shall supply the tap, meter and meter pit, the charge for
installation of a 5/8 inch to two inches in size shall be in accordance with
the established schedule of fees. The charge for the installation a tap for
a meter of larger than two inches in size shall be at current cost as per
ordinance. All fees shall be payable in advance.
§ 687-107. One premises per service pipe or meter.
Only one dwelling, store or other premises shall be attached to or supplied
by one service pipe or meter.
§ 687-108. Furnishing of meters.
All meters used on any City water services measuring the quantity of water
consumed shall be obtained from the Water-Sewer Utility. The applicant or
consumer or their contractor shall pay for the cost of the tap, meter pit and
meter as well as all necessary associated fittings for the new installation.
The cost for the new meter and associated fittings shall be the current
cost as stated on the rate sheet at the time of the request. All meters shall
remain the property of the Water-Sewer Utility.
§ 687-109. Meters required for services.
All services shall be metered by a water meter of the same size as the
water tap and service pipe, except that one-inch residential services may
be metered with smaller meters in accordance with the schedule of water
rates.
§ 687-110. Remote meters.
The Utility reserves the right to install a meter which may be read by remote
means, either manually or by telephone, cable or other data communication
devices. The owner of any property served by the Water-Sewer Utility shall
permit installation and provide uninterrupted access to any such device so
installed. The remote meter shall be installed in a place suitable to the
Water-Sewer Utility.
§ 687-111. Protection of meter from damage.
The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held
responsible for its care and protection from freezing or hot water and from
other injury thereto. The owner or consumer shall notify the Water-Sewer
§ 687-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-111
1:1283
Utility of any injury to or of the nonworking of the meter as soon as the same
comes to his knowledge. No bypass around the meter will be permitted.
§ 687-112. Repairs to water meter.
Repairs to water meters will be made by the Water-Sewer Utility only at its
expense; provided, however, that if proper protection has not been provided
a meter, all expenses incurred by the Utility for the repairing or replacing
of said meter shall be charged to the owner or consumer of the premises
where such meter is located. It is understood that such repairs will be
charged only when evidence is obtained that such repairs are due to gross
neglect on the part of the consumer.
§ 687-113. Faulty meters; determination of charges.
Where water is furnished by meter measurement, the quantity recorded by
it shall be conclusive on both the applicant and the City, except when the
meter has been found to be registering incorrectly or has ceased to register.
In such a case or cases, the quantity may be determined by the average
registration of another meter for a period of 30 days or of the same meter
for a period of 30 days after it has been repaired and tested, or the quantity
used during a previous corresponding period may be used as a basis for
settlement.
§ 687-114. Water testing.
The Water-Sewer Utility will, at the request of any customer with an
abnormally high consumption, based upon past billing records and the age
of the meter, test the meter at an approved testing facility and make the
certified test results available to the customer. If the meter is found to be
recording water in excess of that delivered, bills rendered will be adjusted.
If the meter is found to be accurate, the contended bill will stand, and the
cost of removal and testing will be due from the property owner.
§ 687-111 VINELAND CODE § 687-114
1:1284
ARTICLE XVI
Meter and Flat-Rate Services
§ 687-115. Billing. [Amended 12-11-1973 by Ord. No. 916;
3-13-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-8]
Effective April 1, 2001, meters will be read monthly for water services
rendered, and bills shall be due in accordance with Article XVI, Meter and
Flat Rate Services, § 687-116, Penalties and due dates. The Water Utility
may discontinue service upon five days' written notice in case the customer
is in arrears in the payment of bills, but no such cutting off shall deprive
the City of the right before water is again turned on to demand and require
payment of all water rents or other charges accrued.
§ 687-116. Penalties and due dates. [Added 12-8-1981 by Ord. No.
1279; amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 88-62; 9-11-1990 by Ord. No.
90-83; 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-36; 4-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-29]
The rates specified in the rate schedule of the Water-Sewer Utility are net
rates and are contingent upon payment of bills within 15 days of the date
rendered. An additional charge of 5% of the current amount billed, net of
any payments applied thereon, will be added to bills not paid within the
specified payment time.
A. Senior citizens. [Added 2-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-9]
(1) The delayed payment charge shall be waived to senior citizens 65
years of age or older, provided that a written application is made
and service is in the applicant's name. Proof of age must be
presented at time of application.
(2) If all conditions are met in Subsection A(1), the senior citizen
customers, as defined above, shall receive net billing only. This
waiver of the delayed payment charge shall apply to residential
customers only.
B. Disabled American veterans. [Added 2-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-9]
(1) The delayed payment charge shall be waived to disabled American
veterans, provided that a written application is made and service is
in the applicant's name. Proof of disabled American veteran status
must be presented at time of application. For purposes of this
subsection, a "disabled American veteran" is any veteran who has
been or shall be declared by the United States Veterans
Administration or its successor to have a service-connected
disability.
(2) If all conditions are met in Subsection B(1), the disabled American
veteran customers, as defined above, shall receive net billing only.
This waiver of the delayed payment charge shall apply to
residential customers only.
§ 687-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-116
1:1285
§ 687-117. Charge for returned checks. [Added 12-8-1981 by Ord.
No. 1279; amended 2-11-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5; 10-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-68]
A charge as provided in Chapter 280, Checks, Returned, will be made when
a customer's check is returned by the customer's bank as uncollectible.
§ 687-118. Estimated bills. [Added 12-8-1981 by Ord. No. 1279]
In the event that a meter reading is not obtained by the Water-Sewer Utility,
an estimated bill will be rendered based on previous metered usage. If the
estimate is less than the minimum for that meter size, the Water-Sewer
Utility will charge the minimum for said size.
§ 687-119. Meters retired from service.
It is to be understood that, when a water meter is once installed, the same
cannot be taken out from service without permission from the Water-Sewer
Utility. It is also to be understood that, upon the expiration of the life of any
meter or meters owned by the City, a new meter shall be installed by the
Utility.
§ 687-120. Nonmetered service. [Amended 12-11-1973 by Ord. No.
916]
In order to comply with the official order of the Department of Conservation
and Economic Development of the State of New Jersey, Division of Water
Policy and Supply, dated November 8, 1956, water service shall be supplied
only on a metered basis except for temporary service for building
construction and other purposes, fire hydrant and sprinkler service.
Charges for such nonmetered service shall be in accordance with the
schedule established herein for such service, or where such schedule of
charges does not apply, the charge for the service shall be on any other
basis agreed upon between the Utility and the applicant or consumer based
C. Permanently and totally disabled persons. [Added 2-23-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-9]
(1) The delayed payment charge shall be waived to permanently and
totally disabled persons, provided that a written application is
made and service is in the applicant's name. Proof of permanent
and total disability status must be presented at time of application.
For purposes of this subsection, a "permanently and totally
disabled person" is any person who has been or shall be declared
by the United States Social Security Administration or its successor
to be permanently and totally disabled.
(2) If all conditions are met in Subsection C(1), the permanently and
totally disabled customers defined above shall receive net billing
only. This waiver of the delayed payment charge shall apply to
residential customers only.
§ 687-116 VINELAND CODE § 687-120
1:1286
upon estimated consumption of water, said charge to be not less than 1 1/
2 times the minimum charge for applicable metered service. Bills for such
special services and for fire hydrant and sprinkler service shall be rendered
semiannually, and sprinkler service shall be rendered at the first of each
half-year period on the first business day of January and July. Should the
water rent or any bill for water, shop material furnished or work done
remain unpaid 30 days from the date of bill, the City reserves the right
to shut off the water without further notice, but no such cutting off shall
deprive the City of the right before the water is again turned on to demand
and require payment of all water rents or other charges accrued.
§ 687-121. Right to install meter.
Where the water is furnished for special services on an unmetered basis, the
Water Utility shall have the right to install, maintain and inspect a meter to
detect waste, and the owner shall provide a suitable location therefor. The
utility also reserves the right to install a meter at its expense and furnish
water only by meter measurement.
§ 687-122. Discontinuance of service.
When water is furnished for temporary or other purposes or for special
services on an unmetered basis, the charge for such service as provided
in § 687-120 shall be continued so long as the consumer's premises shall
remain connected with the service pipe. Owners or consumers desiring to
discontinue the use of any hydrant, sprinkler service or other special service
must have the same physically disconnected, with written notice of such
disconnection given promptly to the Water-Sewer Utility office. The charge
for such service will then cease, but in no case will an abatement of anadvance-
billed flat-rate charge be taken into consideration for a shorter
period than one month nor for part of a month.
§ 687-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-122
1:1287

ARTICLE XVII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 687-123. Authority for agreements.
No agent or employee of the Water-Sewer Utility shall have the authority
to bind it by any promises, agreement or representation not provided for
in these rules, unless such authority is in writing and signed by the proper
person designated by the City Council.
§ 687-124. Repairs to Utility's property. [Added 12-8-1981 by Ord.
No. 1279]
The Water-Sewer Utility will charge on a time-and-materials basis for work
which is rendered due to customer neglect, damaging of Utility property or
failure to comply with the Utility's regulations or agreements, either written
or verbal.
§ 687-125. Right not to turn on water.
No plumber or owner shall turn on water to any premises, whether an old
or new supply, in cases where the water has been turned off for nonpayment
of water rent or for any other cause. The City reserves the right not to turn
on the water until all water rents or other charges have been paid.
§ 687-126. Fire hydrants. [Amended 12-26-1968 by Ord. No. 688;
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 88-62]
No person or persons, except a duly authorized person or persons
designated by the City Council, shall take water from any public fire
hydrant, except for fire purposes or for the use of the Fire Department in
case of fire, nor shall anyone in any way use or take water for private use.
Use of a fire hydrant for purposes other than firefighting or other emergent
municipal use shall not be permitted.
§ 687-127. Right to reserve emergency supply.
The City shall have the right to reserve a sufficient supply of water at all
times in its reservoirs to provide for fire and other emergencies.
§ 687-128. Delinquent accounts.
The City will look to the property supplied in whomsoever the ownership
may be for all delinquent accounts for water supplied.
§ 687-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-129
1:1289
§ 687-129. Reconnection charges. [Added 12-8-1981 by Ord. No.
1279; amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 88-62; 2-23-1993 by Ord. No.
93-9; 8-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-43; 11-23-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-64; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-82; 11-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-95]
If the Water-Sewer Utility disconnects service for nonpayment of bills and
reconnection is requested, a reconnection charge shall be made, which will
appear on the customer's next bill as arrears. Normal reconnections done
on weekdays between 1:00 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. shall carry a twenty-fivedollar
charge. Requests for reconnections on weekdays after 4:30 p.m. or on
weekends at any time shall carry an eighty-dollar charge. Customers who
turn their own service back on will be charged an additional $25 and may
face criminal charges for tampering with City property.
§ 687-130. New tap required.
It is expressly understood that service from the City main to the tree line is
owned by the property owner, except curb stops or valves or curb boxes or
roadway boxes, which are to be used by the Water-Sewer Utility for turning
on and shutting off the water supply, so that at the end of the service life of
such service it will be necessary for the property owner to make application
for a new tap and be charged as per the schedule for the tapping of the City
mains.
§ 687-131. Waste of water.
Excessive or unnecessary use or waste of water, whether caused by
carelessness or by defective or leaky plumbing or fixtures is strictly
prohibited. Water must not be kept running for sprinkling purposes longer
than the time specified in any seasonal or restrictive regulations which may
be in force. For willful or indifferent waste of water, special unmetered
charges may be increased as the case may require, or the supply may be cut
off by the Water-Sewer Utility and not turned on until all charged are paid
and satisfactory assurance obtained that such waste may not occur again.
§ 687-132. Refund of overpayments. [Added 2-23-1993 by Ord. No.
93-9]
A. The City of Vineland Water-Sewer Utility shall establish a procedure for
refund of overpayments to customers within the current fiscal period,
said procedure to be an addition to this Part 4.
B. The City of Vineland Water-Sewer Utility shall apply a credit balance to
active accounts where an overpayment does exist.
C. The City of Vineland Water-Sewer Utility shall issue refund checks to
customers, addressed to the last known address of record, where said
refund exceeds $5 and there is no active Water-Sewer Utility account
against which to charge said credit.
§ 687-129 VINELAND CODE § 687-132
1:1290
D. The City of Vineland Water-Sewer Utility shall establish a policy of
canceling the overpaid balance of customer accounts less than or equal
to $5 where there is a remaining credit balance, which balance has
accrued on the records for a period in excess of one year, and no valid
address of record is available for refunding said balance of overpaid
account funds.
E. The Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility shall be the authorized
municipal official with authority to authorize said cancellation of
customer accounts with $5 or less remaining therein pursuant to
Subsection D above.
§ 687-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-132
1:1291

ARTICLE XVIII
Rights Reserved; Rates
§ 687-133. Change in supply or pressure.
The City may at any time restrict or regulate the quantity of water used by
the consumers in case of scarcity or if, in the judgment of the governing
body, such restriction or regulation may be necessary for the safety of the
community or in case of fire, and, in case of necessity, the City may be
at liberty to shut off the water supply in order to make repairs, and said
municipality shall not be liable under any circumstances for the deficiency
or failure in the supply of water, whether occasioned by shutting off of water
or any other cause whatsoever, nor shall the City be held liable for any
damage caused by increased pressure being put on the mains during the
time of fires, drills by the companies or any other time, and all contracts
shall be held and construed to be made subject to the provisions of this
section.
§ 687-134. Installation of meters.
The City shall have the right to install meters at its own expense in any and
all properties now being served on a nonmetered basis. All bills thereafter
shall be rendered at metered rates. All new services installed shall be
metered, except for the supply of water for temporary, building,
construction, fire hydrant and sprinkler services or for other special
purposes.
§ 687-135. Amendment of rules and regulations.
The City shall have the right to modify, rescind, amend or alter any of the
terms of this Part 4 or make such additional regulations and restrictions as
shall be found advisable for the protection of the municipal water system
and plant.
§ 687-136. Right to turn off water.
The City reserves the right to turn off water for:
A. Nonpayment of rent therefor or any charges that may stand against any
premises supplied.
B. Fraudulent representation on the part of the consumer.
C. Use of water for other purposes than those stated in the application or
permit.
D. Hampering or in any way interfering with the mechanism of any meter
or parts of a meter installed on any premises. This is a misdemeanor
under the law.
E. Persistent violation of the rules and regulations of the Water-Sewer
Utility.
§ 687-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-137
1:1293
§ 687-137. Strict enforcement.
The Water-Sewer Utility will spare no pains in order to furnish an abundant
supply of good, pure and wholesome water at sufficient pressure for general
usage and special pressure in case of fire, and, to ensure an efficient and
successful management of the municipal water plant, the foregoing rules
and regulations will be strictly enforced.
§ 687-138. Rate schedules. [Last amended 8-27-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-57]
The following rates shall be charged and paid for water services, effective
July 1, 2019.
A. Schedule of flat water rates:
(1) Hydrants.
(a) $190 per year for the use of each hydrant for fire purposes only
on private property; can be billed annually, biannually, or
monthly at the utility's discretion.
(b) $27.50 per year for the use of each hydrant for fire purposes by
the City on public highways; can be billed annually, biannually,
or monthly at the utility's discretion.
(c) $300 per fire flow test. Procedures and applications are
obtained from the Water Utility. No test shall be conducted
without prior Water Utility approval and a scheduled test
appointment.
(d) Automatic fire sprinkler service. For service connections to an
automatic fire sprinkler system for fire protection only:
Meter Size
(inches) Rate per Year
2 and 3 $375
4 $450
6 and larger $525
B. Metered rates. The following rates shall be hereafter charged monthly
for water supplied by metered measurement to consumers. The
following rates apply on the consumption as registered by one or more
meters. The consumption by multiple meters on an account will be
combined in rendering the monthly statement of charges.
Gallonage per Month Rate per Thousand Gallons
First 25,000 gallons $2.81
Next 225,000 gallons $2.07
§ 687-137 VINELAND CODE § 687-138
1:1294
Gallonage per Month Rate per Thousand Gallons
Next 2,250,000 gallons $1.60
Next 2,500,000 gallons $1.41
(1) Metered service rates. The following shall be the rates at which
water will be furnished, the allowance of water for the said
minimum charge to be deducted from the quantities shown below
under minimum charges.
(2) Minimum charges. After a meter is installed, no bill will be
rendered or payment accepted for less than the following minimum
rates for each meter monthly:
Meter Size
(inches)
Gallonage
Included Monthly Rates
Through 5/8 3,000 $12.32
Through 1 10,000 $32.94
Through 1 1/2 16,000 $56.03
Through 2 21,000 $69.22
Through 3 25,000 $79.09
Through 4 30,000 $107.07
Through 6 80,000 $247.07
Through 8 107,000 $329.42
Through 10 133,000 $411.77
C. Additional consumer units.
(1) There shall be a monthly consumer unit charge for each additional
unit (multifamily dwelling) served through the same meter as
follows:
Equivalent Units Monthly Charge
3 or more bedrooms 1 $4.97
2 bedrooms 3/4 $3.75
1 bedroom 1/2 $2.52
Hotel/motel (per
room)
1/4 $1.23
(2) Examples of multifamily dwellings: apartments, duplexes, mobile
home parks, condominiums, senior complexes, townhouses, etc.
(3) Service charge. The Water-Sewer Utility reserves the right to
impose a service charge on all meters if deemed necessary.
§ 687-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-138
1:1295
D. Tapping fees.
(1) Tapping, meter and meter pit fees (piping to curbline complete)
shall be charged as follows:
Size of Tap
(inches) Fee
1 $2,400
1 1/2 $4,200
2 $5,000
(2) Taps, meters and meter pits larger than two inches in size shall be
made only on special arrangement with the Water-Sewer Utility,
and the applicant shall pay the full and actual cost of materials and
installation. Excavation and required compactions shall be
executed by a contractor per the specification sheet provided by
the Water Utility.
(3) All charges incident to tap applications shall be due and payable in
advance.
E. Street opening fees. A street opening fee in such amount as may be
determined by ordinance or resolution of City Council shall be charged
in addition to the above tap charges.
F. Missed appointment charge. A charge of $37 shall be debited to the
account of a Water-Sewer Utility customer who fails to keep a
prescheduled appointment for services to be performed or readings to
be taken.
G. Recovery clause. The Water-Sewer Utility reserves the right to impose a
recovery clause to adjust for the escalation in energy and treatment
costs associated with the supply and distribution of City water.
H. Connection fee.
(1) A Water Connection Fee is required from a new connector to the
Water Utility representing a fair payment toward the total capital
cost paid for developing the Water Utility System as determined by
ordinance or resolution of City Council. The Water Utility reserves
the right to review the water usage of the established business for a
period of one year from the time of activation. Multi-phase projects
are subject to review upon completion of each phase.
I. Assessment fee.
(1) Assessment for water main extension shall be based on the number
of properties in the project. The total cost for the project shall be
divided by the number of properties that are serviceable by the
water main extension.
§ 687-138 VINELAND CODE § 687-138
1:1296
§ 687-139. Gallonage basis for billing. [Added 8-26-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-46]
In order to make bills more easily understood by the customers, all water
bills shall reflect the gallonage pumped to each customer during the
quarter. Since the water meters record cubic feet of usage, a conversion
factor of 7.5 gallons per cubic foot of water shall be used.
§ 687-140. Assessment fee. [Added 8-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-43;
amended 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-64; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-82]
(2) Each property that is serviceable by the water main extension shall
be provided with a standard 5/8 inch water tap, meter and meter
pit. The owner of the parcel shall determine the location of the tap
on the frontage of the property. The cost for the tap/meter/pit shall
be included in the assessment. Any additional taps, or taps of
increased size, requested by the property owner, must conform to
all zoning and other regulations set forth by the City of Vineland
and the Vineland Water-Sewer Utility. If permitted, additional and/
or larger taps will be charged to the property owner and will not be
included in the assessment. A connection fee, as established by this
chapter, shall be paid in advance before access is granted.
(3) Easements/rights-of-way: No assessments shall be levied upon
government or public utility easements/rights-of-way.
(4) Properties that are owned by government, utilities, schools, and
other tax-exempt properties are assessable.
(5) Railroad property shall be exempt from assessment, with the
exception of railroad properties that require a water tap.
(6) Unique situations may be exempted from assessment upon
approval by the Water-Sewer Utility Superintendent and the
Business Administrator.
(7) Any parcel that is subdivided to create a new parcel contained
within the original project area and completed within the original
period of the assessment shall be subject to payment of the same
lot assessment as if it had existed at the time of the construction of
the project. This assessment shall be paid in full during the period
of the original assessment and may be charged in annual
assessments. Installation of new taps shall not be permitted until
the street-opening moratorium has expired.
A. Assessment for water main extension shall be based on the number of
properties in the project. The total cost for the project shall be divided
by the number of properties that are serviceable by the water main
extension.
§ 687-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-140
1:1297
B. Each property that is serviceable by the water main extension shall be
provided with a standard one-inch water tap. The owner of the parcel
shall determine the location of the tap on the frontage of the property.
The cost for the tap shall be included in the assessment. Any additional
taps or taps of increased size, requested by the property owner, must
conform to all zoning and other regulations set forth by the City of
Vineland and the Vineland Water-Sewer Utility. If permitted, additional
and/or larger taps will be charged to the property owner and will not be
included in the assessment. A connection fee, as established by this
part, shall be paid in advance before access is granted.
C. Easements/rights-of-way. No assessments shall be levied upon
government or public utility easements/rights-of-way.
D. Properties that are owned by governments, utilities, schools, and other
tax-exempt properties are assessable.
E. Railroad property shall be exempt from assessment, with the exception
of railroad properties that require a water tap.
F. Unique situations may be exempted from assessment upon approval by
the Water-Sewer Utility Superintendent and the Business
Administrator.
G. Any parcel that is subdivided to create a new parcel contained within
the original project area and completed within the original period of the
assessment (usually 10 years) shall be subject to payment of the same
lot assessment as if it had existed at the time of the construction of the
project. This assessment shall be paid in full during the period of the
original assessment and may be charged in annual assessments.
Installation of new taps shall not be permitted until the street opening
moratorium has expired, usually five years.
§ 687-140 VINELAND CODE § 687-140
1:1298
ARTICLE XIX
Sewer Service
§ 687-141. Contract with users.
The following rates, rules and regulations shall form part of the contract
with all users of sewer services of the City of Vineland and shall be
subscribed to by all persons applying for such services.
§ 687-142. Service connections.
All service connections must be made by a registered, licensed plumber, be
inspected by one of the City plumbing inspectors and be properly reported
to the Water-Sewer Utility, as provided in an ordinance or ordinances
heretofore or hereafter adopted by the Board of Health or the City Council
of the City of Vineland. All changes of sewer services, connections or
fixtures must also be inspected by one of the City plumbing inspectors and
reported as provided in an ordinance or ordinances heretofore or hereafter
adopted by the Board of Health or the City Council of the City of Vineland.
§ 687-143. Service charges; abatement.
For all users of sewer services who have City water service, charges for
sewer service will be made in accordance with scheduled rates for such
times as the water is supplied. Where water has been turned off for any
cause, the sewer charge ceases from that date; provided, however, that in
no case will an abatement of an advance-billed sewer charge be taken into
consideration for a shorter period than one month nor for part of a month.
When water is again turned on, sewer charges will commence from the
date, no extra charge being made.
§ 687-144. Right of entry.
The Superintendent or any authorized employee of the Water-Sewer Utility
or any person or persons delegated by the City Council for that purpose
may, at all reasonable hours, enter the premises of any users of sewer
services for the purpose of examining the pipes and fixtures and also to
check the number of fixtures connected.
§ 687-145. Sewer rents. [Amended 12-11-1973 by Ord. No. 916]
Sewer rent shall be paid quarterly in advance, the bills being rendered on
the first business day of the month following quarterly reading for metered
water service. The City will look to the property supplied, in whomsoever
the ownership may be, for all delinquent accounts for sewer services.
§ 687-146. Schedule of sewer rates.
A. The following rates shall be charged and paid for sewer service.
§ 687-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-146
1:1299
B. Schedule of sewer rates. Sewer rates shall be as follows: [Amended
5-26-1970 by Ord. No. 748]
(1) Class A. Residences: $13 per annum.
(2) Class B. Stores and commercial establishments: $16 per annum.
(3) Class C. Stores and offices; stores and one apartment (stores
combined with more than one apartment will take apartment
houses, Class D rate): $20 per annum.
(4) Class D. Hotels, apartment houses, churches, lodge buildings,
theaters and public buildings not otherwise classified; service
charge of $8 per annum; fixture charge of $2 each per annum, in
addition to service charge.
(5) Class E. Factories, commercial laundries and industrial
establishments.
(a) Where the establishment receives full water supply from the
City Water-Sewer Utility, the following charge for sewer
service will be made for each quarterly period: 50% of the total
amount of water charges, exclusive of water meter service
charge, for the preceding quarterly billing. There shall be a
minimum charge of $6.50 per quarterly period.
(b) Where the establishment maintains private water supply, the
charge for sewer service will be made in accordance with one
of the following optional rates, the Water-Sewer Utility
reserving the right to determine, the best interest of the
Utility's sewerage system being considered, which optional
rate shall apply. If private source or sources of supply
supplement City water supply, separate billings will be made
for sewer service, one billing based upon the regular charge
for City water service and the other billing in accordance with
one of the following optional rates:
[1] Option 1. Customer shall install, at his own expense, a
meter or meters approved by the Water-Sewer Utility to
measure the quantity of water received from such private
source or sources and subsequently discharged into the
City sewers, the recorded flow from such source or
sources to be used as the basis for the charge for sewer
service as follows: 50% of the equivalent charge which
would be made by the Water-Sewer Utility for the quantity
of water received from private source or sources, based on
the established schedule of rates in effect for metered
water service. There shall be a minimum charge of $6.50
per quarterly period.
[2] Option 2.
§ 687-146 VINELAND CODE § 687-146
1:1300
[a] The customer shall install, at his own expense, a
suitable device for continuously recording and
totalizing the flow discharged by it into the sewerage
system, said device or devices and the installation
thereof to be approved by the Water-Sewer Utility, the
recorded quantity of flow into the sewerage system to
be charged for in accordance with the following
schedule of rates, the advance billing for the quarterly
period to be based upon the recorded flow for the
prior three months.
Cubic Feet Per Quarter Per 1,000 Cubic Feet
First 10,000 $1.25
Next 10,000 $0.85
Next 10,000 $0.75
Next 20,000 $0.65
Next 50,000 $0.55
Next 100,000 $0.45
Over 200,000 $0.40
[3] There shall be a minimum charge of $6.50 per quarterly
period.
[4] Option 3. Where no device is installed by the customer for
the measuring of water received from private source or
sources or discharged into the City sewers, a charge for
sewer service shall be made on the basis of the number of
employees at the rate of $2.50 per employee per annum,
the maximum number of employees at any one time during
the three-month period prior to the period for which
advance sewer charge billing is made, as certified by the
customer to the Utility from established records, to be
used as the basis for said sewer service charge; provided,
however, that the minimum charge on such billing basis
shall be $35 per quarterly period.
(6) Class F. Commercial garages and automobile laundries: annual
charge for service, exclusive of wash drains, $16; extra charge for
wash drains, $13 per annum.
(7) Class G. Public schools and parochial schools: annual charge, per
classroom, $13.
(8) Class H. Institutions: Special rates will be made and approved by
the City Council of the City of Vineland.
(9) Class I. Air-conditioning equipment: *annual charge in addition to
regular sewer charge:
§ 687-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-146
1:1301
§ 687-147. Reserved right to classify users.
The City of Vineland Water-Sewer Utility reserves the right to classify all
users of sewer service in accordance with the above schedule. Where a
property may come under more than one classification, the Utility shall
determine which rate shall apply.
§ 687-148. Operation of interconnections. [Added 7-14-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-49]
(a) Three horsepower (tons): $35.
(b) Two horsepower to 2.99 horsepower (tons): $20.
(c) Under two horsepower (tons): $13.
* NOTE: Annual charge for one year billed on the second
quarterly bill rendered during the year. No refunds, credits or
rebates will be allowed for units disconnected during the year
following the date of the bill. A pro rata charge shall be made
on equipment installed between billing dates.
(10) Class J. Disposal of cesspool effluent and sludge. [Amended
12-11-1973 by Ord. No. 916; 6-10-1980 by Ord. No. 1220]
(a) The dumping of cesspool effluent and sludge in specially
prepared areas at the sewage disposal plant will be permitted
for only licensed cesspool cleaners operating within the limits
of the City of Vineland. Dumping will be permitted only at
times specified by and in accordance with regulations
established by the Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility.
Fees for said disposal service shall be in accordance with the
following schedule, according to truck tank size, and shall be
payable in the manner and in accordance with regulations
established by the Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility
and the City Comptroller.
(b) During regularly scheduled hours of availability to the manhole
of the sewer utility located in the sanitary landfill, the licensed
cesspool cleaners shall be charged the following rates
(Regularly scheduled hours of the sanitary landfill are Monday
through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.; Saturdays, 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.):
[1] Tank size of up to 1,500 gallons: $7 per load.
[2] Tank size of over 1,500 gallons and up to 2,000 gallons:
$10 per load.
[3] Any larger-sized tank will be charged on a basis of $0.005
per gallon.
§ 687-146 VINELAND CODE § 687-148
1:1302
A. The New Jersey Administrative Code section entitled "Water Supply
Allocation Permits" provides the procedure for Class 3 Water Utility
purveyors to interconnect pursuant to water supply allocation needs.
B. The City of Vineland Water Utility desires to interconnect with the
Buena Borough Municipal Utility Authority, which interconnection is
the second municipal interconnection for the City of Vineland, the
Borough of Newfield being the first.
C. The City Council of the City of Vineland hereby ordains and authorizes
execution of said written agreement in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:19-6.9.
§ 687-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-148
1:1303

ARTICLE XX
Water Conservation
[Added 9-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-63; amended 2-24-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-1]
§ 687-149. Water use restrictions.
Restrictions on outdoor water use apply to all users in the City of Vineland
at all times regardless of source of supply (e.g., public water supplies,
well or ground water, lakes, streams, or ponds) unless expressly exempt
in § 687-154, Exemptions. Such outdoor water use shall conform to the
following water use restrictions:
A. Car washing, pressure washing and other non-landscape outdoor water
uses:
(1) Properties may only use water for this purpose two days per week.
(a) Properties with even number addresses may only use water on
Wednesdays and Saturdays.
(b) Properties with odd number addresses may only use water on
Thursdays and Sundays.
B. Lawn watering with a hose or hose-end sprinkler:
(1) Properties may only use water for this purpose two days per week.
(a) Properties with even number addresses may only use water on
Wednesdays and Saturdays.
(b) Properties with odd number addresses may only use water on
Thursdays and Sundays.
(2) Watering shall only be conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 9:00 a.m. or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(3) The watering of any single area shall not exceed thirty minutes per
day.
(4) Flowers and shrubs may be watered as needed with a hand-held
hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle.
(5) No hose or hose-end watering shall be permitted when it is raining.
C. Irrigating lawns and landscapes with automatic irrigation systems
equipped with a conventional irrigation controller:
(1) Properties may only use water for this purpose two days per week.
(a) Properties with even number addresses may only use water on
Wednesdays and Saturdays.
§ 687-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-149
1:1305
§ 687-150. Declaration of extreme water emergency.
§ 687-151. Violations.
§ 687-152. Enforcement of water conservation restrictions.
(b) Properties with odd number addresses may only use water on
Thursdays and Sundays.
(2) Irrigation shall only be conducted between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 10:00 a.m.
(3) Operation of any irrigation zone equipped with spray (mist) heads
shall not exceed 15 minutes per zone. Operation of any irrigation
zone equipped with rotary sprinkler heads shall not exceed 50
minutes per zone.
D. Flowers and shrubs irrigated with drip or microirrigation:
(1) Properties may use water for this purpose as needed.
E. State of New Jersey requirements shall supersede those identified in
this section when more stringent than those identified in this article.
A. Upon declaration of an extreme water emergency by the City of
Vineland, outside water use is strictly prohibited. In addition to the
outside prohibition and whenever possible, all inside water use for
homes and businesses shall be reduced.
B. Outdoor water use for commercial farms producing harvestable crops,
commercial nurseries, and sod farms are exempt from extreme water
emergency restrictions.
C. Non-turf plants may be watered by hand-held containers
A. Violations of the water use restrictions in § 687-149 include outdoor
water use on days not permitted in this article, or during hours not
permitted in this article, where said use is not explicitly exempted by
§ 687-154, Exemptions.
B. Violations of the extreme water emergency restrictions in § 687-150
include any outdoor water use not explicitly exempted by § 687-150,
Extreme water emergency.
C. Violations of these restrictions are subject to the fines and penalties
described in § 687-153, Penalties.
A. Enforcement of the above restrictions shall be administered by
representatives of the Water Utility, and any representative of the City
(i.e., inspectors, fire fighters, police), who will inform the Water Utility
of any violations. All fines imposed per § 687-153, Penalties shall be
added onto the next regular billing cycle of the offending property.
§ 687-149 VINELAND CODE § 687-152
1:1306
§ 687-153. Penalties.
§ 687-154. Exemptions.
The water use restrictions in § 687-149, Water use restrictions above do not
apply to the following:
B. All written warnings issued per § 687-153, Penalties shall include an
explanation of the penalties for additional offenses.
C. The Water Utility shall keep such records as may be reasonable and
necessary for the purpose of determining the persons and businesses
who have been warned or fined for violations of this article.
A. Water use restrictions per § 687-149.
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense: written warning.
(3) Third offense: fine of $100.
(4) Fourth offense: fine of $250.
(5) Fifth offense: fine of $500 and water shut-off until payment made.
B. Extreme water emergency restrictions per § 687-150.
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense: fine of $250.
(3) Third offense: fine of $500 and water shut-off until payment is made
and water emergency is lifted.
A. Outdoor water use from rain water harvesting, gray water, or reclaimed
water are exempt from the provisions of the ordinance. Use of gray or
reclaimed water must have an approved NJPDES permit issued through
the NJDEP.
B. Outdoor water use for commercial farms producing harvestable crops,
commercial nurseries, sod farms and golf courses are exempt from the
provisions of the article.
C. Other commercial uses including, but not limited to, commercial car
washing and commercial power washing.
D. Outdoor irrigation necessary for one day only where treatment with an
application of chemicals require immediate watering to preserve an
existing landscape or to establish a new landscape.
E. Outdoor irrigation necessary for the establishment of newly sodded
lawns or landscaping within the first 21 consecutive days of planting.
§ 687-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-154
1:1307

Part 5
[AdoptCeodll7e-c9t-i2on01 O9f BUytiOlirtdy .B Niloli. n2g0s19-46]
ARTICLE XXI
Time Limitation
§ 687-155. Time limitation for payment or collection of utility
billings based upon meter failures.
The time limitation for the payment or collection of erroneous utility bills
shall be six years next after the cause of action shall have accrued.
§ 687-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 687-155
1:1309
Chapter 694
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 123.
Bicycles and similar vehicles — See Ch. 239.
Fees for traffic offense discovery
reports — See Ch. 350, Art. III.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 367.
Freight cars — See Ch. 386.
Limousines — See Ch. 441.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 491.
Parking lots — See Ch. 496.
Parking near driveways or alleys — See Ch.
502.
Temporary street closings — See Ch. 626.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 630.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 651.
Towing and storage services — See Ch. 665.
Motor vehicles — See Ch. 700.
§ 687-155 VINELAND CODE § 687-155
1:1310
Part 1
[Adopted 8-13-1974 By OPrdu.b Nlico .H 9i3g9hw(Cahys. 442, Part 1, Of The 1990
Code)]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 694-1. Short title.
This Part 1 may be known and cited as the "Traffic Ordinance."
§ 694-2. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Part 1, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 694-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-2
1:1311

ARTICLE II
Parking, Stopping or Standing
§ 694-3. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 or any other New Jersey statutes or
as hereinafter provided.
§ 694-4. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 694-30), attached to and made a part of
this Part 1.
§ 694-5. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
(§ 694-31) of any day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule II, attached to and
made a part of this Part 1.
§ 694-6. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule III (§ 694-32), attached to and made a part of
this Part 1.
§ 694-7. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV (§ 694-33) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule IV of any day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV, attached to and made a
part of this Part 1.
§ 694-8. Unlawful parking.
No person shall park any vehicle on any street for the purposes of:
A. Displaying said vehicle for sale.
B. Cleaning, waxing or greasing said vehicle.
C. Repairing said vehicle, except for reasons of emergency.
§ 694-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-9
1:1313
§ 694-9. Angle parking. [Added 11-28-1978 by Ord. No. 1137]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time other than at a ninety-degree
angle, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V
(§ 694-34), attached to and made a part of this Part 1.
§ 694-9 VINELAND CODE § 694-9
1:1314
ARTICLE III
One-Way Streets
§ 694-10. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 694-35), attached
to and made a part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the directions indicated.
§ 694-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-10
1:1315

ARTICLE IV
Through Streets; Stop Intersections
§ 694-11. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 694-36), attached to and made a part
of this Part 1, are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield right-of-way signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 694-12. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule VIII (§ 694-37), attached to and made a part of this Part 1, are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 694-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-12
1:1317

ARTICLE V
Loading Zones
§ 694-13. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule IX (§ 694-38), attached to and made a
part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 694-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-13
1:1319

ARTICLE VI
Taxi Stands
§ 694-14. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule X (§ 694-39), attached to and made a
part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 694-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-14
1:1321

ARTICLE VII
Bus Stops
[Added 5-27-1980 by Ord. No. 1215]
§ 694-15. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XI (§ 694-40), attached to and made a
part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 694-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-15
1:1323

ARTICLE VIII
School Bus Reserved Parking Areas
[Added 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-91]
§ 694-16. School bus reserved parking areas designated.
No person shall park a vehicle other than a school bus at any time upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XII (§ 694-41),
attached to and made a part of this Part 1.
§ 694-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-16
1:1325

ARTICLE IX
Turn Regulations
§ 694-17. Left-turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XIII (§ 694-42), attached to and made a part of this Part 1.
§ 694-18. U-turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XIV (§ 694-43), attached to and made a part of this Part 1.
§ 694-19. Right turns.
§ 694-20. Left lane must turn left. [Added 5-22-1979 by Ord. No.
1161]
All persons using the left lane must turn left at any of the locations
described in Schedule XVII (§ 694-46), attached to and made a part of this
Part 1.
§ 694-21. Center lane left turn only. [Added 5-22-1979 by Ord. No.
1161]
All persons shall make a left turn only from the center lane at any of the
locations described in Schedule XVIII (§ 694-47), attached to and made a
part of this Part 1.
A. Right turns only. All persons shall make a right turn only at any of the
locations described in Schedule XV (§ 694-44), attached to and made a
part of this Part 1.
B. Right turn on red prohibited. No person shall turn a vehicle to make a
right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop) indication at any of the
locations described in Schedule XVI (§ 694-45), attached hereto and
made a part hereof, whenever an official sign is present prohibiting
such a turn on the red signal. [Added 7-26-1977 by Ord. No. 1085]
§ 694-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-21
1:1327

ARTICLE X
Speed Limits
[Added 3-11-1975 by Ord. No. 954]
§ 694-22. Speed limits established.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the following streets
shall be established as follows:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Almond Road
Zone 1 45 From the Vineland City line to
a point 100 feet west of
Edrudo Road; thence
Zone 2 40 To Route 47
Arbor Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34]
40 Along the entire length of
Arbor Avenue
Ascher Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-74]
40 Between Panther Road and
Union Road
Beacon Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-74]
35 Between Main Road and
Douglas Lane
Burns Avenue298 [Added
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
35 Between South West
Boulevard and Main Road
298. Editor's Note: This entry replaces the former entry for Burns Avenue, added by Ord. No.
89-99, amended by Ord. No. 93-34 and repealed by Ord. No. 97-35.
§ 694-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-22
1:1329
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Butler Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-74]
35 Between N.J. Route 47 and
Lincoln Avenue, except for 25
miles per hour when passing
through the Butler Avenue
School Zone during recess
when the presence of children
is clearly visible from the
roadway or while children are
going to or leaving school
during opening or closing
hours
Chestnut Avenue
Zone 1 40 From Mill Road to the center
of Main Road; thence
Zone 2 50 To the easterly Vineland City
line
School zones 25 mph in the Vineland Memorial Junior
High School Zone in Zone 1; and
35 mph in the Vineland Senior High School
Zone in Zone 2,
during recess or while children are going
to or leaving school during opening or
closing hours
Columbia Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
40 Between N.J. Route 47 and the
Gloucester County line
Cornucopia Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34]
45 Between Mays Landing Road
and Genoa Avenue
Dante Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-74]
Zone 1 35 Between Spring Road and
Lincoln Avenue
§ 694-22 VINELAND CODE § 694-22
1:1330
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Zone 2 45 Between Lincoln Avenue and
Union Road
East Avenue [Added
7-27-1976 by Ord. No.
1024; amended 5-23-1989
by Ord. No. 89-29]
Zone 1 40 From East Grant Avenue to
East Elmer Road; thence
Zone 2 45 To Walnut Road; thence
Zone 3 30 To East Chestnut Avenue;
thence
Zone 4 35 To Park Avenue; thence
Zone 5 45 To Forest Grove Road; thence
Zone 6 40 To Strawberry Avenue
School zone 25 In the Doctor Cunningham
School Zone, in Zone 4, during
recess or while children are
going to or leaving school
during opening or closing
hours
East Boulevard [Added 4-27-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-34]
Zone 1 25 Between Park Avenue and
Chestnut Avenue (appears to
fall under N.J.S.A. 39:1-1,
Residence district; no need for
ordinance)
Zone 2 40 From Chestnut Avenue to
Summer Street
Zone 3 45 From Summer Street to
Parvin's Branch Creek
Zone 4 40 From Parvin's Branch Creek to
Butler Avenue
Zone 5 35 From Butler Avenue to
Sheridan Avenue
Elmer Road [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord. No.
89-87; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34]
§ 694-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-22
1:1331
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Zone 1 40 Between N.J. Route 47 and
Main Road
Zone 2 35 Between Main Road and
Spring Road
Elm Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 5-8-1990
by Ord. No. 90-37;
4-27-1993 by Ord. No.
93-34; 1-9-2001 by Ord.
No. 2000-99]
Zone 1 45 Between Mill Road and
Orchard Road
Zone 2 40 Between Orchard Road and
(Delsea Drive) Route 47 South
Forest Grove Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 5-8-1990
by Ord. No. 90-37;
5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
92-37; 4-27-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-34; 1-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 2000-99]
45 Between Mill Road and the
Gloucester County line, except
30 mph when passing through
the Marie Durand School Zone
during recess when the
presence of children is clearly
visible from the roadway or
while children are going to or
leaving school during opening
or closing hours
Foster Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
40 Between Route N.J. 47 and
South West Boulevard
Gallagher Drive [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
40 Between Route N.J. 47 and
Mill Road
Garden Road [Added
9-27-1977 by Ord. No.
1098]
Zone 1 50 From the westerly Vineland
City line to Route 47; thence
§ 694-22 VINELAND CODE § 694-22
1:1332
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Zone 2 45 To the easterly Vineland City
line
Garrison Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
35 Between Route N.J. 47 and
Orchard Road
Genoa Avenue/Menantico
Road [Added 12-26-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-99; amended
4-27-1993 by Ord. No.
93-34; 11-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-74]
Zone 1 40 Between Brewster Road and
Lincoln Avenue
Zone 2 45 Between Lincoln Avenue and
the Atlantic County line
Grant Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 5-26-1992
by Ord. No. 92-37;
4-27-1993 by Ord. No.
93-34; 11-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-74]
40 Between N.J. Route 47 and
Lincoln Avenue, except for 25
mph when passing through
the Dr. William Mennies
School Zone during recess
when the presence of children
is clearly visible from the
roadway or while children are
going to or leaving school
during opening or closing
hours
Italia Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-74]
Zone 1 35 Between Venezia Avenue and
Menantico Creek
Zone 2 40 Between Menantico Creek and
Cornucopia Avenue
§ 694-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-22
1:1333
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Lake Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
40 Between Route N.J. 47 and the
Gloucester County Line
Landis Avenue [Amended
1-25-1977 by Ord. No.
1068; 3-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-25; 5-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-34; 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 96-36]
Zone 1 50 Between the Pittsgrove
Township, Salem County/
Vineland City, Cumberland
County corporate line to 1,600
feet east of the Pittsgrove
Township, Salem County/
Vineland City, Cumberland
County corporate line
Zone 2 45 Between 1,600 feet east of the
Pittsgrove Township, Salem
County/Vineland City,
Cumberland County corporate
line to N.J. Route 47
Leamings Mill Road (County
Route 684) [Added
7-27-2004 Ord. No.
2004-36]
40 Entire length
Lincoln Avenue [Added
12-14-1976 by Ord. No.
1060]
Zone 1 50 From South Main Road (Route
555) to 750 feet south of
Dante Avenue; thence
Zone 2 40 To Edna Drive; thence
Zone 3 50 To East Chestnut Avenue;
thence
Zone 4 40 To 200 feet north of the
northerly leg of Laurel Road;
thence
§ 694-22 VINELAND CODE § 694-22
1:1334
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Zone 5 50 To Buena Vista Township line
Magnolia Road 40 Except in the Dr. John W.
Winslow School Zone where
the limit shall be 25 mph
during recess or while
children are going to or
leaving school during opening
or closing hours
Main Road (all County Road
26, part County Road 555,
part County Road 540,
excluding the N.J. Route
interchange)
Zone 1 45 From the southerly Vineland
City line to the center of Rieck
Terrace; thence
Zone 2 50 To a point 350 feet south of
the center of Beacon Avenue;
thence
Zone 3 40 To the center of Grant Avenue;
thence
Zone 4 45 To the center of Landis
Avenue; thence
Zone 5 40 To the Central Railroad of
New Jersey grade crossing;
thence
Zone 6 45 To the center of Wheat Road;
thence
Zone 7 [Amended
4-14-1998 by Ord. No.
98-23]
40 To the northerly Vineland City
line
School zones 25 In the Vineland Memorial
Junior High School Zone in
Zone 4 and in the Main and
Oak School Zone in Zone 5,
during recess or while
children are going to or
leaving school during opening
or closing hours
§ 694-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-22
1:1335
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Maple Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
40 Between Main Road and
Lincoln Avenue
Maurice River Parkway
[Added 12-26-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-99; amended
4-27-1993 by Ord. No.
93-34; 1-9-2001 by Ord.
No. 2000-99]
40 Between Landis Avenue and
Garden Road
Mill Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
Zone 1 40 Between Walnut Road and
Garden Road
Zone 2 45 Between Garden Road and
Weymouth Road
Oak Road (County Route 81)
[Added 1-25-1977 by Ord.
No. 1069; amended
8-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-60]
45 From the Maurice River
Parkway to the easterly
Cumberland County/Atlantic
County line, except for 30 mph
in the Oak and Main School
Zone during recess when the
presence of children is clearly
visible from the roadway or
while children are going to or
leaving school, during opening
or closing
Old Forest Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
45 Between West Avenue and
North West Boulevard
§ 694-22 VINELAND CODE § 694-22
1:1336
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Old Lake Road [Amended
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; 5-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-37; 4-27-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-34; 1-9-2001
by Ord. No. 2000-99]
30 Between Columbia Avenue
and its northerly terminus
Old Panther Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
45 Between Chestnut Avenue and
Piacenzia Avenue
Orchard Road [Added
1-25-1977 by Ord. No.
1069]
Zone 1 50 From Sherman Avenue to Elm
Road; thence
Zone 2 45 To West Chestnut Avenue;
thence
Zone 3 40 To Almond Road; thence
Zone 4 45 To Oak Road; thence
Zone 5 40 To Wheat Road
School zone 25 In the Dane Barse School
Zone in Zone 3 during recess
or while children are going to
or leaving school during
opening or closing hours
Palermo Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
45 Between Lincoln Avenue and
Hance Bridge Road, except for
30 mph when passing through
the Rossi School Zone during
recess when the presence of
children is clearly visible from
the roadway or while children
are going to or leaving school
during opening or closing
hours
§ 694-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-22
1:1337
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Panther Road [Added
12-13-1994 by Ord. No.
94-89]
45 Along the entire length except
for 25 mph when passing
through the East Vineland
Elementary School Zone when
the presence of children is
clearly visible from the
roadway during recess or
while children are going to or
leaving school during opening
or closing hours
Park Avenue
Zone 1 30 From Lubins Lane to Route
47; thence
Zone 2 40 To Grand Street; thence
Zone 3 35 To East Avenue; thence
Zone 4 40 To Main Road
Pennsylvania Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-74]
Zone 1 45 Between Lincoln Avenue and
Berryman's Creek
Zone 2 40 Between Berryman's Creek
and Mays Landing Road
Piacenzia Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
45 Between Panther Road and
Union Road
Prospect Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
35 Between Strawberry Avenue
and the Gloucester County
line
Salem Avenue [Added
5-23-1978 by Ord. No.
1124]
40
§ 694-22 VINELAND CODE § 694-22
1:1338
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Sheridan Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-74]
Zone 1 35 Between South East
Boulevard and Lincoln Avenue
Zone 2 45 Between Lincoln Avenue and
Hance Bridge Road
South East Boulevard [Added 12-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-99; repealed
4-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-34]
Spring Road [Added
7-27-1976 by Ord. No.
1024]
Zone 1 40 From South Lincoln Avenue to
Magnolia Road; thence
Zone 2 35 To East Chestnut Avenue;
thence
Zone 3 45 To Maple Avenue
School zone 30 In the Ellison Elementary
School Zone in Zone 2 during
recess or while children are
going to or leaving school
during opening or closing
hours
Strawberry Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
40 Between North East
Boulevard and the Gloucester
County line
Trento Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-74]
45 Between Panther Road and
Union Road
Valley Avenue [Added
4-28-1981 by Ord. No.
1255]
§ 694-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-22
1:1339
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Zone 1 30 Between Chestnut Avenue and
East Park Avenue; thence
Zone 2 35 Between East Park Avenue
and Wheat Road, except 25
mph in the Solve E. Dippolito
School Zone during recess or
while children are going to or
leaving school during opening
or closing hours
Venezia Avenue [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-74]
40 Between Hance Bridge Road
and Dante Avenue
Vine Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-34;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-99]
40 Between Main Road and the
Atlantic County line
Walnut Road [Added
12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-99; amended 5-26-1992
by Ord. No. 92-37;
4-27-1993 by Ord. No.
93-34; 1-9-2001 by Ord.
No. 2000-99]
Zone 1 40 Between Mill Road and Route
N.J. 47
Zone 2 35 Between Route N.J. 47 and
Spring Road
West Avenue [Added
1-27-1976 by Ord. No.
1001; amended 12-26-1989
by Ord. No. 89-99;
5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
90-37; 4-27-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-34; 1-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 2000-99]
Zone 1 30 Between Foster Avenue and
Landis Avenue
§ 694-22 VINELAND CODE § 694-22
1:1340
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Zone 2 35 Between Landis Avenue and
Park Avenue
Zone 3 40 Between Park Avenue and
Weymouth Road, except for 25
mph when passing through
the Max Leuchter School Zone
in Zone 3 during recess when
children are clearly visible
from the roadway on which
children are going to or
leaving school
Wheat Road (County Road
617) [Added 8-27-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-40]
Zone 1 40 Between the westerly
terminus of Wheat Road and
N.J. Route 47
Zone 2 50 Between N.J. Route 47 and the
Cumberland County-Atlantic
County corporate line
§ 694-23. Regulatory and warning signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained as
authorized by the Commissioner of Transportation.
§ 694-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-23
1:1341

ARTICLE XI
Vehicle Exclusions
[Added 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 86-28; amended 4-14-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-24]
§ 694-24. Vehicles over certain weights excluded.
Vehicles over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule XIX (§ 694-48), attached to and
made a part of this Part 1, except for the pickup or delivery of goods,
materials or freight on such streets or except where considered to be a
preexisting nonconforming use in the zone and would remain as such.
§ 694-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-24
1:1343

ARTICLE XII
Handicapped Parking
[Added 2-13-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
§ 694-25. Handicapped parking spaces.299
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, the locations described
in Schedule XX attached to and made a part of this Part 1 are hereby
designated as restricted parking spaces for use by persons who have been
issued special vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles
pursuant to the provisions of Section 2 of P.L. 1949, c. 280 (N.J.S.A.
39:4-205), when using a motor vehicle on which is displayed a certificate or
for which a special vehicle identification card has been issued, pursuant to
Section 3 of said law (N.J.S.A. 39:4-206).
299. Editor's Note: For other provisions regarding handicapped parking, including penalties for
violations, see Ch. 491, Parking, Handicapped, of this Code.
§ 694-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-25
1:1345

ARTICLE XIII
No-Passing Zones
[Added 3-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-17]
§ 694-26. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained along
those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXI (§ 694-50),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 694-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-26
1:1347

ARTICLE XIV
Pedestrian Control
[Added 7-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-45]
§ 694-27. Midblock crosswalks established.
Midblock crosswalks are hereby established and shall be maintained along
those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXII (§ 694-51),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 694-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-27
1:1349

ARTICLE XV
Penalties
§ 694-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-11-1989 by Ord. No.
89-41]
§ 694-29. Removal of vehicles in violation. [Added 4-25-1978 by
Ord. No. 1118; amended 11-28-1978 by Ord. No. 1137]
In addition to the penalties contained in § 694-28 above, any unattended
vehicle parked on the south side of Cherry Street between Howard Street
and State Street in the City of Vineland shall be deemed a nuisance and
a menace to the safe and proper regulation of travel in the vicinity of
Newcomb Hospital, and any City of Vineland police officer may provide for
the removal of such vehicle and the storage thereof. The owner shall pay
the reasonable cost of removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
A. Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
statute and except as otherwise provided herein, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this Part 1 or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. No-parking zone. Any person parking a vehicle at any time upon any of
the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule I (§ 694-30), attached
to and made a part of this Part 1, shall be subject, upon conviction, to a
fine of not less than $20 and not more than $50 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
C. No parking after hours. Any person parking a vehicle between the
hours specified in Schedule II (§ 694-31) of any day, except Sundays and
public holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
said Schedule II, attached to and made a part of this Part 1, shall be
subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $20 and not more
than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
D. Overtime parking. Any person parking a vehicle for longer than the
time limits shown in Schedule IV (§ 694-33) at any time between the
hours listed in said Schedule IV of any day, except Sundays and public
holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule IV, attached to and made a part of this Part I, shall be subject,
upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $10 and not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 694-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-29
1:1351

ARTICLE XVI
Schedules
§ 694-30. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-4, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Almond Road Both From Maurice River to Maurice
River Parkway
Almond Street [Added
6-26-1990 by Ord. No.
90-58]
North From the westerly curbline of
Howard Street to a point 185 feet
west thereof
Arbor Avenue [Added
11-27-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-91]
Both From the easterly curbline of
Delsea Drive to a point 925 feet
easterly thereof
Arcadia Place East Entire length
Arcadia Place [Added
5-9-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-35]
West From a point 277 feet south of the
southerly curbline of East Landis
Avenue to a point 30 feet southerly
thereof
Catherine Street [Added
10-14-1986 by Ord. No.
86-61]
South From South Eighth Street to South
Seventh Street
Cedarwood Drive [Added
1-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-4]
Both From a point 1, 235 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Main Road
to a point 60 feet westerly thereof
Chambers Street North From State Street to Myrtle Street
Cherry Street [Added
4-25-1978 by Ord. No.
1118; repealed
11-28-1978 by Ord. No.
1137]
Chestnut Avenue Both From Main Road to East Boulevard
Chestnut Avenue Both From the east curbline of N.J.
Route 47 to a point 250 feet east
thereof
Chestnut Avenue Both From the west curbline of N.J.
Route 47 to a point 200 feet west
thereof
Chestnut Avenue [Added
9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the west curbline of South
Main Road to the east curbline of
Delsea Drive
§ 694-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-30
1:1353
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Avenue North From the east curbline of Main
Road to a point 300 feet east
thereof
Chestnut Avenue South From the east curbline of Main
Road to a point 150 feet east
thereof
Crystal Avenue East From Central Railroad to Jones
Street
Crystal Avenue West From Cambridge Street to Jones
Street
DeMarco Drive [Added
10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-43]
East From the southerly curbline of
Garden Road to the northerly
curbline of Industrial Way a
distance of 2,600 feet more or less
DeMarco Drive [Added
7-31-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-43]
Both From Garden Road (County Route
674) to ultimate terminus at
Industrial Way.
Division Street South From the west curbline of Crystal
Avenue to a point 230 feet east
thereof
East Avenue West From Plum Street to Grape Street
East Boulevard [Added
9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the north curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 50 feet
north thereof
East Boulevard [Added
9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the south curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 240
feet south thereof
East Boulevard [Repealed
5-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-23]
East Boulevard [Added
9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the north curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 65 feet north
thereof
East Boulevard [Added
9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the south curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 240 feet south
thereof
East Boulevard, north
[Added 5-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-30]
East From East Oak Road to Birch
Street
East Boulevard East From Landis Avenue to Elmer
Street
§ 694-30 VINELAND CODE § 694-30
1:1354
Name of Street Side Location
East Boulevard [Added
5-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-23]
East From the northerly curbline of
Landis Avenue to a point 137 feet
north of the center line of Landis
Avenue
East Boulevard [Added
5-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-23]
West From the northerly curbline of
Landis Avenue to a point 53 feet
north of the center line of Landis
Avenue
East Boulevard West From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 120 feet south
thereof
East Wood Street [Added
9-24-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-60]
South From a point 325 feet west of the
west curbline of North Eighth
Street to a point 106 feet westerly
therefrom
Elmer Street [Added
11-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-52]
North From a point 100 feet west of
South West Boulevard to a point
143 feet westerly thereof
Florence Avenue [Added
12-23-1996 by Ord. No.
96-105]
South From East Avenue to State Street
Fourth Street East From Landis Avenue to Elmer
Street
Fourth Street [Added
3-11-1975 by Ord. No.
955; repealed 11-9-1999
by Ord. No. 99-75]
Fowler Avenue Both From Park Drive to Crystal Avenue
Frederick Court [Added
10-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-47]
Beginning at the intersection of
the southerly curbline of Frederick
Court with the westerly curbline of
Golda Lane; thence along the
southerly curbline in a westerly
direction a distance of 700 feet;
thence along the curbline in a
northwesterly direction along an
arc a distance of 200 feet to the
westerly edge of a Driveway on Lot
15, Block 5201
Harvard Street [Added
6-24-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-29]
East Entire length
§ 694-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-30
1:1355
Name of Street Side Location
Hickory Place [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-28]
Both From the southerly curbline of
Cedar Avenue to the northerly
curbline of Pine Avenue
Howard Street [Added
1-10-1995 by Ord. No.
94-99]
East Almond Street to Chestnut Avenue
Howard Street [Added
1-10-1995 by Ord. No.
94-99]
West From a point 725 feet south of the
south curbline of Almond Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Howard Street West From Landis Avenue to Almond
Street
Humbert Street [Added
10-14-1986 by Ord. No.
86-61]
North From South Seventh Street to
South Eighth Street
Industrial Way [Added
10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-43]
Varies Beginning at the intersection of
the west edge of Mill Road and the
southerly edge of Industrial Way;
thence
Along the southerly curbline of
Industrial Way in a westerly
direction a distance of 2,000 feet;
thence
In a westerly direction along an
arc a distance of 450 feet; thence
Along the westerly curbline of
Industrial Way in a northerly
direction a distance of 900 feet;
thence
Along an arc in an easterly
direction a distance of 450 feet;
thence
Still along the northerly curbline of
Industrial Way in an easterly
direction a distance of 620 feet
more or less to the westerly
curbline of DeMarco Drive
From Mill Road to ultimate
terminus at DeMarco Drive
[Added 7-31-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-43]
Juliana Drive [Added
5-12-1992 by Ord. No.
92-30]
East From a point 71 feet north of the
north curbline of Mayfair Court to
a point 20 feet north thereof
§ 694-30 VINELAND CODE § 694-30
1:1356
Name of Street Side Location
Landis Avenue Both From Myrtle Street to Spring Road
Landis Avenue [Repealed
3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
96-25]
Landis Avenue North From the east curbline of Lincoln
Avenue to a point 100 feet east
thereof
Landis Avenue North From the west curbline of Lincoln
Avenue to a point 50 feet west
thereof
Landis Avenue North From the east curbline of N.J.
Route 47 to a point 1,230 feet east
thereof
Landis Avenue South From the east curbline of Lincoln
Avenue to a point 50 feet east
thereof
Landis Avenue South From the west curbline of Lincoln
Avenue to a point 100 feet west
thereof
Landis Avenue South From the east curbline of N.J.
Route 47 to a point 1,730 feet east
thereof
Lincoln Avenue [Added
5-8-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-33]
Both From the northerly curbline of
Brewster Road to a point 500 feet
north of the northerly curbline of
Menantico Road
Lincoln Avenue [Added
7-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-36]
Both From a point 500 feet south of the
center line of Edna Drive to 500
feet north of the center line of
Edna Drive
Lincoln Avenue East From the north curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 50 feet north
thereof
Lincoln Avenue East From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 100 feet south
thereof
Lincoln Avenue West From the north curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 100 feet north
thereof
Lincoln Avenue West From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 50 feet south
thereof
§ 694-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-30
1:1357
Name of Street Side Location
Lynn Avenue [Added
7-28-1992 by Ord. No.
92-52]
Both From Park Avenue to Osborne
Avenue
Main Road East From the north curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 150
feet south thereof
Main Road East From the south curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 150
feet south thereof
Main Road East From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 250 feet south
thereof
Main Road East From Maple Avenue to Landis
Avenue
Main Road West From the north curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 1,000
feet north thereof
Main Road West From the south curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 150
feet south thereof
Main Road West From Karin Street to Landis
Avenue
Main Road West From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 200 feet south
thereof
Menantico Road [Added
5-8-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-33]
Both From a point 500 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Lincoln
Avenue to a point 500 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Lincoln
Avenue
Michael Avenue [Added
6-25-1991 by Ord. No.
9147]
Both From the western curbline of
Route 47 to a point 85 feet
westerly thereof
Michigan Avenue North From Arcadia Place to East Avenue
Mill Road, north [Added
6-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-29]
East From a point 250 feet south of Pine
Avenue to a point 300 feet north of
Cedar Avenue
Montrose Street [Added
12-28-1999 by Ord. No.
99-88]
North From West Avenue to Coney
Avenue
§ 694-30 VINELAND CODE § 694-30
1:1358
Name of Street Side Location
Montrose Street [Added
8-23-1988 by Ord. No.
88-63; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-78]
Myrtle Street West From Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
New Pear Street North From East Avenue to Valley Avenue
New Pear Street [Added
12-13-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-60]
South From the westerly curbline of
Myrtle Street to a point 250 feet
westerly thereof
North East Avenue [Added
12-23-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-68]
East From a point 980 feet north of the
north curbline of East Wheat Road
and extending 1,000 feet north
thereof (to the bridge over the
Blackwater Branch)
North East Avenue [Added
12-23-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-68]
West From a point 790 feet north of the
north curbline of East Wheat Road
and extending 1,190 feet north
thereof (to the bridge over the
Blackwater Branch)
North Fourth Street
[Added 5-8-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-34]
East From the southerly curbline of Oak
Road to a point 106 feet southerly
thereof
North Maple Drive [Added
7-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-27]
Both From a point 90 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Hazel Avenue
along a circle curving
northeastwardly a distance of 185
feet to the point of tangency with
the straight east-west portion of
North Maple Drive
North Maple Drive [Added
7-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-27]
Both From the west curbline of North
Main Road to a point 90 feet west
thereof, thence along a circle
curving northwestwardly a
distance of 170 feet to the point of
tangency with the straight eastwest
portion of North Maple Drive
North Valley Avenue
[Added 3-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-15]
West From the northerly curbline of
Carlton Place to a point 1,850 feet
northerly thereof
Oaklawn Terrace [Added
9-11-1990 by Ord. No.
90-86]
Both From the easterly curbline of
Landis Avenue to a point 200 feet
northerly thereof
§ 694-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-30
1:1359
Name of Street Side Location
Oak Road Both From the east curbline of N.J.
Route 47 to a point 150 feet east
thereof
Oak Road Both From the west curbline of N.J.
Route 47 to a point 150 feet west
thereof
Park Avenue Both From the east curbline of N.J.
Route 47 to a point 200 feet east
thereof
Park Avenue Both From the west curbline of N.J.
Route 47 to a point 150 feet west
thereof
Park Avenue [Added
9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the west curbline of North
Main Road to the east curbline of
Delsea Drive
Park Avenue South From Main Road to West Avenue
Pear Street (south of
Central Railroad)
North From Third Street to Fourth Street
Pear Street (south of
Central Railroad)
South From Second Street to Fourth
Street
Pine Street East Entire length
Plum Street [Repealed
3-24-1992 by Ord. No.
92-17]
Plum Street [Added
3-24-1992 by Ord. No.
92-17; repealed
10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
92-80]
Seventh Street [Added
1-25-1977 by Ord. No.
1066]
East From the southerly curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 100
feet southerly thereof
Seventh Street [Repealed
4-9-1991 by Ord. No.
91-25]
Seventh Street [Added
7-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-26]
East From a point 153 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Wood Street
to a point 90 feet northerly thereof
Seventh Street [Added
7-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-26]
West From the northerly curbline of
Wood Street to the southerly
curbline of Plum Street
§ 694-30 VINELAND CODE § 694-30
1:1360
Name of Street Side Location
Sixth Street [Repealed
4-9-1991 by Ord. No.
91-25]
Sixth Street [Added
3-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-12]
East From the northerly curbline of
Grape Street to a point 140 feet
north thereof
South Fourth Street
[Added 11-9-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-75]
West From the north curbline of Quince
Street to a point 118 feet north
thereof
South Maple Drive [Added
7-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-27]
Both From the east curbline of Hazel
Avenue to a point 70 feet east
thereof, thence along a circle
curving southeastwardly a distance
of 165 feet to the point of tangency
with the straight east-west portion
South Maple Drive.
South Maple Drive [Added
7-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-27]
Both From the west curbline of North
Main Road to a point 90 feet west
thereof, thence along a circle
curving southwestwardly a
distance of 165 feet to the point of
tangency with the straight eastwest
portion of South Maple Drive.
South Seventh Street
[Added 10-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-61]
West From Catherine Street to Humbert
Street
State Street East From Landis Avenue to Almond
Street
State Street [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord. No.
1294]
East From Landis Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
State Street [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord. No.
1294]
West From the prolongation of Almond
Street to a point 280 feet southerly
therefrom
State Street [Added
3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
99-14]
West From a point 391 feet south of the
southerly curbline (projected) of
Almond Street and extending 130
feet southerly thereof
Third Street [Added
10-14-1986 by Ord. No.
86-61]
Both From the north curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 50 feet north
thereof
Thorview Court [Added
11-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-51]
East Entire length
§ 694-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-30
1:1361
Name of Street Side Location
Timberbrook Drive [Added
10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-42]
North From a point 265 feet from the
intersection of the west edge of
Valley Avenue and the northerly
edge of Timberbrook Drive,
westerly a distance of 320 feet
Timberbrook Drive [Added
10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-42]
North From a point 1,040 feet from the
intersection of the west edge of
Valley Avenue and the northerly
edge of Timberbrook Drive,
westerly a distance of 130 feet
Timberbrook Drive [Added
10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-42]
South From the westerly edge of
Ramblewood Drive, westerly a
distance of 170 feet
Timberbrook Drive [Added
10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-42]
South From a point 365 feet from the
intersection of the west edge of
Valley Avenue and the southerly
edge of Timberbrook Drive,
westerly a distance of 625 feet
Valley Avenue [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-29]
Both From the southerly curbline of
Wheat Road to the northerly
curbline of Walnut Road
Valley Avenue East From the north curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 50 feet north
thereof
Valley Avenue East From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 100 feet south
thereof
Valley Avenue West From Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
West Avenue Both From Landis Avenue to Wood
Street
West Avenue East From Landis Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
West Avenue West From Landis Avenue to Elmer
Street
West Boulevard [Added
9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the north curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 200
feet north thereof
West Boulevard [Added
9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the south curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 50 feet
south thereof
§ 694-30 VINELAND CODE § 694-30
1:1362
Name of Street Side Location
West Boulevard Both From the north curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 120 feet north
thereof
West Boulevard [Repealed
6-9-1992 by Ord. No.
92-39]
West Boulevard [Added
9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the north curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 240 feet north
thereof
West Boulevard [Added
9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-48]
Both From the south curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 80 feet north
thereof
West Boulevard [Added
6-9-1992 by Ord. No.
92-39]
East From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 35 feet south
thereof
West Boulevard [Added
6-9-1992 by Ord. No.
92-39]
West From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 120 feet south
thereof
§ 694-31. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-5, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon the following described streets or parts
of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Almond Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61300]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Avenue to West
Avenue
Almond Street [Added
7-26-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-55]
South 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.;
Monday
through Friday
From a point 220 feet
east of the east curbline
of West Avenue to a
point 135 feet east
thereof
300. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the deletion of the entry that prohibited
parking the entire length of every street within the City between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.
§ 694-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-31
1:1363
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Almond Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
West Avenue to East
Avenue
Castpa Place [Added
6-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-29]
Both 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From the easterly
curbline of Hickory
Place to a point 250 feet
east thereof
Cherry Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Avenue to West
Avenue
Cherry Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
West Avenue to East
Avenue
East Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Landis Avenue to
Plum Street
East Avenue [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Montrose Street to
Elmer Street
East Avenue [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Montrose Street to
Chestnut Avenue
§ 694-31 VINELAND CODE § 694-31
1:1364
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
East Avenue [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Park Avenue to Plum
Street
East Boulevard
[Added 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Chestnut Avenue to
Elmer Street
East Boulevard
[Added 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Landis Avenue to Park
Avenue
East Boulevard
[Added 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
Eighth Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
Eighth Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
§ 694-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-31
1:1365
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Elmer Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
West Avenue to East
Avenue
Elmer Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
West Avenue to East
Avenue
Fourth Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Chestnut Avenue to
Elmer Street
Fourth Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Landis Avenue to Park
Avenue
Fourth Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Quince Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Fourth Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Park Avenue to
Montrose Street
§ 694-31 VINELAND CODE § 694-31
1:1366
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Grape Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Avenue to West
Avenue
Grape Street [Added
3-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-11]
South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m., 1:00
p.m. to 3:00
p.m.; Monday
through Friday,
except school
buses
From a point 170 feet
west of the westerly
curbline of Fourth
Street to a point 106
feet west thereof
Grape Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
West Avenue to East
Avenue
Hickory Place [Added
6-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-29]
Both 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Entire length
Landis Avenue [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Avenue to West
Avenue
Landis Avenue [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
West Avenue to East
Avenue
Montrose Street [Added 9-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-61; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-78]
§ 694-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-31
1:1367
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Montrose Street
[Added 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-78]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Avenue to a point
350 feet east of Seventh
Street
Montrose Street
[Added 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-78]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Boulevard to West
Avenue
Montrose Street [Added 9-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-61; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-78]
Montrose Street
[Added 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-78]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
East Avenue to a point
350 feet east of Seventh
Street
Montrose Street
[Added 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-78]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
East Boulevard to West
Avenue
Myrtle Street [Repealed 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-11]
Peach Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Avenue to Second
Street
Peach Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Second Street to East
Avenue
§ 694-31 VINELAND CODE § 694-31
1:1368
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Pear Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Avenue to East
Boulevard
Pear Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
East Boulevard to East
Avenue
Pear Street (south of
Central Railroad)
[Added 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Second Street to Third
Street
Pear Street (south of
Central Railroad)
[Added 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Fourth Street to West
Boulevard
Pine Avenue [Added
6-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-29]
Both 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Entire length
Plum Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
West Avenue to East
Avenue
Plum Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
East Avenue to West
Avenue
§ 694-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-31
1:1369
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Quince Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Avenue to West
Avenue
Quince Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
West Avenue to East
Avenue
Second Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Chestnut Avenue to Park
Avenue
Second Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
Seventh Street
[Added 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Chestnut Avenue to Park
Avenue
Seventh Street
[Added 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Chestnut Avenue to Park
Avenue
Sixth Street [Added 9-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-61; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-78]
§ 694-31 VINELAND CODE § 694-31
1:1370
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Sixth Street [Added
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-78]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Almond Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Sixth Street [Added
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-78]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Park Avenue to a point
150 feet south of Grape
Street
Sixth Street [Added
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-78]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Almond Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Sixth Street [Added
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-78]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday
except public
holidays
Park Avenue to a point
150 feet south of Grape
Street
Sixth Street [Added 9-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-61; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-78]
Third Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Chestnut Avenue to Park
Avenue
Third Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
§ 694-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-31
1:1371
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
West Avenue [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Wood Street to Park
Avenue
West Avenue [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Park Avenue to Wood
Street
West Avenue [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Elmer Street to
Chestnut Avenue
West Boulevard
[Added 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-61]
East 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
West Boulevard
[Added 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-61]
West 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
West Plum Street
[Added 9-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-62]
South 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Saturday,
except public
holidays
From a point 325 feet
east of the east curbline
of North Fourth Street
to a point 160 feet
easterly therefrom
§ 694-31 VINELAND CODE § 694-31
1:1372
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Wood Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Monday
through
Wednesday,
except public
holidays
East Avenue to West
Avenue
Wood Street [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-61]
South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.;
Thursday
through
Sunday, except
public holidays
West Avenue to East
Avenue
§ 694-32. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-6, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Almond Road [Added
12-27-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-34]
Both From the easterly curbline of
Orchard Road to a point 1,000 feet
easterly thereof
Brewster Road [Added
1-13-1976 by Ord. No.
999]
Both From the north curbline of Chestnut
Avenue to a point 250 feet north
thereof
Brewster Road [Added
1-13-1976 by Ord. No.
999]
Both From the south curbline of Chestnut
Avenue to a point 250 feet south
thereof
Brewster Road [Added
1-13-1976 by Ord. No.
999]
Both From the north curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 250 feet north
thereof
Brewster Road [Added
1-13-1976 by Ord. No.
999]
Both From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 250 feet south
thereof
Cherry Street [Added
11-28-1978 by Ord.
No. 1137]
South From State Street to Howard Street
Chestnut Avenue
[Amended 1-13-1976
by Ord. No. 999]
Both From the east curbline of Brewster
Road to a point 250 feet east thereof
§ 694-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-32
1:1373
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Avenue [Added
5-22-1979 by Ord. No.
1161]
Both From the east curbline of Brewster
Road to a point 2,295 feet easterly
thereof
Chestnut Avenue
[Amended 1-13-1976
by Ord. No. 999]
Both From the west curbline of Brewster
Road to a point 250 feet west thereof
Chestnut Avenue [Added
5-22-1979 by Ord. No.
1161]
Both From the west curbline of Spring
Road to a point 520 feet westerly
thereof
Chestnut Avenue [Added
5-22-1979 by Ord. No.
1161]
North From the west curbline of Brewster
Road to a point 620 feet westerly
thereof
Chestnut Avenue [Added
5-22-1979 by Ord. No.
1161]
North From the east curbline of Spring
Road to a point 450 feet easterly
thereof
Chestnut Avenue [Added
5-22-1979 by Ord. No.
1161]
South From the west curbline of Brewster
Road to a point 520 feet westerly
thereof
Chestnut Avenue [Added
5-22-1979 by Ord. No.
1161]
South From the east curbline of Spring
Road to a point 530 feet easterly
thereof
Dante Avenue [Added
1-25-1977 by Ord. No.
1067]
Both From the easterly curbline of Lincoln
Avenue to a point 250 feet easterly
thereof
Dante Avenue [Added
1-25-1977 by Ord. No.
1067]
Both From the westerly curbline of Lincoln
Avenue to a point 250 feet westerly
thereof
Delsea Drive [Added
9-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-56]
Both From the south curbline of Wheat
Road to a point 150 feet south
thereof
Delsea Drive [Added
12-12-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-93]
East From the northerly curbline of
Walnut Road (eastern connection) to
a point 200 feet north thereof
Delsea Drive [Added
12-12-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-93]
West From a point 125 feet south of the
projected center line of Walnut Road
(eastern connection) to a point 225
feet north thereof
East Avenue Both From Washington Avenue to Walnut
Road
East Avenue [Repealed 5-23-1989 by Ord. No. 89-28]
East Avenue [Added
5-23-1989 by Ord. No.
89-28]
East From the south curbline of Chestnut
Avenue to a point 308 feet south
thereof
§ 694-32 VINELAND CODE § 694-32
1:1374
Name of Street Side Location
East Avenue East From Landis Avenue to Elmer Street
East Avenue East From Landis Avenue to Park Avenue
East Avenue East From Montrose Street to Chestnut
Avenue
East Avenue East From the north curbline of Oak Road
to a point 250 feet north thereof
East Avenue East From the south curbline of Oak Road
to a point 250 feet south thereof
East Avenue [Added
5-23-1989 by Ord. No.
89-28]
East From the north curbline of Walnut
Road to a point 238 feet south of the
south curbline of Washington Avenue
East Avenue [Added
6-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-51]
West From Chestnut Avenue to
Washington Avenue
East Avenue West From the north curbline of Oak Road
to a point 250 feet north thereof
East Avenue West From Landis Avenue to Montrose
Street
East Avenue West From Landis Avenue to Wood Street
East Avenue West From the south curbline of Oak Road
to a point 250 feet south thereof
Elmer Road [Added
6-14-1983 by Ord. No.
83-13]
Both From a point 1,596 feet westerly of
the west curbline of Southwest
Boulevard to a point 1,200 feet
westerly thereof
Elmer Road [Added
10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-77]
North From the easterly curbline of Delsea
Drive to a point 75 feet east thereof
Elmer Street [Added
1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
90-1]
North From the westerly curbline of Delsea
Drive to a point 70 feet west thereof
Elmer Street [Added
1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
90-1]
North From the easterly curbline of Moyer
Street to a point 110 feet east
thereof
Elmer Street [Added
1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
90-1]
North From the westerly curbline of Moyer
Street to its westerly limit
Elmer Street [Added
1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
90-1]
South From the westerly curbline of Delsea
Drive to its westerly limit
Ewan Terrace West From Landis Avenue to New Pear
Street
§ 694-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-32
1:1375
Name of Street Side Location
Grant Avenue [Added
8-13-1985 by Ord. No.
85-34; amended
5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
90-36]
North From a point 860 feet east of Delsea
Drive to a point 2,600 feet east of
Delsea Drive
Grove Lane Both From Grove Road to John Street
John Street South Entire length
Landis Avenue [Added
1-13-1976 by Ord. No.
999]
Both From the east curbline of Brewster
Road to a point 250 feet east thereof
Landis Avenue [Added
1-13-1976 by Ord. No.
999]
Both From the west curbline of Brewster
Road to a point 250 feet west thereof
Landis Avenue [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-92]
Both From the easterly curbline of Main
Road to a point 270 feet east thereof
Landis Avenue [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-92]
Both From the westerly curbline of Main
Road to a point 280 feet west thereof
Landis Avenue [Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 96-25; repealed
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-34]
Landis Avenue [Added
5-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-36]
Both From the Pittsgrove Township, Salem
County/Vineland City, Cumberland
County corporate line to N.J. Route
47 (Delsea Drive)
Lincoln Avenue [Added
1-25-1977 by Ord. No.
1067]
Both From the northerly curbline of Dante
Avenue to a point 250 feet northerly
thereof
Lincoln Avenue [Added
1-25-1977 by Ord. No.
1067]
Both From the southerly curbline of Dante
Avenue to a point 250 feet southerly
thereof
Magnolia Road [Added
8-13-1985 by Ord. No.
85-35]
South From a point 940 feet east of the
center line of Spring Road to a point
1,546 feet east of the center line of
Spring Road
Main Road [Added
5-28-1985 by Ord. No.
85-20]
Both From the center line of East Maple
Avenue to the center line of Linda
Lane
Main Road [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-82]
Both From the northerly curbline of
Landis Avenue to a point 270 feet
north thereof
§ 694-32 VINELAND CODE § 694-32
1:1376
Name of Street Side Location
Main Road [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-82]
Both From the southerly curbline of
Landis Avenue to a point 280 feet
south thereof
Main Road [Added
7-27-1976 by Ord. No.
1025]
Both From the north curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 150 feet north
thereof
Main Road [Added
7-27-1976 by Ord. No.
1025]
Both From the south curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 150 feet south
thereof
Main Road [Added 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-56; repealed 4-10-1990
by Ord. No. 90-21]
Main Road East From the north curbline of Sherman
Avenue to a point 250 feet north
thereof
Main Road East From the south curbline of Sherman
Avenue to a point 250 feet south
thereof
Main Road West From the north curbline of Sherman
Avenue to a point 250 feet north
thereof
Main Road West From the south curbline of Sherman
Avenue to a point 250 feet south
thereof
Maurice River Parkway
[Added 8-26-1975 by
Ord. No. 974]
Both From West Oak Road to West Garden
Road
Mill Road [Added
12-27-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-35]
Both From a point 1,500 feet north of the
north curbline of Oak Road to a point
1,000 feet north thereof
Mill Road East From the north curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 250 feet north
thereof
Mill Road East From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 250 feet south
thereof
Mill Road West From the north curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 250 feet north
thereof
Mill Road West From the south curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 250 feet south
thereof
§ 694-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-32
1:1377
Name of Street Side Location
Moyer Street [Added
1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
90-1]
East From the northerly curbline of Elmer
Street (west side projected) to a
point 118 feet north thereof
Moyer Street [Added
1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
90-1]
East From the southerly curbline of
Landis Avenue to a point 70 feet
south thereof
Moyer Street [Added
1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
90-1]
West From Elmer Street to Landis Avenue
North Main Road
[Added 10-10-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-77]
Both From Maple Avenue to Wheat Road
North Mill Road [Added
6-11-1985 by Ord. No.
85-23]
Both From Oak Road to the bridge north
of Oak Road
Oak Road [Added
10-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-76]
Both From a point 150 feet west of the
west curbline of N.J. Route 47 to a
point 90 feet west thereof
Orchard Road [Added
3-11-1975 by Ord. No.
955]
Both From the northerly curbline of
Landis Avenue to a point 250 feet
northerly thereof
Orchard Road [Added
3-11-1975 by Ord. No.
955]
Both From the southerly curbline of
Landis Avenue to a point 250 feet
southerly thereof
Orchard Road Both From the south curbline of Sherman
Avenue to a point 1,475 feet south
thereof
Orchard Road [Added
8-28-1989 by Ord. No.
89-46]
East From the northerly curbline of
Woodlawn Avenue to a point 250 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Landis Avenue
Orchard Road [Added
8-28-1989 by Ord. No.
89-46]
West From the northerly curbline of
Woodlawn Avenue to a point 80 feet
north thereof
Orchard Road [Added
8-28-1989 by Ord. No.
89-46]
West From a point 485 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Woodlawn
Avenue to a point 250 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Landis
Avenue
Osborne Avenue [Added
11-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-73]
Both From the westerly curbline of North
West Avenue to a point 100 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 694-32 VINELAND CODE § 694-32
1:1378
Name of Street Side Location
Park Avenue [Added
7-27-1976 by Ord. No.
1025]
North From the west curbline of Main Road
to a point 150 feet west thereof
Seventh Street [Added
4-9-1991 by Ord. No.
91-25]
East From Elmer Street to Grape Street
Seventh Street [Repealed 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-25]
Seventh Street [Repealed 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-25]
Sherman Avenue North From the east curbline of Main Road
to a point 250 feet east thereof
Sherman Avenue North From the west curbline of Main Road
to a point 250 feet west thereof
Sherman Avenue South From the east curbline of Main Road
to a point 250 feet east thereof
Sherman Avenue South From the west curbline of Main Road
to a point 250 feet west thereof
Spring Road [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-82]
Both From the northerly curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 90 feet
north thereof
Spring Road [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-82]
Both From the southerly curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 90 feet
south thereof
Spring Road [Added
12-10-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-59]
West From a point at the south property
line of Maple Avenue to a point 1,050
feet in a southerly direction along the
westerly side of Spring Road
State Street [Added
1-28-1992 by Ord. No.
92-4]
Both From the northerly curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 100 feet
north thereof
State Street [Added
1-28-1992 by Ord. No.
92-4]
Both From the southerly curbline of
Chestnut Avenue to a point 100 feet
south thereof
Valley Avenue [Added
5-11-1993 by Ord. No.
93-42]
Both From the north curbline of Chestnut
Avenue to a point 100 feet north
thereof
Valley Avenue [Added
5-11-1993 by Ord. No.
93-42]
Both From the south curbline of Chestnut
Avenue to a point 100 feet south
thereof
Valley Avenue [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-82]
Both From the northerly curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 90 feet north
thereof
§ 694-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-32
1:1379
Name of Street Side Location
Valley Avenue [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-82]
Both From the southerly curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 90 feet south
thereof
Walnut Road [Added
12-12-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-39]
Both From the easterly curbline of Delsea
Drive to a point 215 feet east thereof
Wheat Road [Added
9-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-56; repealed
4-10-1990 by Ord. No.
90-21]
Wheat Road North From the east curbline of N.J. Route
47 to a point 100 feet east thereof
Wheat Road North From the west curbline of N.J. Route
47 to a point 100 feet west thereof
Wheat Road South From the east curbline of N.J. Route
47 to a point 100 feet east thereof
Wheat Road South From the west curbline of N.J. Route
47 to a point 100 feet west thereof
§ 694-33. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.301
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-7, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
301. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2017-95, adopted 1-16-2018, provided that, during the
period of time while the City is undertaking a major construction project on the property
which boarders 6th Street to the west, Plum Street to the south, and 7th Street to the east
and to the north, inclusive of the City parking lots, unlimited parking is permitted on both
sides of all streets and roads in the City of Vineland which include and are bordered by
8th Street to the east, Peach Street to the north, 6th Street to the west and the northern
boundary of Landis Avenue to the south; however, there will be no change in the parking
restrictions on Landis Avenue.
§ 694-32 VINELAND CODE § 694-33
1:1380
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Cherry Street
[Added
11-28-1978 by
Ord. No. 1137]
North 15 mins. All From 100 feet from the
westerly curbline of
Howard Street to a
point 28 feet westerly
thereof
East Quince Street
[Added
11-9-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-77;
amended
9-24-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-61]
South 15 mins. All Beginning at a point 39
feet east of the east
curbline of South Sixth
Street and extending to
a point 73 feet east
thereof
South Sixth Street
[Added
9-24-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-61]
East 15 mins. All Beginning at a point 41
feet south of the south
curbline of East Quince
Street and extending
34 feet southerly
therefrom
Eighth Street Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From Wood Street to
Elmer Street
Elmer Street Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From East Avenue to
Sixth Street
Elmer Street Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From Sixth Street to
East Boulevard
Landis Avenue
[Added
12-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-44]
Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From Myrtle Street to
State Street
Landis Avenue
[Added 4-9-1991
by Ord. No.
91-25; amended
11-13-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-60]
Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday;
9:00 to
3:00
p.m.,
Saturdays
From West Avenue to
Myrtle Street
§ 694-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-33
1:1381
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Landis Avenue
[Added
3-12-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-11]
South 30 mins. 5:30 p.m.
to 2:00
a.m.
From a point 92 feet
east of the east
curbline of South
Seventh Street and
extending 18 feet
easterly thereof (as
measured along the
curb)
Landis Avenue
[Added
3-12-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-11]
South 30 mins. 5:30 p.m.
to 2:00
a.m.
From a point 150 feet
east of the east
curbline of South
Seventh Street and
extending 18 feet
easterly thereof (as
measured along the
curb)
Landis Avenue
[Repealed
4-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-25]
Plum Street
[Added
4-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-21]
Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From Sixth Street to
Seventh Street
Plum Street
[Added
3-23-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-17]
South 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From a point 223 feet
east of the curbline of
Seventh Street to a
point 25 feet east
thereof
Seventh Street
[Repealed
4-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-25]
Seventh Street
[Added 4-9-1991
by Ord. No.
91-25; repealed
6-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-48]
Seventh Street
[Added
6-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-48]
East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From Plum Street to
Elmer Street
§ 694-33 VINELAND CODE § 694-33
1:1382
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Seventh Street
[Amended
4-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-25]
West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From 89 feet south of
the south curbline of
Landis Avenue to Grape
Street
Sixth Street
[Added 4-9-1991
by Ord. No.
91-25; amended
1-28-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-6]
East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From a point 111 feet
south of the south
curbline of Landis
Avenue to Elmer Street
Sixth Street
[Added 4-9-1991
by Ord. No.
91-25]
East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From Plum Street to a
point 129 feet north of
the north curbline of
Landis Avenue
Sixth Street
[Added 4-9-1991
by Ord. No.
91-25]
West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From Plum Street to
Grape Street
South West
Boulevard [Added
5-11-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-24]
West 15 mins. 12:00
noon to
9:00 p.m.
From a point 41 feet
south of the south
curbline of Grape
Street to a point 75 feet
south thereof
South West
Boulevard [Added
6-26-2012 by
Ord. No.
2012-29]
West 15 mins. 9:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.
From a point 84 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of West Elmer
Street to a point 44 feet
northerly therefrom
State Street
[Added
11-27-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007-92]
West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From a point 39 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 198
feet southerly thereof
West Grape Street
[Added
1-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-2]
North 15 mins. All From a point 63 feet
west of the westerly
curbline of South
Fourth Street to a point
25 feet westerly thereof
Wood Street Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m.
From Eighth Street to
East Boulevard
§ 694-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-33
1:1383
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Wood Street
[Added
12-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-108]
South 15 mins. 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
From a point 75 feet
west of the west
curbline of Third Street
to a point 260 feet
westerly thereof
§ 694-34. Schedule V: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-9, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time other than at a ninety-degree angle upon the following
described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Cherry Street302 North From 35 feet from the westerly
curbline of Howard Street to a point
128 feet westerly thereof
§ 694-35. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-10, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
directions indicated:
Name of Street Direction Location
Crystal Avenue North From Park Avenue to Fowler
Avenue
Division Street West From Crystal Avenue to Park Drive
East Boulevard North From Chestnut Avenue to Park
Avenue
East Boulevard [Added
12-23-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-62; amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
86-28]
North Between Walnut Road and Park
Drive
Eighth Street South From Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
Elmer Street East From West Avenue to East Avenue
Fowler Street East From Park Drive to Crystal Avenue
Grape Street West From East Avenue to West Avenue
Harvard Street
[Repealed 6-24-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-29]
302. Editor's Note: See also Schedule IV for applicable fifteen-minute time-limit parking.
§ 694-33 VINELAND CODE § 694-35
1:1384
Name of Street Direction Location
Howard Street South From Landis Avenue to Almond
Street
John Street East From Grove Lane to West
Boulevard
Paul Street East From Sixth Street to Seventh Street
Pear Street (south of
Central Railroad)
East From Second Street to Fourth
Street
Plum Street East From West Avenue to East Avenue
Seventh Street North From Chestnut Avenue to Park
Avenue
Sixth Street [Amended
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-78]
South From Park Avenue to Grape Street
Street located in public
square at northwest
corner of Landis Avenue
and East Boulevard
[Repealed 6-28-1994
by Ord. No. 94-50]
Street located in public
square at northwest
corner of Landis Avenue
and West Boulevard
[Repealed 6-28-1994
by Ord. No. 94-50]
Street located in public square at southeast corner of Landis Avenue and
East Boulevard [Repealed 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-50]
Street located in public square at southwest corner of Landis Avenue and
West Boulevard [Repealed 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-50]
West Boulevard [Added
12-23-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-62; amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
86-28]
South Between Fenimore Street and
Axtell Avenue
West Boulevard South From Park Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
Wood Street West From East Avenue to West Avenue
§ 694-36. Schedule VII: Through Streets. [Amended 8-26-1975 by
Ord. No. 969; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 86-34; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-50; 8-8-1989 by Ord. No. 89-44; 10-23-1990 by Ord. No. 90-95;
2-13-1991 by Ord. No. 91-3; 1-14-1992 by Ord. No. 91-96; 4-27-1993
by Ord. No. 93-32; 4-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-33; 7-11-1995 by Ord.
§ 694-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1385
No. 95-39; 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 96-25; 5-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-34; 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-36]
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-11, and pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following described streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield right-of-way signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Adams Avenue Between Main Road and Elmwood
Avenue
Almond Street Between N.J. Route 47 and West Avenue
Almond Street Between Columbia Avenue and Valley
Avenue
Almond Street/Roberts
Boulevard
Between Valley Avenue and Main Road
Alps Place Between Maple Avenue and its northerly
limit
Alpha Place/Heights Place Between Orchard Road and the northerly
limit of Heights Place
Amos Avenue/Bortle Avenue Between West Avenue and Avon Place
Annio Lane Between Barry Drive and Linden
Boulevard
Arbor Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and Northwest
Boulevard
Arcadia Place Between Landis Avenue and its southerly
limit
Ascher Road Between Union Road and Cornucopia
Avenue
Ascher Road Between Cornucopia Avenue and Panther
Road
Athens Way Between Palermo Avenue and Rome
Road
Autumncrest Drive Between Barry Drive and Redwood Drive
Avon Place Between West Avenue and its westerly
limit
Axtell Avenue/White Street Between Southwest Boulevard and
Walnut Road
Barry Drive Between Wynnewood Drive and Dolly
Drive
Barry Drive/Junior Drive Between Dolly Drive and Dante Avenue
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-36
1:1386
Name of Street Limits
Bartholemew Drive/Brookhaven
Drive
Between Hance Bridge Road and Hance
Bridge Road
Baylor Avenue Between Orchard Road and Woodlawn
Avenue
Baywood Drive Between Sherwood Drive and Paterson
Drive
Beacon Avenue/Douglas Lane/
Steven Lane
Between Main Road and Wendy Lane
Becker Drive Between Maple Avenue and Oak Road
Beechwood Drive Between Brewster Road and its westerly
limit
Berkeley Drive Between Dante Avenue and its southerly
limit
Berkshire Drive Between Bradford Drive and its westerly
limit
Bernard Road Between Lake Road and Gloucester
County Line
Beverly Drive Between Wheat Road and its northerly
limit
Birch Street Between Northwest Boulevard and Third
Street
Birch Street/North Sixth Street Between Northeast Boulevard and
Broadway
Boody Drive Between Northeast Boulevard and
Oxford Street
Boxwood Drive/Meadow Drive/
Oaklawn Terrace
Between Landis Avenue and Landis
Avenue
Bradford Drive Between Walnut Road and Chestnut
Avenue
Brentwood Drive Between Chestnut Avenue and Madison
Avenue
Broad Lane Between Broadlawn Terrace and Lisa
Lane
Broadlawn Terrace Between Park Avenue and Hendee Road
Broadway Between East Avenue and Northeast
Boulevard
Brookfield Street Between Hance Bridge Road and Dante
Avenue
Brookfield Street Between Dante Avenue and its northerly
limit
§ 694-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1387
Name of Street Limits
Brookfield Street Between Landis Avenue and its northerly
limit
Brookhaven Road Between Bartholemew Road and Hance
Bridge Road
Brown Road Between N.J. Route 47 and the
Gloucester County Line
Bryant Street/Lawrence Street/
Marion Street
Between Brewster Road and Brookfield
Street
Burnt Mill Drive Between Arbor Avenue and its northerly
limit
Butler Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and Southwest
Boulevard
Butler Avenue Between Southeast Boulevard and Main
Road
Butler Avenue Between Main Road and Lincoln Avenue
Buttonwood Drive/Greenwood
Drive
Between Paterson Drive and Magnolia
Road
Cambridge Street/Harvard
Street
Between Park Avenue and East Avenue
Carlisle Drive Between Chestnut Avenue and Woodlawn
Avenue
Carlton Place/Lisa Lane Between Valley Avenue and the southerly
limit of Lisa Lane
Carpy Avenue/Dahliadel Drive Between Chestnut Avenue and Knoll
Drive
Castpa Place/Edrudo Road Between Hickory Place and Almond Road
Cedar Avenue/Hickory Place/
Pine Avenue
Between Mill Road and Mill Road
Cedarwood Drive Between Main Road and its westerly
limit
Charles Street Between Oak Road and Sunset Avenue
Chestnut Avenue Between Mill Road and N.J. Route 47
Chestnut Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and West Avenue
Chestnut Avenue Between West Avenue and Southwest
Boulevard
Chestnut Avenue Between Southeast Boulevard and
Seventh Street
Chestnut Avenue Between Seventh Street and East Avenue
Chestnut Avenue Between East Avenue and State Street
(when signal is installed)
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-36
1:1388
Name of Street Limits
Chestnut Avenue Between State Street and Main Road
(when signal is installed)
Chestnut Avenue Between Main Road and Spring Road
Chestnut Avenue Between Spring Road and Brewster Road
Chestnut Avenue Between Brewster Road and Lincoln
Avenue
Chestnut Avenue Between Lincoln Avenue and the Atlantic
County Line
Chestnut Terrace Between Chestnut Avenue and Chimes
Terrace
Chimes Terrace Between N.J. Route 47 and West
Crescent Drive
Columbia Avenue Between Chestnut Avenue and Landis
Avenue
Columbia Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and the
Gloucester County Line
Conley Drive Between Hance Bridge Road and its
westerly limit
Cornucopia Avenue Between Mays Landing Road and Genoa
Avenue
Cottonwood Drive Between Spring Road and Glenwood
Drive
Country Bridge Road Between Covered Bridge Road and its
northerly limit
Covered Bridge Road Between Hance Bridge Road and Mays
Landing Road
Crane Street Between Quail Street and its westerly
limit
Crane Street Between Park Avenue and Pine Street
Crescent Drive West Between Chestnut Terrace and Chimes
Terrace
Crystal Avenue Between Park Avenue and Pine Street
Dante Avenue Between Spring Road and Lincoln
Avenue
Dante Avenue Between Lincoln Avenue and Panther
Road
Dante Avenue Between Panther Road and Cornucopia
Avenue
Dante Avenue Between Cornucopia Avenue and Union
Road
§ 694-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1389
Name of Street Limits
Dauphin Road Between Washington Avenue and
Monarch Road
Diamond Drive Between Hance Bridge Road and Athens
Way
Division Street Between Forest Grove Road and its
southerly limit
Dolly Drive Between Dante Avenue and Mart Avenue
Dolly Drive/Blue Court Between Mart Avenue and James Court
Doren Terrace Between Landis Avenue and Wallace
Street
Driftwood Lane Between Redwood Drive and
Wynnewood Drive
East Avenue Between Strawberry Avenue and Forest
Grove Road
East Avenue Between Forest Grove Road and Garden
Road
East Avenue Between Garden Road and Wheat Road
East Avenue Between Wheat Road and Oak Road
East Avenue Between Oak Road and Park Avenue
East Avenue Between Park Avenue and Landis Avenue
East Avenue Between Landis Avenue and Chestnut
Avenue
East Avenue Between Chestnut Avenue and Walnut
Road
East Avenue Between Walnut Road and Elmer Road
East Avenue Between Elmer Road and Grant Avenue
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Sheridan Avenue and Butler
Avenue (The intersection of East
Boulevard and Butler Avenue is hereby
designated a multiway stop intersection.
Stop signs shall be installed on all
approaches to the intersection.)
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Butler Avenue and Sherman
Avenue (County Route 552) (The
intersection of East Boulevard and
Sherman Avenue is hereby designated a
four-way stop intersection. Stop signs
shall be installed on all approaches to
the intersection.)
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-36
1:1390
Name of Street Limits
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Sherman Avenue and Grant
Avenue (The intersection of East
Boulevard and Grant Avenue is hereby
designated a four-way stop intersection.
Stop signs shall be installed on all
approaches to the intersection.)
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Grant Avenue and Elmer Road
(The intersection of East Boulevard and
Elmer Road is hereby designated a fourway
stop intersection. Stop signs shall be
installed on all approaches to the
intersection.)
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Elmer Road and Chestnut
Avenue
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Chestnut Avenue and Grape
Street
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Grape Street and Elmer Street
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Elmer Street and Landis
Avenue
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Landis Avenue and Wood Street
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Wood Street and Plum Street
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Plum Street and Park Avenue
East Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
(All other sections of East Boulevard are
county roadways.)
East Cornell Street/West
Cornell Street
Between Ithaca Street and its northerly
limit
Edgewood Drive Between Baywood Drive and McClain
Drive
Edna Drive Between Lincoln Avenue and Dolly Drive
Eighth Street Between Park Avenue and Wood Street
Eighth Street Between Elmer Street and Chestnut
Avenue
Eighth Street Between Chestnut Avenue and its
southerly limit
Eighth Street Between Humbert Street and Walnut
Road
Eighth Street/Virano Lane Between Walnut Road and East Avenue
§ 694-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1391
Name of Street Limits
Eilene Drive Between Beverly Drive and its northerly
limit
Elmer Road Between N.J. Route 47 and Southwest
Boulevard
Elmer Road [Amended
5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-25]
Between Southeast Boulevard and East
Avenue (The intersection of Elmer Road
and East Avenue is hereby designated a
four-way stop intersection. Stop signs
shall be installed on all approaches to
the intersection.)
Elmer Road [Added 5-11-1999
by Ord. No. 99-25]
Between East Avenue and Main Road
Elmer Road Between Main Road and Spring Road
Elmer Street Between West Avenue and East Avenue
Elmer Street Between N.J. Route 47 and its westerly
limit
Elm Road Between Orchard Road and N.J. Route 47
Elmwood Avenue Between Landis Avenue and New Pear
Street
Eureka Street Between Utopia Lane and its easterly
limit
Fairmount Avenue Between Valley Avenue and Main Road
Fava Drive Between East Avenue and State Street
Fenimore Street Between Northwest Boulevard and
Second Street
Finch Street Between Fruit Street and its easterly
limit
Fiocchi Drive Between Wheat Road and its southerly
limit
Florence Avenue Between East Avenue and State Street
Forest Grove Road Between N.J. Route 47 and its westerly
limit
Forest Grove Road Between N.J. Route 47 and Northwest
Boulevard
Forest Grove Road Between Northeast Boulevard and the
Gloucester County Line
Foster Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and Southwest
Boulevard
Fourth Street Between Chestnut Avenue and Elmer
Street
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-36
1:1392
Name of Street Limits
Fourth Street Between Wood Street and Park Avenue
Fourth Street/LaFrance Street [Repealed 12-9-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-66]
Franklin Drive Between Spring Road and its easterly
limit
Freedom Road Between Independence Road and its
southerly limit
Friendship Street Between Garden Road and the
Gloucester County Line
Fruit Street Between Brookfield Street and its
northerly limit
Fruit Street Between Brookfield Street and its
southerly limit
Gallagher Drive Between Mill Road and N.J. Route 47
Garrison Road Between N.J. Route 47 and Orchard Road
Garry Avenue Between Main Road and its easterly limit
Genoa Avenue Between Panther Road and Union Road
Genoa Avenue Between Union Road and the Atlantic
County line
Genoa Avenue/Menantico Road Between Panther Road and Lincoln
Avenue
Grant Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and Southwest
Boulevard
Grand Avenue Between Southeast Boulevard and Main
Road
Grant Avenue Between Main Road and Lincoln Avenue
Greenwillows Drive Between Dauphin Road and Spring Road
Greenwillows Drive Between Spring Road and its easterly
limit
Grove Lane Between Forest Grove Road and Carol
Drive
Harding Road Between Main Road and Clover Avenue
Hendee Road Between East Avenue and Valley Avenue
Hennis Road Between N.J. Route 47 and Southwest
Boulevard
Highland Avenue Between Landis Avenue and Chestnut
Avenue
Highland Avenue Between Chestnut Avenue and
Greenwillows Drive
§ 694-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1393
Name of Street Limits
High Ridge Road Between Leamings Mill Road and its
northerly limit
Holmes Avenue Between Chestnut Avenue and
Washington Avenue
Holmes Avenue Between Washington Avenue and Walnut
Road
Holmes Avenue Between Walnut Road and Magnolia
Road
Independence Road Between Ascher Road and its northerly
limit
Iris Avenue Between Magnolia Road and Harding
Road
Italia Avenue Between Panther Road and Cornucopia
Avenue
Italia Avenue Between Cornucopia Avenue and Union
Road
Italia Avenue/Venezia Avenue Between Menantico Road and Panther
Road
Ithaca Street Between East Avenue and West Cornell
Street
Jackson Drive Between Mill Road and Bradford Drive
James Court Between Magnolia Road and Mart
Avenue
Jay Terrace/Meadow Drive/
Linwood Avenue
Between Landis Avenue and Maple
Avenue
Joel Street Between Philip Street and Wheat Road
John Street Between West Avenue and its easterly
limit
Juliana Drive Between Sharp Road and its northerly
limit
Karin Street/LaSalle Street Between Main Road and Landis Avenue
Kay Terrace Between Main Road and its easterly limit
Kingman Avenue Between West Avenue and its westerly
limit
Knoll Drive Between Landis Avenue and its southerly
limit
Korff Drive North/West/South/
East
Between N.J. Route 47 and North Korff
Drive in a counterclockwise direction
Korff Drive West Between Garrison Road and its northerly
limit
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-36
1:1394
Name of Street Limits
La France Street/North Fourth
Street (westbound/southbound)
[Added 12-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-66]
Between North West Boulevard and West
Park Avenue
Lake Road Between N.J. Route 47 and Columbia
Avenue
Lake Road Between Columbia Avenue and the
Gloucester County Line
Landis Avenue Between the Pittsgrove Township, Salem
County/Vineland City, Cumberland
County corporate line to N.J. Route 47
(Delsea Drive)
Laurel Street Between West Avenue and Third Street
Laurel Street Between Third Street and Northwest
Boulevard
Lilac Drive Between Walnut Road and Foster Avenue
Linda Lane/Yale Terrace Between Valley Avenue and Chestnut
Avenue
Linden Boulevard Between its northerly limit and
Autumncrest Drive (yield at Autumncrest
Drive)
London Lane Between Athens Way and its northerly
limit
Luciano Avenue Between Southwest Boulevard and Third
Street
Magnolia Road Between Allen Avenue and its easterly
limit
Magnolia Road Between Main Road and its westerly
limit
Magnolia Road Between Main Road and Spring Road
Magnolia Road Between Spring Road and Lincoln
Avenue
Magnolia Road Between Lincoln Avenue and Linden
Boulevard
Manaway Lane Between Arbor Avenue and Arbor Court
Manchester Drive Between Bradford Drive and its westerly
limit
Maple Avenue/Hazel Avenue Between Valley Avenue and Park Avenue
Maple Avenue Between Main Road and Brewster Road
Maple Avenue Between Brewster Road and Lincoln
Avenue
§ 694-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1395
Name of Street Limits
Maple Avenue Between Lincoln Avenue and the Atlantic
County Line
Marlyn Avenue Between Weymouth Road and its
northerly limit
Mars Place/Venus Drive Between Neptune Terrace and Orchard
Road
Marshall Street Between Main Road and Joel Street
Mart Avenue Between Junior Drive and Linden
Boulevard
Mary Court/West Earl Drive/
Diane Court/East Earl Drive
Between Earl Drive and Earl Drive
Maurice River Parkway Between Landis Avenue and Almond
Road
Maurice River Parkway Between Almond Road and Garden Road
Mayer Street Between Chestnut Avenue and its
southerly limit
McClain Drive Between Franklin Drive and Baywood
Drive
McMahon Drive Between Magnolia Road and its
northerly limit
Menantico Road Between Brewster Road and Lincoln
Avenue
Michael Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and its westerly
limit
Mill Road Between Weymouth Road and Garden
Road
Mill Road Between Garden Road and Oak Road
Mill Road Between Oak Road and Almond Road
Mill Road Between Almond Road and Landis
Avenue
Mill Road Between Landis Avenue and its southerly
limit
Monarch Road Between Queens Road and Holmes
Avenue
Montrose Street Between West Avenue and N.J. Route 47
Mosswood Drive Between Elm Road and its southerly limit
Mountain Road Between High Ridge Road and its
westerly limit
Myrtle Street Between Florence Avenue and Chestnut
Avenue
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-36
1:1396
Name of Street Limits
Myrtle Street Between Chestnut Avenue and Landis
Avenue
Neptune Terrace Between Mars Place and Venus Drive
New Panther Road Between Piacenzia Avenue and Chestnut
Avenue
New Pear Street Between East Avenue and Valley Avenue
New Pear Street/Sutliff Avenue Between Valley Avenue and Adams
Avenue
North Fourth Street
(northbound) [Added
12-9-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-66]
Between West Park Avenue and
LaFrance Street
Nottingham Drive Between Chestnut Avenue and Berkshire
Drive
Oak Lane Between Oak Road and its northerly limit
Old Lake Road Between Columbia Avenue and its
easterly limit
Old Forest Road Between West Avenue and Northwest
Boulevard
Old Panther Road See Panther Road
Old Union Road Between Union Road and its easterly
limit
Osborne Avenue Between West Avenue and its westerly
limit
Oxford Street Between East Avenue and Northeast
Boulevard
Palermo Avenue Between Lincoln Avenue and Hance
Bridge Road
Panther Road Between Mays Landing Road, continuing
on Old Panther to Chestnut Avenue
Panther Road Between Chestnut Avenue and Landis
Avenue
Park Avenue Between Lubins Lane and N.J. Route 47
Park Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and West Avenue
Park Avenue Between West Avenue and Northwest
Boulevard
Park Avenue Between Northeast Boulevard and East
Avenue
Park Avenue Between East Avenue and Valley Avenue
Park Avenue Between Valley Avenue and Main Road
§ 694-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1397
Name of Street Limits
Park Drive Between Park Avenue and Northeast
Boulevard (The intersection of Park
Drive and East Boulevard is hereby
designated a four-way stop intersection.
Stop signs shall be installed on all
approaches of the intersection.)
Paterson Drive Between Magnolia Road and Franklin
Drive
Pats Lane Between Holmes Avenue and McMahon
Drive
Pennsylvania Avenue Between Lincoln Avenue and Hance
Bridge Road
Pennsylvania Avenue Between Hance Bridge Road and Mays
Landing Road
Perna Lane Between Sherman Avenue and its
northerly limit
Philip Street Between Main Road and its easterly limit
Piacenzia Avenue Between Panther Road and Union Road
Pine Street Between Park Drive and Oxford Street
Pine Grove Avenue Between Mill Road and its westerly limit
Pleasant Drive Between East Avenue and State Street
Prospect Avenue Between Strawberry Avenue and the
Gloucester County Line
Prospect Street Between Washington Avenue and
Chestnut Avenue
Queens Road Between Greenwillows Drive and Walnut
Road
Ramblewood Drive Between Oak Road and its northerly limit
Redcrest Drive Between Landis Avenue and its northerly
limit
Regina Elena Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and Burnt Mill
Road
Rita Avenue Between Panther Road and its westerly
limit
Robert Drive Between Weymouth Road and its
northerly limit
Roberts Boulevard See Almond Street/Roberts Boulevard
Robin Road Between Brown Road and Old Lake Road
Robin Street Between Maurice River Parkway and
Bird Street
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-36
1:1398
Name of Street Limits
Rogers Avenue Between Main Road and its easterly limit
Rome Road Between Hance Bridge Road and Fruit
Street
Roosevelt Boulevard Between Main Road and Spring Road
Rosemary Avenue Between Rita Avenue and its southerly
limit
Royal Drive Between Sharp Road and the easterly
limit of Kay Place
Samuel Drive Between Carlisle Drive and Orchard
Road
Sanford Drive/Heron Street Between Hance Bridge Road and the
easterly limit of Heron Street
Sarah Place/Yelkca Avenue Between Oak Road and West Avenue
Scarpa Drive Between Alps Place and its easterly limit
Second Street Between Chestnut Avenue and Elmer
Street
Second Street Between Wood Street and Park Avenue
Second Street Between Park Avenue and Laurel Street
Seventh Street Between Walnut Road and Chestnut
Avenue
Seventh Street Between Chestnut Avenue and Elmer
Street
Seventh Street Between Wood Street and Park Avenue
Sharp Road Between Valley Avenue and Main Road
Sheridan Avenue Between Southeast Boulevard and Main
Road
Sheridan Avenue Between Main Road and Lincoln Avenue
Sheridan Avenue Between Lincoln Avenue and Hance
Bridge Road
Sherwood Drive Between Magnolia Road and Cottonwood
Drive
Shirley Court/West Earl Drive
South
Between West Avenue and Diane Court
Simca Terrace Between Oak Road and its southerly limit
Sixth Street Between Walnut and Chestnut Avenue
Sixth Street [Amended
10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-78]
Between Chestnut Avenue and Almond
Street
Sixth Street Between Wood Street and Park Avenue
§ 694-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1399
Name of Street Limits
Spring Road Between Lincoln Avenue and Magnolia
Road (The intersection of Magnolia Road
and Spring Road is hereby designated as
a four-way stop intersection. Stop signs
shall be installed on all approaches to
the intersection.)
Spring Road Between Magnolia Road and Chestnut
Avenue
Spring Road Between Chestnut Avenue and Landis
Avenue
Spring Road Between Landis Avenue and Maple
Avenue
Stanley Terrace Between Weymouth Road and its
northerly limit
Starlet Drive Between Beacon Avenue and Butler
Avenue
State Street Between Elmer Road and Magnolia Road
State Street Between Chestnut Avenue and Florence
Avenue
State Street Between Chestnut Avenue and Landis
Avenue
Strawberry Avenue Between Northeast Boulevard and the
Gloucester County line
Summer Street Between Southeast Boulevard and Sixth
Street
Summit Street Between Northwest Boulevard and Third
Street
Sunset Avenue Between Mill Road and its westerly limit
Swallow Road Between Swan Drive and Brookfield
Street
Swan Drive Between Hance Bridge Road and Fruit
Street
Swan Drive Between Fruit Street and Swallow Road
Swenlin Drive Between Oak Road and Venus Drive
Third Street Between Axtell Avenue and Chestnut
Avenue
Third Street Between Chestnut Avenue and Elmer
Street
Third Street Between Wood Street and Park Avenue
Third Street Between Fenimore Street and Oak Road
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-36
1:1400
Name of Street Limits
Third Street Terrace Between Chestnut Avenue and Luciano
Avenue
Trento Avenue Between Panther Road and Cornucopia
Avenue
Trento Avenue Between Cornucopia Avenue and Union
Road
Utopia Lane Between Italia Avenue and Genoa
Avenue
Utopia Lane Between Genoa Avenue and its northerly
limit
Valley Avenue Between Walnut Road and Chestnut
Avenue
Valley Avenue Between Chestnut Avenue and Landis
Avenue
Valley Avenue Between Landis Avenue and Park Avenue
Valley Avenue Between Park Avenue and Oak Road
Valley Avenue Between Oak Road and Wheat Road
Venezia Avenue Between Dante Avenue and Hance
Bridge Road
Venus Drive Between Simca Terrace and its westerly
limit
Vineland Court/Joyce Lane Between Lincoln Avenue and Sheridan
Avenue
Vineland Court/Mildred Lane Between Lincoln Avenue and Sheridan
Avenue
Vine Road Between Main Road and Brewster Road
Vine Road Between Brewster Road and the Atlantic
County line
Virginia Avenue Between Park Avenue and New Pear
Street
Wallace Street Between Orchard Road and Taylor
Avenue
Walnut Road Between Mill Road and Orchard Road
Walnut Road Between Orchard Road and N.J. Route 47
Walnut Road Between N.J. Route 47 and West
Boulevard
§ 694-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1401
Name of Street Limits
Walnut Road Between East Boulevard and East
Avenue (The intersection of East Avenue
and Walnut Road is hereby designated as
a four-way stop intersection. Stop signs
shall be placed on the near right side of
all four approaches to the intersection.)
Walnut Road Between East Avenue and Main Road
Walnut Road Between Main Road and Spring Road
Washington Avenue Between Brentwood Drive and its
westerly limit
Washington Avenue Between Main Road and Spring Road
Washington Avenue Between Spring Road and Highland
Avenue
Washington Avenue Between Myrtle Street and State Street
Wayne Avenue Between West Avenue and its westerly
limit
Wendy Lane Between Sherman Avenue and its
southerly limit
West Avenue Between Foster Avenue and Walnut Road
West Avenue Between Walnut Road and Chestnut
Avenue
West Avenue Between Chestnut Avenue and Landis
Avenue
West Avenue Between Landis Avenue and Park Avenue
West Avenue Between Park Avenue and Oak Road
West Avenue Between Oak Road and Wheat Road
West Avenue Between Wheat Road and Garden Road
West Avenue Between Garden Road and Forest Grove
Road
West Avenue Between Forest Grove Road and Arbor
Avenue
West Avenue Between Arbor Avenue and Weymouth
Road
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Hennis Avenue and Butler
Avenue (The intersection of West
Boulevard and Butler Avenue is hereby
designated a multiway stop intersection.
Stop signs shall be installed on all
approaches to the intersection.)
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-36
1:1402
Name of Street Limits
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Butler Avenue and Sherman
Avenue (County Route 552) (The
intersection of West Boulevard and
Sherman Avenue is hereby designated a
four-way stop intersection. Stop signs
shall be installed on all approaches to
the intersection.)
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Sherman Avenue and Grant
Avenue (The intersection of West
Boulevard and Grant Avenue is hereby
designated a four-way stop intersection.
Stop signs shall be installed on all
approaches to the intersection.)
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Grant Avenue and Elmer Road
(The intersection of West Boulevard and
Elmer Road is hereby designated a fourway
stop intersection. Stop signs shall be
installed on all approaches to the
intersection.)
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Elmer Road and Chestnut
Avenue
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Chestnut Avenue and Grape
Street
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Grape Street and Elmer Street
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Elmer Street and Landis
Avenue
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Landis Avenue and Wood Street
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Wood Street and Plum Street
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
Between Plum Street and Park Avenue
West Boulevard [Amended
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
(All other sections of West Boulevard
between Sherman Avenue and Chestnut
Avenue and north of Park Avenue are
county roadways.)
Westwood Drive Between Elm Road and its southerly limit
Wilson Avenue/Hendricks Road Between Southwest Boulevard and
Sherman Avenue
Wood Street Between East Avenue and Seventh Street
Wood Street Between Sixth Street and West Avenue
§ 694-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-36
1:1403
Name of Street Limits
Woodcrest Drive/Laurie Lane/
Maria Place/Mullen Drive
Between Main Road and Woodcrest
Drive in a counterclockwise direction
Woodlawn Avenue Between Orchard Road and its easterly
limit
Woodlawn Avenue/Taylor
Avenue
Between Doren Terrace and Chestnut
Avenue
Wynnewood Drive/Redwood
Drive
From Dante Avenue, continuing on
Redwood Drive to Barry Drive
§ 694-37. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Almond Road (County Route
540) [Added 11-28-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-91]
Almond Road (County Route 450) and
Mill Road (all approaches)
Almond Street Columbia Avenue and Almond Street
Almond Street [Added
8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1226]
Howard Street and Almond Street
Clover Avenue Holmes Avenue and Clover Avenue
Coney Avenue Montrose Street and Coney Avenue
Cornucopia Avenue Genoa Avenue and Cornucopia Avenue
East Avenue [Added
5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-25]
East Avenue and Elmer Road (all
approaches)
East Avenue [Added
4-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-33]
East Avenue and Walnut Road (all
approaches)
East Avenue East Boulevard
[Added 11-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-76]
Strawberry Avenue and East Avenue
East Boulevard and Grant Avenue (all
approaches)
East Boulevard (part City street
and part county road)
[Amended 8-26-1975 by Ord.
No. 969; 5-27-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-34]
Oak Road and East Boulevard (four-way);
Park Drive and East Boulevard (fourway);
Wheat Road and East Boulevard
(four-way)
East Boulevard (County Route
615N) [Added 3-14-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-16]
East Boulevard (County Route 615N) and
Forest Grove Road (all approaches)
Elmer Road [Added 5-11-1999
by Ord. No. 99-25]
Elmer Road and East Avenue (all
approaches)
§ 694-36 VINELAND CODE § 694-37
1:1404
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Fava Drive [Added 2-27-1979
by Ord. No. 1151]
State Street and Fava Drive
Grandview Avenue Maple Avenue and Grandview Avenue
Grape Street [Added
10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-78]
Grape Street and Sixth Street
Howard Street [Added
8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1226]
Almond Street and Howard Street
Iris Avenue Harding Road and Iris Avenue
Magnolia Road [Added
4-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-32]
Magnolia Road and Spring Road (all
approaches)
Mayfair Street Fairmount Avenue and Mayfair Street
Mayfair Street Maple Avenue and Mayfair Street
Mayfair Street Sharp Road and Mayfair Street
Mill Road [Added 11-28-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-91]
Mill Road and Almond Road (County
Route 540) (all approaches)
Mill Road [Added 2-10-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-6]
Oak Road (CR 681) and Mill Road (all
approaches)
Oak Road (CR 681) [Added
2-10-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-6]
Oak Road (CR 681) and Mill Road (all
approaches)
Quigley Avenue Park Avenue and Quigley Avenue
Second Street Laurel Street and Second Street
Sixth Street [Added
10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-78]
Sixth Street and Almond Street
Spring Road [Added
4-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-32]
Magnolia Road and Spring Road (all
approaches)
Third Street Fenimore Street and Third Street
Walnut Road [Added
4-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-33]
East Avenue and Walnut Road (all
approaches)
West Boulevard [Added
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-76]
West Boulevard and Grant Avenue (all
approaches)
West Boulevard (part City street
and part county road)
[Amended 8-26-1975 by Ord.
No. 969; 5-27-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-34]
Oak Road and West Boulevard (fourway);
Wheat Road and West Boulevard
(four-way)
West Boulevard (County Route
615S) [Added 3-14-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-16]
West Boulevard (County Route 615S) and
Forest Grove Road (all approaches)
§ 694-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-38
1:1405
§ 694-38. Schedule IX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-13, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
East Boulevard [Added
5-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-23]
East Side Beginning at a point 137 feet north
of the center line of Landis Avenue
and extending to a point 50 feet
north thereof Location
East Boulevard West Beginning at a point 30 feet south of
the south curbline of Elmer Street
and extending to a point 63 feet
south thereof
East Elmer Street
[Added 12-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-58]
South Beginning at the east curbline of
Sixth Street and extending to a point
113 feet east thereof
Eighth Street West Beginning at a point 54 feet north of
the north curbline of Wood Street
and extending to a point 50 feet
north thereof
Montrose Street
[Repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-78]
North Sixth Street
[Repealed 11-27-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-93]
Plum Street [Amended
2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
98-8]
South Beginning at a point 41 feet east of
the east curbline of Sixth Street and
extending to a point 50 feet east
thereof
Seventh Street
[Amended 4-9-1991
by Ord. No. 91-25]
West Beginning at a point 39 feet south of
the south curbline of Landis Avenue
and extending to a point 50 feet
south thereof
Sixth Street East Beginning at a point 30 feet south of
the south curbline of Landis Avenue
and extending to a point 81 feet
south thereof
Sixth Street [Repealed
2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
98-8]
West Boulevard West Beginning at a point 30 feet south of
the south curbline of Elmer Street
and extending to a point 63 feet
south thereof
§ 694-38 VINELAND CODE § 694-38
1:1406
Name of Street Side Location
Wood Street North Beginning at a point 171 feet east of
the east curbline of Seventh Street
and extending to a point 50 feet east
thereof
Wood Street North Beginning at a point 225 feet east of
the east curbline of Seventh Street
and extending to a point 50 feet east
thereof
Wood Street North Beginning at a point 87 feet west of
the west curbline of Seventh Street
and extending to a point 63 feet west
thereof
Wood Street South Beginning at a point 240 feet east of
the east curbline of Sixth Street and
extending to a point 50 feet east
thereof
§ 694-39. Schedule X: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-14, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
East Boulevard West Beginning at a point 45 feet north of
the north curbline of Landis Avenue
and extending to a point 42 feet
north thereof
Roadway around the park at Landis Avenue and Southeast Boulevard (also
known as Lucina Park) [Added 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-26; repealed
6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-50]
Roadway around the park at Landis Avenue and Northeast Boulevard (also
known as Arminava Park) [Added 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-26;
repealed 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-50]
Roadway around the park at Landis Avenue and Northwest Boulevard
(also known as Artillery Park) [Added 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-26;
repealed 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-50]
Roadway around the park at Landis Avenue and Southwest Boulevard
(also known as Torpedo Park) [Added 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-26;
repealed 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-50]
Southwest Boulevard
[Added 4-9-1991 by
Ord. No 91-26;
amended 6-9-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-39]
East From a point 35 feet south of the
south curbline of Landis Avenue to a
point 267 feet south thereof
§ 694-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-40
1:1407
§ 694-40. Schedule XI: Bus Stops. [Added 5-27-1980 by Ord. No.
1215; amended 11-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-42; 8-11-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-34; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-49; 3-28-1989 by Ord. No.
89-18; 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-92; 9-11-1990 by Ord. No. 90-84;
12-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-98; 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-48;
5-26-1998 by Ord. No. 98-40]
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-15, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
A. Route 47 (Delsea Drive). [Amended 7-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-32]
(1) Along Route 47 (Delsea Drive), northbound, on the easterly side
thereof, at:
(a) Hennis Road and College Drive, mid block, beginning 860 feet
north of the northerly curbline of Hennis Road and extending
175 feet northerly therefrom.
(b) Sherman Avenue and Grant Avenue, mid block, beginning 210
feet north of the northerly curbline of Sherman Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(c) Grant Avenue and Garrison Avenue, mid block, beginning 225
feet north of the northerly curbline of Grant Avenue and
extending 150 feet northerly therefrom.
(d) Landis Avenue and Park Avenue, mid block, beginning 260 feet
north of the northerly curbline of Landis Avenue and extending
100 feet northerly therefrom.
(e) Grubb Road, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Grubb Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Along Route 47 (Delsea Drive), southbound, on the westerly side
thereof, at:
(a) Grubb Road, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Grubb Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(b) Forest Grove Road, far side, beginning at the southerly
curbline of Forest Grove Road and extending 100 feet
southerly therefrom.
(c) West Walnut Road and Hickory Drive, mid block, beginning 75
feet north of the northerly curbline of West Walnut Road and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(d) North Korff Drive and Michael Avenue, mid block, beginning
75 feet north of the northerly curbline of North Korff Drive and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
§ 694-40 VINELAND CODE § 694-40
1:1408
(e) Hennis Road and College Drive, mid block, beginning 890 feet
north of the northerly curbline of Hennis Road and extending
130 feet northerly therefrom.
B. Landis Avenue.
(1) Along Landis Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof, at:
(a) Coney Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Coney Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) West Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
West Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(c) 4th Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 4th
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(d) (Reserved)303
(e) 8th Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 8th
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(f) Arcadia Street (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Arcadia Street and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(g) Howard Street (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Howard Street and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(h) Valley Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Valley Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(i) Main Road (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Main Road and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(j) Main Road (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Main Road and extending 185 feet easterly therefrom.
(k) Spring Road (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Spring Road and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(l) Highland Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline
of Highland Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(m) Brewster Road (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Brewster Road and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(n) A point between Giampietro Park entrance and Lincoln Avenue
(midblock), beginning 805 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Lincoln Avenue and extending 125 feet westerly therefrom.
(o) Lincoln Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Lincoln Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
303. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1)(d), listing 6th Street (near side), was repealed
9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-32.
§ 694-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-40
1:1409
(2) Along Landis Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side thereof, at:
(a) A point between Lincoln Avenue and Giampietro Park entrance
(midblock), beginning 500 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Lincoln Avenue and extending 125 feet westerly therefrom.
[Amended 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(b) Brewster Road (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Brewster Road and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(c) Eastwood Drive (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline
of Eastwood Drive and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(d) Spring Road (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Spring Road and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(e) Main Road (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Main Road and extending 280 feet easterly therefrom.
(f) Valley Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Valley Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(g) Columbia Avenue (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline
of Columbia Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom.
(h) Ewan Terrace (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Ewan Terrace and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(i) 8th Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of 8th
Street and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(j) (Reserved)304
(k) 4th Street (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 4th
Street and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(l) West Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
West Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(m) Coney Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Coney Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
C. Along East Boulevard, northbound, on the easterly side thereof, at:
(1) Oak Road (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of Oak
Road and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.305
(2) Garden Road (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Garden Road and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
304. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2)(j), listing 6th Street (far side), was repealed
9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-32.
305. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), regarding bus stops on La France Street, which
immediately preceded this entry, was repealed 4-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-23.
§ 694-40 VINELAND CODE § 694-40
1:1410
(3) Arbor Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Arbor Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(4) Park Drive (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of Park
Drive and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom. [Added
4-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-23]
(5) Park Drive and Vietnam Way (midblock), beginning 130 feet south
of the southerly curbline of Park Drive and extending 135 feet
southerly therefrom. [Added 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-47]
D. Along West Boulevard, southbound, on the westerly side thereof, at:
(1) Arbor Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Arbor Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Garden Road (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Garden Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) Oak Road (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of Oak
Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(4) Fenimore Street and LaFrance Street (midblock), beginning 225
feet south of the southerly curbline of Fenimore Street and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 4-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-23;306 amended 8-26-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-47]
E. Main Road.
(1) Along Main Road, northbound on the easterly side thereof, at:
(a) Butler Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Butler Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(b) Grant Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Grant Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(c) Elmer Road (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Elmer Road and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(d) Walnut Road (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Walnut Road and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(e) Chestnut Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly
curbline of Chestnut Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
(f) Sherman Avenue (far side), beginning at a point 100 feet north
of the northerly curbline of Sherman Avenue and extending
306. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection D(4), regarding bus stops
on La France Street,
§ 694-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-40
1:1411
§ 694-41. Schedule XII: School Bus Reserved Parking Areas. [Added
12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-91]
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-16, the following areas are
reserved for school bus parking only:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
100 feet northerly therefrom. [Added 8-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-37]
(2) Along Main Road, southbound on the westerly side thereof, at:
(a) Chestnut Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Chestnut Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
(b) Walnut Road (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Walnut Road and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(c) Elmer Road (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Elmer Road and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(d) Grant Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Grant Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(e) Butler Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Butler Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(f) Sherman Avenue (near side), beginning at a point 60 feet south
of the southerly curbline of Sherman Avenue and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 8-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-37]
F. Sherman Avenue. [Added 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-73]
(1) Along Sherman Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side thereof,
at:
(a) A point between Delsea Drive and Orchard Road, beginning at
a point 1,890 feet west of the westerly curbline of Delsea Drive
and extending 125 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Along Sherman Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof,
at:
(a) A point between Orchard Road and Delsea Drive beginning at a
point 1,755 east of the easterly curbline of Orchard Road and
extending 125 feet easterly therefrom.
§ 694-40 VINELAND CODE § 694-41.1
1:1412
§ 694-41.1. No parking/bus stop zones. [Added 9-24-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-45]
The following described locations are hereby designated as "no parking/bus
stop" zones, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-8e:
§ 694-42. Schedule XIII: Left-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-17, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
Locations
From the south side of Chestnut Avenue, between Brewster Road and
Lincoln Avenue. Monday through Friday, between 7:15 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
and between 2:00 p.m. and 2:45 p.m., when school is in session [Added
7-23-1985 by Ord. No. 85-30]
North on East Boulevard to west on Landis Avenue
North on East Boulevard to west on Park Avenue [Added 2-27-1979 by
Ord. No. 1151]
South on East Boulevard to east on Park Avenue [Added 2-27-1979 by
Ord. No. 1151]
East on Landis Avenue to north on East Boulevard
West on Landis Avenue to south on West Boulevard
North on the street located in the public square at the southwest corner of
Landis Avenue and West Boulevard to west on Landis Avenue [Repealed
6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-50]
South on the street located in the public square at the northeast corner of
Landis Avenue and East Boulevard to east on Landis Avenue [Repealed
6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-50]
South on West Boulevard to east on Landis Avenue
South on West Boulevard to east on Park Avenue [Added 2-27-1979 by
Ord. No. 1151]
Westbound from the most northerly driveway of the Cumberland Mall to
southbound onto Route NJ 47 [Added 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-26]
A. Along County Route 552 (Mayslanding Road), eastbound, on the
southerly side thereof at:
(1) Union Road (midblock), beginning 2,800 feet from the easterly
curbline of Union Road and extending 135 feet easterly therefrom.
B. Along County Route 552 (Mayslanding Road), westbound, on the
northerly side thereof at:
(1) Union Road (midblock), beginning 2,800 feet from the easterly
curbline of Union Road and extending 135 feet easterly therefrom.
§ 694-41.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-42
1:1413
Locations
Route NJ 47 [Added 11-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-92; repealed
4-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-26]
Southbound on South Delsea Drive shall be permitted to negotiate a left
turn so as to enter the property located on the southeast corner of South
Delsea Drive and West Sherman Avenue, also known as Block 1053, Lots
13 and 13.03, on the Tax Map of the City of Vineland [Added 6-26-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-50]
§ 694-43. Schedule XIV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-18, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Landis Avenue From Myrtle Street to West Avenue
§ 694-44. Schedule XV: Right Turn Only.
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-19A, all persons shall make a
right turn only at any of the following locations:
Locations
East on Almond Road to south on N.J. Route 47
West on Almond Road to north on N.J. Route 47 [Added 1-13-2004 by
Ord. No. 2003-75]
§ 694-45. Schedule XVI: Right Turn on Red Prohibited. [Added
7-26-1977 by Ord. No. 1085]
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-19B, no person shall turn a
vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop)
indication at any of the following locations whenever an official sign is
present prohibiting such a turn on the red signal:
Location Prohibited Right Turn
Chestnut Avenue and Valley
Avenue [Added 5-11-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-41]
From north on Valley Avenue to east
on Chestnut Avenue
Chestnut Avenue and Valley
Avenue [Added 5-11-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-41]
From south on Valley Avenue to west
on Chestnut Avenue
East Avenue and Montrose Street [Repealed 5-28-1991 by Ord. No.
91-35]
Elmer Street and Seventh Street
[Amended 5-28-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-35]
From north on Seventh Street to east
on Elmer Street from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday through Friday
§ 694-42 VINELAND CODE § 694-45
1:1414
Location Prohibited Right Turn
Elmer Street and Sixth Street From east on Elmer Street to south on
Sixth Street
Landis Avenue and East Avenue All
Landis Avenue and East Boulevard From north on East Boulevard to east
on Landis Avenue and from west on
Landis Avenue to north on East
Boulevard
Landis Avenue and Eighth Street From south on Eighth Street to west
on Landis Avenue and from east on
Landis Avenue to south on Eighth
Street
Landis Avenue and Fourth Street From north on Fourth Street to east on
Landis Avenue and from south on
Fourth Street to west on Landis
Avenue
Landis Avenue and Lincoln
Avenue [Added 8-25-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-68]
All
Landis Avenue and Main Road
[Added 8-25-1992 by Ord. No.
92-68]
All
Landis Avenue and Myrtle Street From west on Landis Avenue to north
on Myrtle Street and from east on
Landis Avenue to south on Myrtle
Street during hours from 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
Landis Avenue and Myrtle Street From north on Myrtle Street to east on
Landis Avenue and from south on
Myrtle Street to west on Landis
Avenue
Landis Avenue and Second Street From north on Second Street to east
on Landis Avenue and from south on
Second Street to west on Landis
Avenue
Landis Avenue and Seventh Street From north on Seventh Street to east
on Landis Avenue and from west on
Landis Avenue to north on Seventh
Street
Landis Avenue and Sixth Street From south on Sixth Street to west on
Landis Avenue and from east on
Landis Avenue to south on Sixth Street
§ 694-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-45
1:1415
Location Prohibited Right Turn
Landis Avenue and Third Street From north on Third Street to east on
Landis Avenue and from south on
Third Street to west on Landis Avenue
Landis Avenue and West Avenue All
Landis Avenue and West
Boulevard
From south on West Boulevard to west
on Landis Avenue and from east on
Landis Avenue to south on West
Boulevard
Main Road and Chestnut Avenue
[Added 8-25-1992 by Ord. No.
92-68]
All
Main Road and Sherman Avenue
[Added 8-25-1992 by Ord. No.
92-68]
From east on Sherman Avenue to
south on Main Road and from west on
Sherman Avenue to north on Main
Road
Park Avenue and East Avenue From north on East Avenue to east on
Park Avenue and from west on Park
Avenue to north on East Avenue
Park Avenue and West Avenue
[Repealed 2-8-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-5]
South East Boulevard and
Sherman Avenue [Added
2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5]
From southbound on South East
Boulevard to west on Sherman Avenue
South West Boulevard and
Sherman Avenue [Added
2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5]
From northbound on South West
Boulevard to east on Sherman Avenue
Wood Street and Seventh Street From west on Wood Street to north on
Seventh Street
Wood Street and Sixth Street From south on Sixth Street to west on
Wood Street
§ 694-46. Schedule XVII: Left Lane Must Turn Left. [Added
5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 1161]
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-20, all persons using the left lane
must turn left at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Approach At Intersection of
Chestnut Avenue Both Brewster Road
Chestnut Avenue [Added
8-28-1979 by Ord. No.
1172]
Both Main Road
§ 694-45 VINELAND CODE § 694-46
1:1416
Name of Street
Direction of
Approach At Intersection of
Chestnut Avenue Both Spring Road
Main Road [Added
8-28-1979 by Ord. No.
1172]
Both Chestnut Avenue
§ 694-47. Schedule XVIII: Center Lane Left Turn Only. [Added
5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 1161]
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-21, all persons shall make a left
turn only from the center lane at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Approach Location
Chestnut Avenue Both From a point 210 feet east of the
curbline of Brewster Road to a
point 1,895 feet east of the east
curbline of Brewster Road
§ 694-48. Schedule XIX: Vehicles Over Certain Weights Excluded.
[Added 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 86-28; amended 11-22-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-88; 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-24]
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-24, vehicles in excess of the
gross weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following described
streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup or delivery of goods,
materials or freight on said streets:
Name of Street
Weight
Limit
(tons) Location
Almond Street 4 From Delsea Drive east to
West Avenue*
Axtell Avenue [Repealed
9-12-1995 by Ord. No.
95-57]
Axtell Avenue [Added
9-12-1995 by Ord. No.
95-57; amended 5-28-1996
by Ord. No. 96-41]
4 From West Boulevard to
White Street
Bradford Drive [Added
1-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2003-74]
4 From Walnut Road to
Chestnut Avenue
§ 694-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-48
1:1417
Name of Street
Weight
Limit
(tons) Location
Columbia Avenue [Added
10-22-1996 by Ord. No.
96-84]
4 From Landis Avenue to
Chestnut Avenue
Grubb Road [Added
10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-67]
4 Between Route NJ 47 and the
Vineland City-Franklin
Township corporate line
Grubb Road [Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-87;repealed
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-67]
Holly Hill Terrace 4 From Chestnut Avenue north
to Almond Street*
Jackson Drive [Added
1-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2003-74]
4 From Mill Road to Bradford
Drive
Luciano Avenue 4 From West Boulevard to
Third Street
Maurice River Parkway
[Added 11-22-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-88]
4 From Landis Avenue to
Garden Road
Melrose Street 4 From Almond Street south to
Chestnut Avenue*
Nottingham Drive [Added
1-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2003-74]
4 From Berkshire Drive to
Chestnut Avenue
Third Street 4 From Chestnut Avenue to
Axtell Avenue
Tulip Street [Added
1-11-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-73]
4 From Seventh Street to the
easterly terminus of Tulip
Street
Villa Avenue 4 From West Boulevard to
Third Street
West Avenue [Added
12-27-1994 by Ord. No.
94-93; amended 5-28-1996
by Ord. No. 96-41]
4 From Chestnut Avenue to
Walnut Road
White Street [Added
9-12-1995 by Ord. No.
95-57; amended 5-28-1996
by Ord. No. 96-41]
4 From Walnut Road to Axtell
Avenue
§ 694-48 VINELAND CODE § 694-48
1:1418
* NOTE: This exclusion is necessitated since this is a residential
neighborhood with secondary roads of insufficient width to safely
accommodate two-way traffic which would include vehicles over four tons.
§ 694-49. Schedule XX: Handicapped Parking Spaces. [Added
2-13-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
In accordance with the provisions of Article XII, the following described
locations are hereby designated as handicapped parking spaces:
Name of Street Side Limits
East Boulevard [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
East From a point 147 feet north of
the north curbline of Landis
Avenue to a point 50 feet north
thereof
Earl Drive [Added
2-27-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-4]
West From a point 70 feet south of the
south curbline of Chestnut
Avenue to a point 25 feet south
therefrom
East Wood Street [Added
9-11-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-72]
North From a point 87 feet east of the
easterly curbline of North Eighth
Street to a point 25 feet easterly
thereof
Grape Street South From a point 265 feet east of the
east curbline of Third Street to a
point 20 feet easterly thereof
Juliana Drive [Added
5-12-1992 by Ord. No.
92-31]
East From a point 46 feet north of the
north curbline of Mayfair Court
to a point 25 feet north thereof
Juliana Drive [Added
5-12-1992 by Ord. No.
92-31]
East From a point 91 feet north of the
north curbline of Mayfair Court
to a point 25 feet north thereof
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
North From a point 187 feet west of the
center line of the railroad tracks
to a point 28 feet west thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
North From a point 79 feet west of the
west curbline of East Avenue to a
point 26 feet west thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
North From a point 59 feet west of the
west curbline of Eighth Street to
a point 31 feet west thereof as
measured along the curb
§ 694-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-49
1:1419
Name of Street Side Limits
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
North From a point 144 feet west of the
west curbline of Fourth Street to
a point 26 feet west thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
North From a point 99 feet west of the
west curbline of Myrtle Street to
a point 26 feet west thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
North From a point 70 feet west of the
west curbline of Second Street to
a point 26 feet west thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
North From a point 58 feet west of the
west curbline of Seventh Street
to a point 26 feet west thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
North From a point 122 feet west of the
west curbline of Sixth Street to a
point 26 feet west thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
North From a point 61 feet west of the
west curbline of Third Street to a
point 26 feet west thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
South From a point 179 feet east of the
center line of the railroad tracks
to a point 26 feet east thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
South From a point 159 feet east of the
east curbline of East Avenue to a
point 26 feet east thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
South From a point 57 feet east of the
east curbline of Eighth Street to
a point 27 feet east thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
South From a point 161 feet east of the
east curbline of Fourth Street to
a point 26 feet east thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
South From a point 56 feet east of the
east curbline of Seventh Street to
a point 33 feet east thereof as
measured along the curb
§ 694-49 VINELAND CODE § 694-49
1:1420
Name of Street Side Limits
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
South From a point 51 feet east of the
east curbline of Sixth Street to a
point 26 feet east thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
South From a point 167 feet east of the
east curbline of Third Street to a
point 26 feet east thereof as
measured along the curb
Landis Avenue [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
South From a point 166 feet east of the
east curbline of West Avenue to a
point 26 feet east thereof as
measured along the curb
Myrtle Street [Added
3-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-11]
East From a point 280 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Michigan Avenue to a point 25
feet north thereof
North Third Street [Added
9-11-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-72]
East From a point 168 feet north of
the northerly curbline of West
Wood Street to a point 25 feet
northerly thereof
Seventh Street [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
East From a point 39 feet north of the
north curbline of Landis Avenue
to a point 33 feet north thereof
Seventh Street [Added 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-35; repealed
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11]
Sixth Street [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
East From a point 116 feet south of
the south curbline of Plum Street
to a point 22 feet south thereof
Sixth Street [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
94-47]
East From a point 199 feet south of
the south curbline of Plum Street
to a point 22 feet south thereof
Sixth Street [Added
5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
92-36]
East From a point 127 feet north of
the north curbline of Wood Street
to a point 50 feet north thereof
Sixth Street [Added
1-28-1992 by Ord. No.
92-5]
East From a point 41 feet south of the
south curbline of Elmer Street to
a point 50 feet south thereof
South Eighth Street [Added
4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-11]
West From a point 132 feet south of
the southerly curbline of East
Quince Street to a point 25 feet
south thereof
South Sixth Street [Added 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-6; repealed
6-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-49]
§ 694-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-49
1:1421
Name of Street Side Limits
South Third Street [Added
10-24-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-83]
West From a point 41 feet south of the
south curbline of West Quince
Street to a point 25 feet south
thereof
Washington Avenue [Added
6-23-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-39; 12-22-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-79]
North From a point 185 feet east of the
easterly curbline of South Sixth
Street to a point 25 feet easterly
thereof
West Almond Street [Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-41]
South From a point 136 feet west of the
westerly curbline of South West
Boulevard to a point 25 feet
westerly thereof
West Grade Street [Added
1-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-3]
South From a point 90 feet east of the
easterly curbline of South Fourth
Street to a point 25 feet easterly
thereof
§ 694-50. Schedule XXI: No-Passing Zones. [Added 3-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-17]
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-26, no-passing zones are hereby
established and shall be maintained upon the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Limits
Franklin Drive [Added
2-14-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-10]
Both From Spring Road to Brewster
Road for an approximate distance
of 3,480 feet
Maple Avenue [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-100]
Both From Main Road (County Route
555) to the east City line
Piacenzia Avenue Both From New Panther Road to Union
Road (County Route 671), a
distance of 7,260 feet
§ 694-51. Schedule XXII: Midblock Crosswalks. [Added 7-9-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-45]
In accordance with the provisions of § 694-27, midblock crosswalks are
hereby established and shall be maintained upon the following described
streets or parts of streets:
§ 694-49 VINELAND CODE § 694-51
1:1422
Name of Street Location
Land Street [Added 9-27-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-34]
Beginning at a point 409 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Seventh Street
and extending to a point 10 feet
westerly therefrom
Land Street [Added 9-27-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-34]
Beginning at a point 434 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Seventh Street
and extending to a point 10 feet
easterly therefrom
North Myrtle Street From a point 260 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Landis Avenue
and extending to a point six feet
northerly therefrom
Park Drive [Added 8-26-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-48]
Beginning at a point 190 feet north of
the northerly curbline of East Park
Avenue (County Route 540) and
extending to a point 10 feet northerly
therefrom
§ 694-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-51
1:1423

ARTICLE XVIA
Bicycle Lanes
[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-20]
§ 694-51.1. Bicycle lanes established.
The certain parts of Elmer Street and Wood Street described in this section
are hereby designated and established as bicycle lanes. No vehicle other
than a bicycle shall be permitted the use of said lane.
Name of Street Side Direction Limits
Elmer Street North Eastbound From West Avenue to East
Avenue
Wood Street South Westbound From East Avenue to West
Avenue
§ 694-51.2. Signs.
Signs shall be erected and maintained as authorized by the Commissioner
of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
§ 694-51.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-51.2
1:1425

Part 2
[Adopted 8-13-1974 By OSnrdo.w N Eom. 9e3rg7e(nCchie. s442, Part 2, Of The 1990
Code)]
ARTICLE XVII
Snow Emergency Parking Regulations
§ 694-52. Designation of no-parking areas.
§ 694-53. Posting of signs; notification.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on the following
streets or highways or portions thereof:
Name of Street Location
Chestnut Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and Main Road
East Avenue Between Chestnut Avenue and Park
Avenue
East Boulevard Between Chestnut Avenue and Park
Avenue
Elmer Street Entire length
Landis Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and Main Road
Park Avenue Between N.J. Route 47 and Main Road
West Avenue Between Chestnut Avenue and Park
Avenue
West Boulevard Between Chestnut Avenue and Park
Avenue
Wood Street Entire length
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 694-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-54
1:1427
§ 694-54. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this Part 2 shall
be deemed to be a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation
of traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 694-55. Effectiveness of regulations.
The effectiveness of this Part 2 is contingent upon signs being erected as
required by law.
§ 694-56. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this Part 2 or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both.
§ 694-54 VINELAND CODE § 694-56
1:1428
Part 3
[Adopted 8-10-1976 By OrdP.u Nboli.c 1 S0c2h7oo(Clsh. 442, Part 3, Of The 1990
Code)]
ARTICLE XVIII
Vineland High School Complex
§ 694-57. Speed limits.
Speed limits for both directions of traffic along roadways within the
Vineland High School Complex shall be established as follows:
§ 694-58. One-way streets.
The roadways or parts thereof within the Vineland High School Complex are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated on a plan
entitled "Vineland High School, Existing Parking and Traffic Pattern, Dated
March 26, 1976," said plan being on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
City of Vineland.
§ 694-59. Erection of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits and one-way streets as authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
A. Twenty miles per hour along the roadway from Brewster Road East to
the roadway abutting the west side of the northwest parking area
within the Vineland High School Complex.
B. Fifteen miles per hour on all other roadways of the Vineland High
School Complex, for directions of traffic as shown on a plan entitled
"Vineland High School, Existing Parking and Traffic Pattern, Dated
March 26, 1976," said plan being on file in the office of the Clerk of the
City of Vineland.
§ 694-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-59
1:1429

Part 4
[Adopted 8-24-1976 By OSrdh.o pNpoi.n 1g0 C3e1n(tCehrs. 442, Part 4, Of The 1990
Code)]
ARTICLE XIX
Cumberland Mall and K-Mart Shopping Center
§ 694-60. Stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time on either side of
the roadways entering Cumberland Mall and K-Mart Shopping Center,
beginning at a point 150 feet east of the easterly curbline of N.J. Route 47
to a point 150 feet west of the westerly curbline of N.J. Route 47.
§ 694-61. Erection of signs.
Regulatory signs shall be erected by the Police Department to effect the
above designations.
§ 694-62. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this Part 4 shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $25 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 694-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-62
1:1431

Part 5
[Adopted 11-27A-1u9to7m9 aBtyicO Trrda.ffi Nco .C 1o1n9tr0o(lC Shig. n4a4l2s, Part 5, Of The
1990 Code)]
ARTICLE XX
Traffic Signal Installation
§ 694-63. Designation of intersections.
An automatic traffic control signal shall be installed and operated at the
following intersections in the City of Vineland:
Intersection
Chestnut Avenue and State Street [Added 4-14-1992 by Ord. No.
92-20]
Landis Avenue and Spring Road [Added 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-89]
Lincoln Avenue and Landis Avenue [Added 11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
92-89]
Main Road and Chestnut Avenue
Main Road and Grant Avenue [Added 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-89]
Main Road and Magnolia Road [Added 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-89]
Orchard Road and Chestnut Avenue [Added 11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
92-89]
Sherman Avenue and Main Road [Added 11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
92-89]
Sherman Avenue and Orchard Road [Added 11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
92-89]
West Landis Avenue at WalMart Drive (WalMart Shopping Center) (Plan
LTS-6251) [Added 1-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-89]
§ 694-64. Compliance with state regulation.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated and as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
§ 694-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-64
1:1433

Part 6
[Adopted 1-9-2001 By OGrde.n Neroa. l2 P0e0n0a-1lt0ie0s(Ch. 442, Part 6, Of The
1990 Code)]
ARTICLE XXI
Failure To Follow Posted Regulations or Lawful Orders
§ 694-65. Violations and penalties.307
A. No person shall disobey or fail to follow the traffic instructions on any
properly posted traffic control device or traffic signal within the City.
B. No person shall disobey or fail to follow the order, direction or other
signal of any police officer, sheriff's officer, New Jersey state trooper or
any other properly authorized law enforcement officer within the City.
C. Any person convicted of violating any provision of Chapter 694 shall be
liable under the appropriate New Jersey statute or City Code provision.
D. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Part 6 regarding
posted traffic regulations and lawful orders of law enforcement officers
shall be fined no less than $50 nor more than $200 for each offense.
307. Editor's Note: See also the following specific penalty sections in this chapter: §§ 694-28,
694-29, 694-56 and 694-62.
§ 694-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-65
1:1435

ARTICLE XXII
Reimbursement for Mailbox Damage
[Added 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-22]
§ 694-66. Intent; reimbursement.
§ 694-67. Eligibility.
The reimbursement provisions of this article shall only apply to those
residents who satisfy the following criteria:
A. It is the intent of this article to establish uniform procedures to
reimburse residents for damage to mailboxes and incidental damage
caused to real property due to snow-removal operations. The City's
primary obligation is to ensure that its roadways are as clear as
possible of snow or ice. It is also understood that most mailboxes are
located within the public right-of-way, and therefore while fulfilling the
primary objective, mailboxes and real property may be unintentionally
and unavoidably damaged. This policy assumes there is a shared
responsibility between the City of Vineland and the homeowner when
mailboxes located in the public right-of-way are damaged during snowremoval
operations.
B. While there is no legal requirement imposed upon the City of Vineland,
it is the policy of the City of Vineland to reimburse residents up to $75
for eligible damage to mailboxes caused by direct plow contact on the
part of the City of Vineland Department of Public Works and
reimbursement up to $150 for all incidental damage to real property.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to entitle any resident to
reimbursement for damage caused by the weight or placement of
thrown snow, nor shall this article be construed to entitle any resident
to reimbursement prior to an investigation and determination by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works that the claimed
damage is eligible for reimbursement pursuant to this article.
A. The mailbox is securely fastened to a sturdy post which is sufficiently
anchored in the ground to resist the impact of plowed snows.
B. The damaged mailbox and/or post must meet the requirements of the
United States Postal Service, as well as all other applicable regulations
in regard to construction and location. Mailboxes that do not meet the
requirements of the United States Postal Service and/or any other
applicable regulations, and the incidental damage to realty resulting
therefrom, are not eligible for reimbursement.
C. The damage must have been caused by direct contact with City plows or
snow-removal equipment. The City of Vineland will not provide
reimbursement for damage to mailboxes, posts and the incidental
damage to realty resulting therefrom caused solely by snow thrown
from City of Vineland plows or snow-removal equipment.
§ 694-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 694-67
1:1437
§ 694-68. Procedure; investigation.
D. The resident must notify the City within seven days of the date the
damage occurred, unless the resident was out of town, in which case
the City of Vineland must be notified of the damage within seven days of
the resident's return. Damage reported outside of this time frame will
not be eligible for reimbursement.
A. Within the time period described above, a resident making a claim for
reimbursement pursuant to this article shall contact the Department of
Public Works to file the claim.
B. After submission of the claim, the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works shall investigate the alleged damage to determine if the
damage was caused by the plow blade or vehicle itself, rather than
thrown snow. A written response on the findings of the investigation
will be mailed to the resident.
C. If it is determined the mailbox and/or the realty was damaged by the
plow blade or vehicle, the resident will be reimbursed in an amount not
to exceed $75 for a new mailbox and/or post and an amount not to
exceed $150 for the incidental damage to realty resulting therefrom. If
it is determined that the damage was not caused by the plow blade or
vehicle, no reimbursement will be given. All actual repairs and/or
replacements shall be the responsibility of the Department of Public
Works.
§ 694-67 VINELAND CODE § 694-68
1:1438
Chapter 700
VEHICLES, MOTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 469. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 694.
§ 700-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control and regulate motorcycles, bikes
and all terrain vehicles, as defined in N.J.S.A. § 39:1-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
§ 39:3C-1 et seq., in order to preserve the public peace and order and
protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public of the City of
Vineland.
§ 700-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or similar apparatus designed
to travel over any terrain, of a type possessing between three and six rubber
tires and Dowered by a gasoline or other type engine. This chapter shall not
apply to lawn mowers, tractors or farm, lawn, garden or similar equipment
when used for purposes for which they were designed.
MOTORCYCLE — Any two-wheeled, motor-propelled apparatus, licensed by
the State of New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, for operation upon the
public highways.
MOTORIZED SPORTBIKE —
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All lands in the City of Vineland not defined as
public property or part of the road system.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Lands located in the City of Vineland, the County
of Cumberland, the State of New Jersey, and/or lands owned or leased
by the Vineland Public Schools, or any other equivalent public body, but
specifically excluding therefrom any roadways being used for public
Any two-, three- or four-wheeled device or similar apparatus, motorpropelled
and commonly referred to as a "moped," "minibike," "gocart,"
"dune buggy," "motor scooter," "trail-bike," or the like which.
by its nature, is not authorized to be licensed by the State of New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, for use upon the public highways,
notwithstanding the fact that licensing of the same in some instances
may not be required for operation upon the public highways.
A.
A snowmobile and any similar sport vehicle which is motor-propelled
and traverses the terrain by means of treads, tracks or the like.
B.
§ 694-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 700-2
1:1439
transportation and being part of the accepted road system of the City, the
County, or the State.
§ 700-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful:
A. Operation on public or private property.
(1) For any person to operate or permit to or suffer to be operated a
motorcycle, motorized sportbike or an all-terrain vehicle, as
defined herein on any public grounds or property, including
playgrounds and recreational areas.
(2) For any person to operate or permit to or suffer to be operated a
motorcycle on public grounds or property (including playgrounds
and recreational areas) except on public streets or highways as
defined in N.J.S.A. § 39:1-1, and public parking areas.
(3) To operate a motor vehicle of any type, as defined herein, upon
public or private property, with or without permission of the
landowner, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. To operate an all-terrain vehicle upon limited access highways or within
the right-of-way limits thereof.
C. To operate a motorcycle, motorized sportbike or an all-terrain vehicle,
as a licensed or unlicensed operator, on private property other than
with the written consent of all of the owners of said property. When
such written consent has been obtained, the operator shall keep the
same on his person for display to the authorities. The failure to present
such written consent upon request or demand shall be prima facie
evidence that the operator does not have such consent.
D. To operate a motorcycle, motorized sportbike or an all-terrain vehicle
on private property in such a way as to harass or disturb farm animals,
domestic livestock or wildlife or further to destroy or damage crops,
crop land, soils or vegetation.
E. To operate a motorcycle, motorized sportbike or an all-terrain vehicle
on public or private property without the same being in "proper
operating condition," which is hereby defined as the presence of all
original operating equipment specified therefore by the original
manufacturer for the proper operation thereof or the equivalent
thereof.
F. To operate a motorcycle, motorized sportbike, all-terrain vehicle or a
motor vehicle on public or private property in a careless, reckless or
negligent manner so as to endanger the safety or property of any
person or public or private property.
G. For any person to create or permit to exist any sounds at such a level
and duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare
§ 700-2 VINELAND CODE § 700-3
1:1440
§ 700-4. General regulations.
§ 700-5. Impoundment; duration; cost.
or that would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life and
property.
H. For any person to make unnecessary noise so as to annoy or disturb the
quiet comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity or persons who are
lawfully upon an adjoining property to the property from where the
noise is emanating.
I. To operate a motorcycle, motorized sportbike or an all-terrain vehicle,
with or without permission, within 500 feet of any dwelling.
J. To operate a motorcycle, motorized sportbike or an all-terrain vehicle
and carry any other person, except in a place designated therefor and
equipped therefor as part of the original manufacture for said purpose.
K. For the registrant, owner or person having control or custody of a
motorcycle, motorized sportbike or an all-terrain vehicle to allow or
enable said device to be used or operated by another in violation of this
chapter.
A. Protective helmets. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, to
permit or suffer to be operated, or to ride as a passenger on a
motorcycle, motorized sportbike or an all-terrain vehicle without
wearing a protective helmet approved by the Director of the Division of
Motor Vehicles in the Department of Law and Public Safety of the State
of New Jersey. Any such helmet shall be of a type acceptable for use in
conjunction with motorcycles and provided in N.J.S.A. § 39:3-76.7
through N.J.S.A. § 39:3-76.10.
B. Equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit or
suffer to be operated an motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle that is not
equipped with working headlights, taillights, brakes and proper
mufflers as supplied by the motor manufacturer for the particular
model without modification. No person shall operate any vehicle or
device equipped with a muffler cutout, muffler bypass or similar device.
C. This chapter shall not be applicable to any recognized organization
which has obtained permission from the City of Vineland to use said
lands for the sole purpose of holding organized and supervised rallies,
races and/or meets.
D. No person under the age of 14 years shall operate or be permitted to
operate an all-terrain vehicle on public lands or upon a public highway.
A. Any police officer shall impound any motor vehicle operated on public
or private property alleged to be in violation of this chapter, either by
virtue of its operation and use contrary to the provisions of this chapter
or by virtue of its operation by an unlicensed operator.
§ 700-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 700-5
1:1441
§ 700-6. Violations and penalties.
B. Said period of impoundment shall be from the date of the alleged
violation until the disposition of the alleged offense by such court of
competent jurisdiction as shall hear the same, and the owner thereof
shall pay the reasonable cost of said removal and storage constituting
impoundment. The Chief of Police or his designee may authorize early
release upon the payment of the removal and storage costs. Said
expense of impoundment shall be in addition to any other fine or
penalty levied or collected under the terms of this chapter.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of
$250, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or by
community service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment and community service as determined in the discretion of
the Municipal Court Judge.
B. A second offense shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 or more
than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or by
community service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment and community service as determined in the discretion of
the Municipal Court Judge.
C. A third and subsequent offense shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$1,000 or more than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
D. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
E. In addition to all other penalties, the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order
or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 700-5 VINELAND CODE § 700-6
1:1442
Chapter 710
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Health — See Ch. 62.
Landis Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 80.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 300.
Drainage systems — See Ch. 320.
Water and sewage disposal system fees — See
Ch. 350, Art. II.
Sewers — See Ch. 585.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 639.
Utilities — See Ch. 687.
§ 700-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 700-6
1:1443

ARTICLE I
Connection with Public Supply
[Adopted 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 86-67 (Ch. 455, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 710-1. Connection required.
All buildings located upon a street in which the public water-supply main is
constructed in the area designated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, identified in § 710-2 of this article, shall be
connected with the public water-supply main, and the private water-supply
well shall be permanently sealed.
§ 710-2. Sealing of wells. [Amended 4-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-27;
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
All private water-supply wells in the following areas shall be sealed
pursuant to the State Department of Environmental Protection's mandatory
contractual requirement, and the City of Vineland shall contract therefor
upon connection of all properties to the Municipal Water Utility's
distribution mains in said areas:
A. North West Avenue from Weymouth Road to Forest Grove Road; West
Arbor Avenue from N.J. Route 47 (Delsea Drive) to North West
Boulevard; Old Forest Road from North West Avenue to North West
Boulevard; West Forest Grove Road from 1,225 feet west of N.J. Route
47 (Delsea Drive) to North West Boulevard; N.J. Route 47 from West
Forest Grove Road to 1,200 feet north of West Arbor Avenue; North
West Boulevard from West Forest Grove Road to the City limit; West
Weymouth Road from 210 feet west of North West Avenue to North
West Boulevard; Gerow Avenue from West Arbor Avenue to Elty Avenue;
Elty Avenue from Gerow Avenue to Bruun Avenue; Bruun Avenue from
Elty Avenue to West Arbor Avenue; Burnt Mill Road from West Arbor
Avenue to Regina Elena Avenue; Temm Court from Burnt Mill Drive to
the cul-de-sac; Regina Elena Avenue from Burnt Mill Drive to its
easterly terminus.
B. Garrison Road from Delsea Drive to Orchard Road; West Korff Drive
from Garrison Road north to the dead end; Lois Lane from West Korff
Drive west to the dead end; Dirk Drive from West Korff Drive east to the
dead end; West Elmer Road from West Korff Drive west to the dead end;
South Orchard Road from Garrison Road north to the stream.
C. The following properties having frontage on North East Avenue, East
Forest Grove Road and/or East Garden Road:
(1) Block 903, Lots 23 and 24.
(2) Block 904, Lots 1, 1.01, 1.02, 1.03, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46 and 48.
(3) Block 909, Lots 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 19.
§ 710-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 710-2
1:1445
§ 710-3. Notice of hearing.
The City of Vineland shall give a hearing on this article for all persons
interested and shall give notice to such persons of the time and place
thereof. The notice shall be served or published not less than 10 days before
the day fixed for the hearing.
§ 710-4. Action upon failure to comply.
If after passage of this article the owner of any properties affected thereby
shall neglect, after notice given as hereinbefore provided, to make any such
connection, the City may cause such connection or installation to be made
under the direction and supervision of the City of Vineland Water Utility.
§ 710-5. Notice of connection.
Before proceeding to make any such connection and well sealing, the City
shall cause notice of such contemplated connection to be given to the owner
of any properties affected thereby. The notice shall contain a description
of the property affected, sufficiently definite in terms to identify it, as well
as a description of the required connection and notice that, unless the
connection shall be completed within 30 days after the service thereof, the
City will proceed to make such connection or cause the same to be done
pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:63-54.308
§ 710-6. Service of notice.
(4) Block 1301, Lot 6.
(5) Block 1401, Lots 1 and 100.
A. The notice may be served upon the owner or owners resident in the City
in person or by leaving it at their usual place of residence with a
member of their family above the age of 14 years, or if any such owner
shall not reside in the City, such notice may be served upon him
personally or may be mailed to his last known post office address or it
may be served upon the occupant of the property or upon the agent of
the owner in charge thereof. Notice to infant owners or owners of
unsound mind shall be served upon their guardians. When lands are
held in trust, service shall be made upon the trustee. When properties
are held by two or more joint tenants, tenants in common or tenants by
the entirety, service upon one shall be sufficient and shall be deemed
and taken as notice to all.
B. If the owner of any such property is unknown or service cannot for any
reason be made as above directed, notice shall be published at least
once, not less than 30 days before the making of such connection and
well sealing by the City, in a newspaper circulating in the City of
308. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:63-54 was repealed by P.L. 1991, c. 53, which law enacted the
Municipal and County Sewerage Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq.
§ 710-2 VINELAND CODE § 710-6
1:1446
§ 710-7. Proof of service of notices.
Proof of service or publication of such notices shall be filed within 10 days
after such service with the officer having charge of the record of tax liens
in the City, but failure to file the same shall not invalidate the proceedings
if service has actually been made as herein provided.
§ 710-8. Notice required prior to City making connection.
If notice of the pendency of the ordinance providing for such connection
or installation shall have been given to the person owning the property
affected thereby in the same manner as is provided in N.J.S.A. 40:63-55 to
40:63-58 and there shall have been a hearing on such ordinance as provided
in N.J.S.A. 40:63-53, then no further notice need be given, and the City may
proceed to make the required connection.309
§ 710-9. Charge to become tax lien.
§ 710-10. Invalidity of charges.
No such charge for water connections or sealing shall be invalid by reason
of any error or omission in stating the name of the owner or owners
of properties affected by such connections, nor for any other informality,
Vineland. There may be inserted in the advertisement notice to the
owner or owners of several different properties.
A. When any such connection and well sealing shall be made, a true and
accurate account of the cost and expense shall be kept and apportioned
to the property or properties thereby connected, and a true statement
of such costs under oath shall be forthwith filed by the City of Vineland
Water Utility with the Clerk of the City of Vineland. The City shall
examine the same and, if properly made, shall confirm it and file such
statement with the officer of the City charged with the duty of collecting
taxes. Said officer shall record the connection charge in the same book
in which he records sidewalks and other assessments.
B. Every such charge for connection and sealing shall bear interest and
penalties from the same time and at the same rate as assessments for
local improvements in the City and, from the time of confirmation, shall
be a first and paramount lien against the respective property or
properties so connected with the public water supply main to the same
extent as assessments for local improvements and shall be collected
and enforced in the same manner. Every officer charged with the
enforcement and collection of assessments for local improvements is
hereby charged with the same duties in regard to the collection and
enforcement of all charges for water collections.
309. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:63-55 to 40:63-58 and 40:63-53 were repealed, effective
1-1-1992.
§ 710-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 710-10
1:1447
where such property or real estate has actually been improved by such
water connection.
§ 710-11. Payment in installments.
The City may provide for the payment of such charge upon any property
for water connection in installments in the same manner as assessments for
local improvements are payable in installments in the City, in which case
such installments shall bear the same rate of interest and be collected and
enforced in the same manner as are installments for assessments on local
improvements.
§ 710-10 VINELAND CODE § 710-11
1:1448
ARTICLE II
Approved Private Water Supply
[Adopted 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-64 (Ch. 363 of the 1990
Code)]
§ 710-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY — Any domestic/public
noncommunity or nonpublic water supply well as specified in N.J.A.C.
7:10-12.
§ 710-13. Permit required.
§ 710-14. Denial of permit.
The issuance of a permit shall be denied if:
§ 710-15. Final approval of wells.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any well within the City of
Vineland until a permit for the location, construction or alteration of
said well has been issued by the City of Vineland Health Department.
B. The Health Department may issue a permit for the location,
construction or alteration of a well, subject to the following conditions:
(1) A completed application is submitted to the Health Department by
a well driller, licensed by the New Jersey State Well Driller
Examining and Advisory Board, and has been prepared in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.1 et seq., as amended.
(2) The appropriate fee set forth in Chapter 350, Fees, Article II, Water
and Sewage Disposal Systems, has been paid.310
C. All permits shall expire 24 months after issuance unless a valid building
permit has been issued and authorized work has commenced.
A. The application or design plan submitted for the location, construction
or alteration of a well is incomplete or does not comply with N.J.A.C.
7:10-12.1 et seq., as amended. In the event that an application or design
plan submitted is deemed incomplete, the Health Department shall
advise the applicant in writing of any and all deficiencies.
B. A public community water supply system is presently available to serve
the property upon which a well is proposed to be located and
constructed, except where the well is intended to be used as a
nonpotable water supply and is identified as such.
310. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 710-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 710-15
1:1449
§ 710-16. Collection of water samples.
A. No well shall be placed into operation or used until the Health
Department issues a final approval indicating that said well has been
located, constructed, repaired or altered in compliance with the
approved design plan and permit issued, and the laboratory analysis of
a water sample collected, by a lab technician, and analyzed by an
NJDEP-certified laboratory has been received and found to be in
compliance with the parameters identified in § 710-17 of this article.
B. For new wells, excluding replacement wells, occupancy of any building
shall not be permitted until the water supply has been inspected and
approved and the water tested and certified to meet the maximum
contaminant levels (MCL) for the parameters listed in § 710-17 of this
article.
C. For replacement wells, the water should not be consumed until it has
been inspected and approved, and the water tested and certified to
meet the MCL for those parameters listed in § 710-17 of this article with
the exception of the forty-eight-hour gross alpha test.
D. The landlord or lessor of real properties where the potable water supply
is a private well must have an initial test completed in compliance with
the parameters identified in § 710-17 of this article, and then tested at
least once every five years.
A. Before a final certification and operation of an approved private water
supply, the person owning the lot upon which a new or replacement well
is located and constructed shall have a sample of the well water
collected, by a laboratory technician, and analyzed by a laboratory
certified by the NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:18-1.1 et seq. for the
individual contaminants set forth in § 710-17 of this article. The water
sample shall be collected within 30 days from the date of the final well
inspection and shall be of the raw/untreated water supply and taken as
close to the pumping well as possible. The results of said laboratory
analysis shall be forwarded directly by the applicant, property owner or
laboratory (with applicant/owner's approval) to the Health Department.
B. The following nonpotable water supply wells shall be exempt from
sampling and analysis requirements established under §§ 710-17 and
710-18 of this section:
(1) Any nonpotable well, the pumps and lines of which do not enter a
building, crawl space or garage and are directly connected to a
sprinkler system manifold.
(2) Geothermal groundwater heat pump wells that are constructed and
installed as totally enclosed systems and are incapable of being
used as a potable water supply.
§ 710-15 VINELAND CODE § 710-16
1:1450
§ 710-17. Testing procedures.
(3) Fire protection wells as defined in the State Uniform Construction
Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq., which are incapable of being used
as potable water supply.
A. The water sample collected under § 710-16 of this article shall be taken
from each approved private water supply and analyzed by a NJDEPcertified
laboratory pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:18-1.1 et seq., for those
contaminants listed below, to determine whether any of the following
contaminants are present in amounts which exceed the MCL
established under N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq. (Safe Water Drinking Act),
as amended, and the regulations for the same. For new wells, excluding
replacement wells, occupancy of any building shall not be permitted
until the water supply has been inspected and approved, and the water
tested and certified to the MCL for bacteria, nitrate, lead, mercury,
volatile organic compounds, forty-eight-hour gross alpha, iron,
manganese, and pH (6.5 to 8.5). For replacement wells, the water
should not be consumed until it has been tested and certified to meet
the MCL for the above parameter, except for forty-eight-hour gross
alpha. The following list of contaminants may be amended from time to
time as deemed necessary by the Health Department:
Bacteria (total coliform)
Nitrates
Lead*
Mercury
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
Gross alpha**
Iron
Manganese
pH***
NOTES:
* For potable water supplies, lead shall not exceed the action level
of 0.015 ppm established by the USEPA.
** A forty-eight-hour rapid gross alpha test shall be required on
all wells tested under the Private Well Testing Act (N.J.S.A.
58:12A-26 et seq.) and any new wells located and constructed.311
*** The MCL for pH is hereby fixed at not less than 6.5 and not
greater than 8.5.
B. All water samples shall be collected, tested and analyzed in accordance
with criteria and procedures established by the NJDEP in N.J.A.C.
7:18-2.1 et seq. Upon request by the Health Department, the laboratory
311. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 710-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 710-17
1:1451
§ 710-18. Order to cap and seal.
The City of Vineland may order a well capped and sealed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:9 et seq. for any of the following reasons:
§ 710-19. Notification.
The owner or authorized agent of the property upon which an approved
new or replacement private water system has been located must notify the
Health Department at least 24 hours prior to any construction, alteration
or repairs to a new or existing potable well. Failure to do so is grounds for
denial of a final approval or the ordering of the capping and sealing of the
well.
§ 710-20. Violations and penalties.
submitting the test results shall submit proof that it is certified by
the NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:18-1.1 et seq. to conduct the tests
necessary to determine the presence of the contaminants and
substances set forth in Subsection A of this section.
C. The applicant (or property owner) shall submit the results of the
analysis directly to the Health Department, along with the following
information:
(1) The block and lot number on which the well is located.
(2) The name and mailing address of all persons owning the property
upon which the well is located.
(3) The laboratory employee or the laboratory's authorized
representative who physically collected the sample from the well.
(4) The date and time that the well sample was collected.
(5) The specific point of collection of the water sample.
(6) The date and time the sample was analyzed by the laboratory.
A. Any well which is determined to be polluted or detrimental to the public
health.
B. Any well which has been constructed, altered or repaired without
obtaining a permit as set forth in § 710-13 of this article.
C. Any well which has been found to be out of compliance with N.J.A.C.
7:10-12.1 et seq., as amended and supplemented from time to time, and
the requirements and standards set forth in this article.
D. Any nonproductive well or any private water supply which has been
replaced under an emergency replacement permit.
§ 710-17 VINELAND CODE § 710-20
1:1452
§ 710-21. Civil remedies.
In addition to the fines and penalties set forth above, in case of any unlawful
acts, the Code Official shall institute an appropriate action or proceeding at
law for the purpose of ordering that person to:
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty.312
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day the
same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
A. Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further
execution of work;
B. Restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance, repair or
alteration of such structure;
C. Require the removal of work in violation; or
D. Prevent the occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with
the provisions of this article.
312. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 710-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 710-21
1:1453

ARTICLE III
Distribution Allocation
[Adopted 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-20]
§ 710-22. Distribution of water allocation.
§ 710-23. Ranking of projects for water allocation.
A. Municipal and public purposes.
(1) Upon the adoption of this article in accordance with the laws of the
State of New Jersey, a portion of the current balance of the water
allocation to the City of Vineland shall be set aside for municipal
and public purposes. That amount shall be 31,000,000 gallons per
year.
(2) Upon the receipt of any new allocation amount granted to the City
of Vineland by the NJDEP, a portion of that new allocation shall be
set aside for municipal and public purposes. That amount shall be
31,000,000 gallons per year.
(3) For purposes of this section, "municipal and public purposes" shall
mean the expansion, addition or construction of municipal
buildings, parks and the like in which water allocation is necessary,
public or private schools, colleges and educational institutions, any
redevelopment project within designated redevelopment areas or
federal empowerment zone or the Urban Enterprise Zone.
(4) Distribution of allocation reserved for municipal and public
purposes shall be in accordance with the ranking of projects as is
hereinafter set forth unless otherwise determined by City Council
after a public hearing.
(5) Distribution of the reserved allocation for municipal and public
purposes shall be utilized only after the exhaustion of existing
allocation distributed in accordance herewith.
B. Industrial/commercial and residential.
(1) Based upon a review of the ten-year history of industrial/
commercial and residential water use in the City of Vineland,
industrial/commercial accounts for 52% thereof and residential
accounts for 48% thereof. As such and based thereon, the net
remaining allocation, after deducting that amount set aside for
municipal and public purposes, shall be divided with 52% reserved
for industrial/commercial projects and 48% reserved for residential
projects.
A. The following point system and procedure shall determine the order
upon which a project shall be granted requested allocation:
(1) Planning/Zoning Board approval.
§ 710-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 710-23
1:1455
§ 710-24. Recision of allocation reserved for existing projects.
(a) Upon receipt of preliminary Planning/Zoning Board approval,
an applicant project will receive a total of five points.
(b) Upon receipt of final Planning/Zoning Board approval, an
applicant project will receive a total of 15 points.
(c) If no Planning/Zoning Board approval is required, an applicant
project will receive a total of 20 points upon the issuance of a
zoning permit.
(d) If no zoning permit is required, an applicant project shall
receive a total of 20 points.
(2) Sewer/septic approval.
(a) Upon receipt of preliminary sewer approvals as defined by the
Landis Sewerage Authority (LSA), an applicant project will
receive a total of two points.
(b) Upon receipt of a fully executed allocation agreement between
the LSA and the applicant and the payment of all fees required
by the LSA, an applicant project will receive a total of eight
points.
(c) For purposes of this subsection, all residential projects
approved with septic systems shall automatically receive a
total of 10 points.
(3) City of Vineland Water Utility approvals.
(a) Upon completion of preliminary review by the City of Vineland
Water Utility, an applicant project shall receive a total of two
points.
(b) Upon the adoption of a resolution by the City Council of the
City of Vineland authorizing the Superintendent of the Water
Utility to execute a water allocation permit application and the
payment of all water connection fees, the applicant shall
receive eight points.
(c) For purposes of this subsection; no application for City of
Vineland Water Utility preliminary review shall be considered
until the project application is deemed complete and all fees
have been paid for preliminary site plan/subdivision approval.
B. The applicant shall be responsible to provide proof of compliance with
Subsection A herein to the Superintendent of the Water Utility.
A. All water allocation previously reserved in accordance with this article
shall expire on the three-year anniversary of the date upon which the
applicant project attained 40 points pursuant to this article unless the
§ 710-23 VINELAND CODE § 710-24
1:1456
§ 710-25. Creation of Water Allocation Review Committee.
applicant project has recorded the final plat in the Clerk's Office of
the County of Cumberland, New Jersey. Water allocation previously
reserved in accordance with this article shall also expire upon
cancellation by the applicant.
B. No municipal or public purposes project shall be subject to the recision
of reservation of allocation except by ordinance of the City Council of
the City of Vineland.
A. There shall be created a Water Allocation Review Committee
(hereinafter referred to as WARC), whose purpose is to review and
make recommendations to the City Council of the City of Vineland
regarding the distribution or redistribution of allocation set aside for
the three use groups, residential, commercial/industrial and municipal
and public purposes. The WARC shall make recommendations to
Council regarding the percentage of distribution of allocation among
said uses whenever the City of Vineland receives any new allocation by
the NJDEP. Further, in the event water allocated to any use group is
reasonably anticipated to be depleted based upon approved allocations,
the distribution as set forth herein shall be reviewed by the WARC. The
WARC shall recommend any redistribution of water allocation to City
Council. City Council shall consider any recommendation after a public
hearing duly advertised in accordance with the procedures of the
adoption of a municipal ordinance.
B. The Water Allocation Review Committee shall consist of the following
officers of the City of Vineland: City Planner; City Engineer;
Superintendent/Manager of Public Works; Director of Economic
Development; Business Administrator; Superintendent of the Water
Utility; City Solicitor; and City Council Liaison to the Water Utility.
§ 710-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 710-25
1:1457
Appendix
Chapter A730
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 341. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 630.
§ A730-1. Purpose.
The City of Vineland hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the City of Vineland poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the City of Vineland of a cable television and
communications system.
§ A730-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et
seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the
federal and state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, 1972, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et
seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
CITY OF VINELAND — The City of Vineland, New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"Comcast of South Jersey, LLC."
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
§ 710-25 VINELAND CODE § A730-2
1:1458
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA — Consists of the area of the City of Vineland
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
§ A730-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the City of Vineland, concerning the renewal
of municipal consent herein granted to the company, were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the City of Vineland, having received
at said public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the
company to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the City of Vineland
hereby finds that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical,
character, financial and other qualifications and that the company's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A730-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A730-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the City of
Vineland 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature
of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television reception
service in the City of Vineland or any higher amount permitted by the Act or
otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A730-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the City of Vineland and any property
subsequently annexed hereto.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board (with a ten-year automatic renewal as provided by
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and 48:5A-25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6).
B. In the event that the City of Vineland shall find that the company has
not substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of
this ordinance, the City of Vineland shall have the right to petition the
OCTV, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the City of Vineland shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
§ A730-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A730-7
1:1459
§ A730-7. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as
set forth in the company's application. Any extension of plant beyond the
primary service area shall be governed by the company's line extension
policy, as set forth in the company's application.
§ A730-8. Construction requirements.
§ A730-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the City of Vineland upon written request
of the Municipal Administrator or Clerk.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the City of
Vineland shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the company, upon reasonable notice by the City of
Vineland, shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense
of the company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the City of Vineland so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the
company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to
maintain proper clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
§ A730-7 VINELAND CODE § A730-9
1:1460
§ A730-10. Municipal Complaint Officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the Complaint Officer
for the City of Vineland pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The City
of Vineland shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by City of Vineland customers from the OCTV.
§ A730-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ A730-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise the company shall give to the City of
Vineland a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the
faithful performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in
its application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A730-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A730-14. Commitments by the company.
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the City of
Vineland to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
A. The company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service on
one outlet at no cost to each school in the City of Vineland, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is
within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
B. The company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service at no
cost on one outlet to each police, fire, emergency management facility,
each senior and youth center owned or operated by the City of Vineland
and the Vineland Public Library, provided the facility is located within
175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
§ A730-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A730-14
1:1461
§ A730-15. Educational/government channel.
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by
the City of Vineland. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all
additional outlets.
C. The company shall provide free basic Internet service, via high-speed
cable modem, to one nonnetworked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future public school in the City, elementary,
intermediate and secondary, at no charge, provided the facility is
located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. The Internet
service shall be installed on a personal computer that is accessible to
the students and not for administrative use only.
D. The company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed
cable modem on one nonnetworked personal computer in each qualified
existing and future public library at no charge, provided the facility is
located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. The Internet
service shall be installed on a personal computer that is accessible to
library patrons and not for administrative use only.
E. Within six months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of approval,
the company shall provide to the City a one-time technology grant in the
amount of $145,000 to meet the cable-related needs of the community.
A. The company will continue to provide one educational/governmental
(EG) channel for the residents of the City of Vineland on the most basic
tier of service offered by the company in accordance with the Cable Act,
Section 611, and as further set forth below. Educational/governmental
video programming shall be provided by the governing body. Unused
capacity may be utilized by the company subject to the provisions for
"fallow time" below.
B. The company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for EG use. An EG access user,
whether an educational or government user, acquires no property or
other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and may
not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no matter
how long the same channel may have been designated for such use.
C. The company shall not exercise editorial control over any educational
or governmental use of channel capacity, except company may refuse to
transmit any educational or governmental access program or portion of
an educational or governmental access program that contains
obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
D. The governing body of City of Vineland shall be responsible for
developing, implementing, and enforcing rules for EG access channel
use.
§ A730-14 VINELAND CODE § A730-15
1:1462
§ A730-16. Advisory committee. [Amended 10-24-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-70]
The Council of the City of Vineland may, in its discretion, appoint an
advisory committee (herein, the "committee"), consisting of five members,
one member to be appointed by each Council person. The committee may
also appoint one alternate member. The committee shall meet periodically
at Vineland City Hall, unless the committee unanimously agrees to meet
elsewhere, and shall:
E. Educational access. "Educational access" shall mean noncommercial
use by educational institutions such as public or private schools, but not
home schools, community colleges, and universities.
F. Government access. "Government access" shall mean noncommercial
use by the governing body of City of Vineland.
G. Company use of fallow time. Because fallow time on EG channels is not
in the public interest, in the event the City of Vineland elects not to fully
program their EG access channel, company may program unused time
on those channels subject to reclamation by the City of Vineland upon
no less than 60 days' written notice. "Fallow time" shall mean periods
when the channel is not being actively used, such as when the viewer's
screen would be blank, feature only static, or similarly limited uses that
reasonably constitute a waste of the channel space.
H. Indemnification. The City shall indemnify company for any liability, loss,
or damage it may suffer due to violation of the intellectual property
rights of third parties on the EG channel and from claims arising out of
the City's rules for or administration of access.
I. The company will provide an additional EG access channel, upon a
demonstration by the City that utilization of the existing EG access
channel exceeds 40 hours per week of original, noncommercial, firstrun,
locally produced full motion video programming over a period of 18
consecutive weeks; and providing the City has continued its
partnership with Cumberland County College in presenting educational
programming to the residents a minimum of 12 hours weekly.
J. The company will provide access to a switch based at the company's
hub site via a static IP address to change programming between the
City of Vineland and Cumberland County College at the direction of the
City.
A. Monitor compliance of the city and the company with regard to the
conditions of the franchise.
B. Discuss and recommend solutions to problems concerning the
operation of the cable system.
C. Attempt to resolve any problems which may result from implementation
of this ordinance.
§ A730-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A730-16
1:1463
§ A730-17. Emergency uses.
§ A730-18. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ A730-19. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference, provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ A730-20. Competitive equity.
Should the City of Vineland grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this ordinance
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
D. Recommend to the city, on a timely basis, any changes in this franchise
which in the future could be permitted under federal or state law
changes, amendments and judicial interpretations hereafter
promulgated. Such changes are subject to the formal amendment
process, which shall include acceptance from the company and
approval from the Board of Regulatory Commissioners pursuant to
existing law.
E. Develop rules for the use the EG channel and provide the company with
a copy of said rules.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
City of Vineland or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the City of Vineland is unable to make full use of the cable
television system as contemplated herein.
§ A730-16 VINELAND CODE § A730-21
1:1464
§ A730-21. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ A730-22. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1990 Code to 2009 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2009 Code
PART I
ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code New
Art. II, General Penalty Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 4, Administration, Department of Ch. 5
Ch. 14, Civil Rights, Commission on Ch. 15
Ch. 17, Claims Approval Ch. 19
Ch. 20, Court, Municipal Ch. 24
Ch. 24, Development Corporation Ch. 29
Ch. 31, Emergency Management Ch. 36
Ch. 40, Environmental Commission Ch. 41
Ch. 44, Authority to Establish
§ A730-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1465
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2009 Code
Art. I, Training Programs Through Police
Academy
Ch. 46, Art. I
Art. II, Bid Specifications and
Construction Plans
Ch. 46, Art. II
Ch. 47, Finance, Department of Ord. No. 2007-104
Ch. 51, Fire Department
Part 1, General Provisions Ch. 56, Art. I
Part 2, Length of Service Awards
Program
Ch. 56, Art. II
Part 3, Fire Department Rescue Fees Ch. 56, Art. III
Ch. 57, Health, Department of Ch. 62
Ch. 62, Housing Authority Ch. 68
Ch. 66, Industrial Commission Ch. 74
Ch. 71, Landis Sewage Authority Ch. 80
Ch. 74, Law, Department of Ch. 84
Ch. 77, Licenses and Inspections,
Department of
Ch. 92
Ch. 85, Map, Official Ch. 98
Ch. 88, Municipal Alliance Committee Ch. 103
Ch. 91, Officers and Employees
Art. I, (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Comptroller Ch. 110, Art. I
Art. III, Tax Assessor Ch. 110, Art. II
Art. IV, Deputy Municipal Clerk Ch. 110, Art. III
Art. V, Chief Financial Officer Ch. 110, Art. IV
Art. VI, Municipal Prosecutor Ch. 110, Art. V
Ch. 96, Police Department
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 123, Art. I
Art. II, Director Ch. 123, Art. II
Art. III, Special Law Enforcement
Officers
Ch. 123, Art. III
Art. IV, Eligibility Ch. 123, Art. IV
Art. V, Enforcement Duties Ch. 123, Art. V
Art. VI, Police Athletic League Ch. 123, Art. VI
Ch. 99, Professional Services Agreement
Art. I, Political Campaign Contributions
Restrictions
Ch. 129, Art. I
§ DT-1 VINELAND CODE § DT-1
1:1466
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2009 Code
Ch. 103, Public Works, Department of Ch. 135
Ch. 105, Purchasing Board Ch. 139
Ch. 110, Recreation Commissioners, Board
of
Ch. 146
Ch. 114, Residency Requirements
Art. I, (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Municipal Officers and Employees Ch. 151
Ch. 120, Salaries and Compensation Ch. 157
Ch. 138, Wards
Art. I, Division into Wards Ch. 165, Art. I
Art. II, Descriptions and Boundaries Ch. 165, Art. II
PART II
GENERAL LEGISLATION
Ch. 148, Advertising Ch. 200
Ch. 151, Agricultural Zones Ch. 205
Ch. 154, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 216
Ch. 158, Amusements Ord. No. 2006-105
Ch. 163, Animal and Poultry Waste REP
Ch. 167, Auctions and Auctioneers Ch. 230
Ch. 169, Limousines Ch. 441
Ch. 175, Bicycles and Similar Vehicles Ch. 239
Ch. 179, Brush, Grass and Weeds
Art. I, Brush and Hedges Ord. No. 2006-89
Art. II, Obnoxious Growths, Trash and
Debris
Ord. No. 2006-89
Ch. 183, Buildings, Numbering of Ch. 258
Ch. 189, Burglar Alarm Service Ch. 211
Ch. 192, Carnivals Ch. 269
Ch. 194, Car Safety Seat Loaner Program REP
Ch. 196, Checks, Returned Ch. 280
Ch. 202, Condominiums
Art. I, Municipal Services Ch. 294, Art. I
Ch. 206, Construction Codes, Uniform
Art. I, (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Administration and Enforcement Ch. 300
Ch. 216, Curfew Ch. 307
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1467
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2009 Code
Ch. 219, Dogs and Other Animals
Art. I, Animal Control Ch. 224, Art. I
Art. II, Piggeries Ch. 224, Art. II
Art. III, Disposal of Dead Animals REP
Art. IV, Disposal of Dead Animals by
Raisers and Slaughters
REP
Art. V, Disposal of Dead Animals by Trash
Collectors
REP
Art. VI, Potentially Dangerous and
Vicious Dogs
Ch. 224, Art. III
Art. VII, Cats Ch. 224, Art. IV
Art. VIII, Proper Disposal of Pet Solid
Waste
Ch. 224, Art. V
Art. IX, Feeding of Wildlife Ch. 224, Art. VI
Ch. 223, Drainage Systems Ch. 320
Ch. 226, Drugs and Drug Paraphernalia
Art. I, Drug-Free School Zone Map Ch. 327, Art. I
Ch. 241, Excavations Ch. 341
Ch. 245, Fees
Art. I, Records of Vital Statistics Ch. 350, Art. I
Art. II, Water and Sewage Disposal
Systems
Ch. 350, Art. II
Art. III, Traffic Offense Discovery
Requests
Ch. 350, Art. III
Art. IV, (Reserved) Omitted
Art. V, Duplicate Redemption Certificates Ch. 350, Art. IV
Art. VI, Duplicate Tax Bills Ch. 350, Art. V
Art. VII, Emergency Medical Service
Records
Ch. 350, Art. VI
Ch. 250, Firearms Ch. 358
Ch. 253, Fire Lanes Ch. 367
Ch. 256, Fire Prevention Ch. 372
Ch. 268, Freight Cars Ch. 386
Ch. 273, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
Art. I, Garbage and Trash Collection Ch. 620, Art. I
Art. II, (Reserved) Omitted
Art. III, Shopping Centers Ch. 620, Art. II
§ DT-1 VINELAND CODE § DT-1
1:1468
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2009 Code
Art. IV, Apartments Ch. 620, Art. III
Art. V, Leaves Ch. 620, Art. IV
Art. VI, White Goods Ch. 620, Art. V
Art. VII, Tires Ch. 620, Art. VI
Art. VIII, Proper Handling of Yard Waste Ch. 620, Art. VII
Art. IX, Yard Waste Collection and
Disposal Program
Ch. 620, Art. VIII
Ch. 278, Graffiti Ch. 400
Ch. 288, Hazardous Materials
Art. I, Reimbursement for Cleanup Ch. 407, Art. I
Ch. 293, Insurance
Art. I, Fire Insurance Claims Ch. 362
Ch. 300, Land Use Ch. 425
Ch. 304, Library, Public
Art. I, Establishment and Management Ch. 431, Art. I
Art. II, Use of Library Property Ch. 431, Art. II
Ch. 305, Licenses and Permits
Art. I, Refusal, Revocation or Suspension
for Delinquent Property Taxes
Ch. 437, Art. I
Ch. 307, Littering Ch. 446
Ch. 310, Loitering REP
Ch. 313, Massage Therapy and Related
Services
REP
Ch. 322, Noise Ch. 469
Ch. 326, Nuisances Ch. 473
Ch. 329, Obscene Material
Art. I, Retail Display Ch. 481, Art. I
Ch. 332, Occupancy Permits
Art. I, Residential Buildings Ch. 485, Art. I
Ch. 339, Parking, Handicapped Ch. 491
Ch. 342, Parking Lots
Art. I, Semipublic Lots Ch. 496, Art. I
Art. II, Municipal Business Lots Ch. 496, Art. I
Ch. 344, Parking Near Driveways or Alleys Ch. 502
Ch. 346, Parks and Recreation
Art. I, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 507, Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1469
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2009 Code
Art. II, General Regulations Ch. 507, Art. II
Art. III, Tobacco-Free Tot Lots Ch. 507, Art. III
Ch. 350, Peace and Good Order Ch. 511
Ch. 353, Peddling and Soliciting Ch. 516
Ch. 363, Private Water Supply, Approved Ch. 710, Art. II
Ch. 365, Property Maintenance Ch. 537
Ch. 370, Public Property Ch. 542
Ch. 372, Public Records Ch. 550
Ch. 383, Restaurants Ch. 563
Ch. 386, Sales, Special Ch. 568
Ch. 388, Secondhand Goods Ch. 574
Ch. 390, Security Gates Ch. 579
Ch. 392, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Art. I, Cesspools Ch. 585, Art. I
Art. II, Sewer Connections Ch. 585, Art. II
Art. III, Illicit Connections Ch. 585, Art. III
Art. IV, Prohibited Disposal of Materials
to Storm Sewer System
Ch. 585, Art. IV
Ch. 393, Sexually Contagious Diseases Ch. 593
Ch. 394, Sex Offender Residency REP
Ch. 395, Shopping Carts Ch. 597
Ch. 400, Slaughterhouses REP
Ch. 403, Smoke Detectors Ch. 609
Ch. 411, Street Closings, Temporary Ch. 626
Ch. 413, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, General Rules and Regulations Ch. 630, Art. I
Art. II, Mandatory Sidewalk Repair Ch. 630, Art. II
Art. III, Municipal Consent for Use Ch. 630, Art. III
Art. IV, Assemblies, Processions,
Parades, Handbilling, Picketing and
Soliciting
Ch. 630, Art. IV
Ch. 421, Swimming Pools
Art. I, Public Pools Ch. 639, Art. I
Ch. 423, Tattooing and Body Piercing Ch. 643
Ch. 424, Taxation
Art. I, Collection of Certain Tangible
Property Taxes
Ch. 647, Art. I
§ DT-1 VINELAND CODE § DT-1
1:1470
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2009 Code
Art. II, Personal Property Exemption Ch. 647, Art. II
Art. III, Senior Citizens Exemption Ch. 647, Art. III
Art. IV, Abatements for Residential
Improvements
Ch. 647, Art. IV
Art. V, Abatements for Industrial and
Commercial Improvements
Ch. 647, Art. V
Art. VI, Environmental Opportunity Zone Ch. 647, Art. VI
Ch. 427, Taxicabs Ord. No. 2007-79
Ch. 431, Tobacco
Art. I, Sale to Minors, Vending Machines
and Self-Service Displays
Ch. 660, Art. I
Ch. 432, Towing and Storage Services Ch. 665
Ch. 432A, Towing and Wrecker Licensing
Requirements
Ch. 669
Ch. 433, Transient Merchants and Itinerant
Vendors
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 676, Art. I
Art. II, Itinerant Photographic Vendors REP
Art. III, VDID/City Sponsored Events Ch. 676, Art. II
Ch. 438, Utilities
Part 1, Municipal Electric Utility
Operations
Ch. 687, Part 1
Part 2, Municipal Electric Utility
Administration
Ch. 687, Part 2
Part 3, Non-Utility-Generated Electric
Power
Ch. 687, Part 3
Part 4, Water-Sewer Utility Ch. 687, Part 4
Ch. 442, Vehicles and Traffic
Part 1, Public Highways Ch. 694, Part 1
Part 2, Snow Emergencies Ch. 694, Part 2
Part 3, Public Schools Ch. 694, Part 3
Part 4, Shopping Centers Ch. 694, Part 4
Part 5, Automatic Traffic Control Signals Ch. 694, Part 5
Part 6, General Penalties Ch. 694, Part 6
Ch. 446, Vehicles, Motor Ord. No. 2006-97
Ch. 455, Water
Art. I, Connection with Public Supply Ch. 710, Art. I
APPENDIX
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1471
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2009 Code
Ch. A464, Cable Television Franchise Ch. A730
Ch. A465, Disposition of Ordinances Omitted
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-48 7-28-2009 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2009-49 7-28-2009 Sale of property NCM
2009-50 7-28-2009 Charitable clothing bins Ch. 277
2009-51 7-28-2009 Acquisition of easement NCM
2009-52 7-28-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2009-53 7-28-2009 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2009-54 8-11-2009 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2009-55 8-11-2009 Exchange of property NCM
2009-56 8-25-2009 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2009-57 8-25-2009 Restaurants amendment Ch. 563
2009-58 8-25-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2009-59 8-25-2009 Bond NCM
2009-60 9-8-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-61 9-22-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2009-62 9-8-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2009-63 9-8-2009 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2009-64 10-13-2009 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2009-65 10-27-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2009-66 10-27-2009 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2009-67 10-27-2009 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2009-68 10-27-2009 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2009-69 10-27-2009 Authorization to enter into
service agreement
NCM
2009-70 10-27-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 425
§ DT-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1472
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-71 11-10-2009 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2009-72 11-24-2009 Readoption of land use
amendments
Ch. 425, footnote
only
2009-73 11-10-2009 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2009-74 11-10-2009 Bond NCM
2009-75 11-24-2009 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2009-76 12-8-2009 Bond NCM
2009-77 12-8-2009 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2009-78 12-8-2009 Special Improvement District
amendment
NCM
2009-79 12-22-2009 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2009-80 1-12-2010 Financial agreement NCM
2009-81 12-22-2009 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2009-82 12-22-2009 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2009-83 12-22-2009 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2009-84 12-22-2009 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2009-85 12-22-2009 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2009-86 12-22-2009 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2009-87 1-12-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2009-88 1-12-2010 Municipal Electric Utility
operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2009-89 1-12-2010 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2010-1 1-26-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-2 2-9-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-3 2-9-2010 Reappropriation NCM
2010-4 Defeated
2010-5 2-9-2010 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1473
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-6 2-23-2010 Ord. No. 2008-36 repealer
(acceptance of property)
NCM
2010-7 2-23-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-8 2-23-2010 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
2010-9 2-23-2010 Streets and sidewalks:
general rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 630, Art. I
2010-10 2-23-2010 Purchase of property NCM
2010-11 3-9-2010 Lease agreement NCM
2010-12 3-9-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-13 3-23-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-14 3-23-2010 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 216
2010-15 3-23-2010 Parks and recreation: general
use regulations amendment;
background checks
Ch. 507, Arts. II
and IV
2010-16 4-13-2010 Bond NCM
2010-17 Defeated
2010-18 Defeated
2010-19 4-27-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-20 5-11-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-21 5-11-2010 Reappropriation NCM
2010-22 5-25-2010 Conveyance of easement NCM
2010-23 5-25-2010 Conveyance of cross
easement
NCM
2010-24 5-25-2010 Bond NCM
2010-25 6-7-2010 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2010-26 6-7-2010 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
2010-27 6-22-2010 Fees: duplicate redemption
certificates amendment
Ch. 350, Art. IV
2010-28 7-13-2010 Authorization of capital
improvements
NCM
2010-29 7-27-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-30 7-27-2010 Motor vehicles amendment Ch. 700
2010-31 7-27-2010 Restaurants amendment Ch. 563
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1474
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-32 8-10-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-33 8-10-2010 Purchase and sale agreement NCM
2010-34 9-14-2010 Refunding bonds NCM
2010-35 8-24-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-36 8-24-2010 Street name change NCM
2010-37 8-24-2010 Exceed limit; cap bank NCM
2010-38 9-14-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-39 9-28-2010 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2010-40 9-28-2010 Acceptance of property NCM
2010-41 9-28-2010 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2010-42 10-12-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-43 10-12-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-44 10-12-2010 Purchase and sale agreement NCM
2010-45 10-12-2010 Purchase and sale agreement NCM
2010-46 10-12-2010 Authorization to enter into
service agreement
NCM
2010-47 10-12-2010 Lease of property NCM
2010-48 10-12-2010 Animals: animal control
amendment
Ch. 224, Art. I
2010-49 10-26-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-50 11-9-2010 Authorization to enter into
service agreement
NCM
2010-51 11-23-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-52 11-23-2010 Acquisition of property NCM
2010-53 12-14-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-54 12-14-2010 Garbage and trash collection;
recycling amendment;
dissolution of garbage and
trash collection district and
creation of Solid Waste Utility
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2011-28
2010-55 12-14-2010 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2010-56 12-14-2010 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2010-57 12-14-2010 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1475
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-58 12-14-2010 Service agreement
amendment
NCM
2010-59 12-28-2010 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2010-60 12-28-2010 Emergency appropriation NCM
Res. No.
2010-612
12-28-2010 Reconsideration of Ord. No.
2010-54 and overriding
Mayor's veto
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2011-28
2010-61 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
Not adopted
2010-62 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
Not adopted
2010-63 1-11-2011 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 24
2010-64 1-11-2011 Purchase and sale agreement NCM
2010-65 1-11-2011 Purchase and sale agreement NCM
2010-66 1-11-2011 Games of chance: issuing
authority for bingo and raffle
licenses amendment
Ch. 391, Art. I
2011-1 1-25-2011 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2011-2 1-25-2011 Purchase and sale agreement NCM
2011-3 2-8-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
2011-4 2-8-2011 Street vacation NCM
2011-5 2-8-2011 Municipal Electric Utility
operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2011-6 2-8-2011 Water-Sewer Utility
amendment
Ch. 687, Part 4
2011-7 2-8-2011 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2011-8 2-22-2011 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2011-9 Parks and recreation: general
use regulations amendment
Not adopted
2011-10 3-22-2011 Acquisition of easement NCM
2011-11 4-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2011-12 4-26-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-13 4-26-2011 Municipal Electric Utility
operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2011-14 4-26-2011 Charter amendment NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1476
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-15 4-26-2011 Parks and recreation: general
use regulations amendment
Ch. 507, Art. II
2011-16 4-26-2011 Authorization to revert from
state fiscal year to calendar
fiscal year
NCM
2011-17 5-10-2011 Tax exemption agreements NCM
2011-18 5-10-2011 Renewal of lease NCM
2011-19 5-10-2011 Noise amendment Ch. 469
2011-20 5-10-2011 Bond NCM
2011-21 5-10-2011 Reappropriation NCM
2011-22 5-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 694
2011-23 5-10-2011 Street vacation amendment NCM
2011-24 5-10-2011 Street vacation amendment NCM
2011-25 5-24-2011 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2011-26 5-24-2011 Department of Public Works
amendment
Ch. 135
2011-27 5-24-2011 Handbills amendment Ch. 446
2011-28 5-24-2011 Condominiums: municipal
services amendment; solid
waste
Chs. 294, Art. I;
620
2011-29 6-14-2011 Street acceptance NCM
2011-30 6-14-2011 Interconnection service
agreement
NCM
2011-31 6-14-2011 Service agreement
amendment
NCM
2011-32 6-14-2011 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2011-33 6-14-2011 Reappropriation NCM
2011-34 7-12-2011 Right-of-way vacation NCM
2011-35 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
Not adopted
2011-36 7-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 694
2011-37 7-26-2011 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2011-38 8-9-2011 Tax exemption agreement NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1477
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-39 8-9-2011 Parks and recreation:
background checks
amendment
Ch. 507, Art. IV
2011-40 8-9-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
2011-41 8-23-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
2011-42 8-23-2011 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2011-43 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
Not adopted
2011-44 9-13-2011 Lease agreement NCM
2011-45 9-13-2011 Dedication of right-of-way NCM
2011-46 9-27-2011 Bond NCM
2011-47 10-11-2011 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2011-48 11-7-2011 Acquisition of easement NCM
2011-49 10-25-2011 Police Department:
employment of off-duty police
officers amendment
Ch. 123, Art. VII
2011-50 11-7-2011 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2011-51 11-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 694
2011-52 11-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 694
2011-53 11-7-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-54 11-22-2011 Municipal Electric Utility
service agreement
NCM
2011-55 11-22-2011 Municipal Electric Utility
service agreement
NCM
2011-56 11-22-2011 Fire prevention: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 372, Art. I
2011-57 11-22-2011 Fire prevention: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 372, Art. I
2011-58 11-22-2011 Fire prevention: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 372, Art. I
2011-59 12-13-2011 Municipal Electric Utility
service agreement
NCM
2011-60 12-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 694
2011-61 12-13-2011 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1478
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-62 12-13-2011 Officers and employees: Tax
Assessor amendment
Ch. 110, Art. II
2011-63 12-13-2011 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
2011-64 12-27-2011 Municipal Electric Utility
service agreement
NCM
2011-65 12-27-2011 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2011-66 12-27-2011 U-Pull-It redevelopment plan NCM
2011-67 1-10-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2011-68 1-10-2012 Acquisition of easement NCM
2011-69 1-10-2012 Acquisition of easement NCM
2012-1 1-24-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-2 1-24-2012 Police Department: special
law enforcement officers
amendment
Ch. 123, Art. III
2012-3 2-14-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-4 2-14-2012 Acceptance of right-of-way NCM
2012-5 2-28-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 694
2012-6 2-28-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-7 2-28-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2012-8 2-28-2012 Newcomb Hospital
redevelopment plan
NCM
2012-9 2-28-2012 Bond NCM
2012-10 3-13-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-11 3-13-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
2012-12 3-27-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-13 3-27-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-14 4-10-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-15 4-10-2012 2012 Water Utility connection
fees
NCM
2012-16 4-10-2012 Lease of property NCM
2012-17 4-24-2012 Water storage tank
maintenance agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1479
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-18 4-24-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-19 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
Not adopted
2012-20 Restaurants amendment Not adopted
2012-21 5-8-2012 Fees: records of vital
statistics amendment; water
and sewage disposal systems
amendment
Ch. 350, Arts. I
and II
2012-22 5-8-2012 Swimming pools: public pools
amendment
Ch. 639, Art. I
2012-23 5-8-2012 Tattooing and body piercing
amendment
Ch. 643
2012-24 5-22-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-25 5-22-2012 Secondhand goods
amendment
Ch. 574
2012-26 5-22-2012 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2012-27 6-12-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-28 6-12-2012 Bond NCM
2012-29 6-26-2012 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2012-30 6-26-2012 Restaurants amendment Ch. 563
2012-31 6-26-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-32 7-17-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-33 7-17-2012 Conveyance of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
2012-34 7-31-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-35 8-14-2012 Bond cancellation NCM
2012-36 8-14-2012 Bond NCM
2012-37 9-25-2012 Towing and storage services
amendment
Ch. 665
2012-38 8-28-2012 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2012-39 8-28-2012 Fire Department: Length of
Service Awards Program
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
2015-36
2012-40 9-25-2012 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1480
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-41 9-25-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-42 9-25-2012 Tax exemption agreement
cancellation
NCM
2012-43 10-9-2012 Municipal Electric Utility
operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2012-44 Bond Not adopted
2012-45 10-9-2012 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2012-46 10-23-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-47 10-23-2012 Bond NCM
2012-48 10-23-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-49 11-13-2012 Animals: feral cats Ch. 224, Art. VII
2012-50 11-13-2012 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2012-51 11-13-2012 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2012-52 11-13-2012 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2012-53 11-27-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-54 11-27-2012 Acceptance of certain
property
NCM
2012-55 11-27-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-56 11-27-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-57 12-11-2012 Acceptance of right-of-way NCM
2012-58 12-11-2012 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 216
2012-59 12-11-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-60 12-11-2012 Bond NCM
2012-61 12-26-2012 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2012-62 12-26-2012 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
2012-63 12-26-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-64 12-26-2012 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1481
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-65 12-26-2012 Police Department: special
law enforcement officers
amendment
Ch. 123, Art. III,
footnote only
2012-66 1-15-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-67 1-15-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2012-68 1-29-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2012-69 1-15-2013 Lease of property NCM
2013-1 1-29-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-2 1-29-2013 Police Department: special
law enforcement officers
amendment
Ch. 123, Art. III,
footnote only
2013-3 2-12-2013 Claims approval amendment Ch. 19
2013-4 2-26-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-5 2-26-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-6 2-26-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-7 2-26-2013 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 651
2013-8 2-26-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2013-9 3-12-2013 Water-Sewer Utility
amendment
Ch. 687, Part 4
2013-10 3-12-2013 Appropriation NCM
2013-11 3-12-2013 Bond NCM
2013-12 3-12-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-13 4-9-2013 Department of Law
amendment
Ch. 84
2013-14 4-9-2013 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
2013-15 4-23-2013 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2013-16 5-14-2013 Lease of property NCM
2013-17 5-14-2013 Water-Sewer Utility
amendment
Ch. 687, Part 4
2013-18 5-28-2013 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1482
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-19 5-28-2013 2013 Water Utility connection
fees
NCM
2013-20 5-28-2013 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2013-21 6-11-2013 Water storage tank
maintenance agreement
NCM
2013-22 6-11-2013 Lease agreement NCM
2013-23 6-11-2013 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2013-24 6-11-2013 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2013-25 6-18-2013 Repeal of PILOT agreement;
grant of tax exemption
NCM
2013-26 7-9-2013 Reappropriation of funds NCM
2013-27 7-9-2013 Bond NCM
2013-28 7-9-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-29 7-9-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-30 7-23-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-31 7-23-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-32 7-23-2013 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2013-33 8-13-2013 Municipal Electric Utility
operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2013-34 8-13-2013 Police Department: Police
Chaplain
Ch. 123, Art. VIII
2013-35 8-13-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-36 8-27-2013 Restaurants amendment Ch. 563
2013-37 8-27-2013 Lease of property NCM
2013-38 Defeated
2013-39 8-27-2013 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2013-40 8-27-2013 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1483
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-41 9-10-2013 Cancellation of pilot
agreement
NCM
2013-42 9-24-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2013-43 9-10-2013 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 24
2013-44 9-10-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-45 9-24-2013 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2013-46 Not adopted
2013-47 9-24-2013 Appropriation NCM
2013-48 10-8-2013 PILOT agreement NCM
2013-49 10-8-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-50 10-22-2013 PILOT agreement NCM
2013-51 10-22-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-52 10-22-2013 Brush, weeds, plant life, solid
waste and debris amendment
Ch. 247
2013-53 10-22-2013 Animal control amendment;
cats amendment
Ch. 224, Arts. I
and IV
2013-54 10-22-2013 PILOT agreement NCM
2013-55 Not adopted
2013-56 11-26-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-57 11-26-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-58 11-26-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-59 12-10-2013 Animal control amendment;
cats amendment
Ch. 224, Arts. I
and IV
2013-60 Not adopted
2013-61 Not adopted
2013-62 12-10-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-63 12-10-2013 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2013-64 12-10-2013 Secondhand goods
amendment
Ch. 574
2013-65 12-23-2013 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1484
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-66 12-23-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
2013-67 Not adopted
2013-68 1-14-2014 Department of Law
amendment
Ch. 84
2014-1 1-28-2014 Registration, licensing and
occupancy permits:
residential buildings
Ch. 475, Art. I
2014-2 1-28-2014 Employment of off-duty police
officers amendment
Ch. 123, Art. VII
2014-3 1-28-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-4 1-28-2014 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2014-5 2-11-2014 Acquisition of easement NCM
2014-6 2-11-2014 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 651
2014-7 2-11-2014 Acquisition of property NCM
2014-8 2-11-2014 Special Improvement District
amendment
NCM
2014-9 2-11-2014 Secondhand goods
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
2014-21
2014-10 2-25-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2014-11 2-25-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-12 2-25-2014 Use of tobacco and tobaccorelated
products on public
property
Ch. 660, Art. II
2014-13 3-11-2014 Lease agreement NCM
2014-14 3-25-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-15 5-13-2014 Service agreement with
Energy America, LLC
NCM
2014-16 5-27-2014 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2014-17 5-27-2014 Mandatory direct deposit of
net pay for City employees in
specific banking institutions
NCM
2014-18 5-27-2014 Parks and recreation:
background checks
amendment
Ch. 507, Art. IV
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1485
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-19 5-27-2014 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2014-20 5-27-2014 Purchase of real property NCM
2014-21 6-10-2014 Secondhand goods
amendment
Ch. 574
2014-22 6-24-2014 Fees: water and sewage
disposal systems amendment
Ch. 350, Art. II
2014-23 6-24-2014 Bond NCM
2014-24 6-24-2014 Police Department: Director
of Public Safety amendment
Ch. 123, Art. II
2014-25 6-24-2014 Police Department: Police
Chaplain amendment
Ch. 123, Art. VIII
2014-26 7-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2014-27 7-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2014-28 7-22-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2014-29 8-12-2014 Utilities: municipal electric
utility operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2014-30 8-12-2014 Acquisition of easement NCM
2014-31 8-12-2014 Bond NCM
2014-32 8-26-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-33 8-26-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-34 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
Not adopted
2014-35 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
Not adopted
2014-36 8-26-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-37 8-26-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-38 8-26-2014 Insurance: municipal self
insurance fund
Ch. 76, Art. I
2014-39 8-26-2014 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 24
2014-40 8-26-2014 Vacant, abandoned and
nuisance property
amendment
Ch. 530
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1486
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-41 Department of Administration
amendment
Vetoed by Mayor
2014-42 8-26-2014 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
2014-43 9-23-2014 Reconveyance of property NCM
2014-44 10-14-2014 2014 Water Utility connection
fees
NCM
2014-45 10-28-2014 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2014-46 10-28-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-47 10-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2014-48 10-28-2014 Registration, licensing and
occupancy permits:
residential buildings
amendment
Ch. 475, Art. I
2014-49 11-10-2014 Conveyance of certain
property to Cumberland
County Habitat for Humanity,
Inc.
NCM
2014-50 11-10-2014 Reappropriation NCM
2014-51 11-10-2014 Financial disclosure Ch. 52
2014-52 11-25-2014 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2014-53 11-25-2014 Cancellation of unexpended
balance of improvement
authorizations
NCM
2014-54 11-25-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-55 11-25-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-56 11-25-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-57 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
Defeated
2014-58 12-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2014-59 12-9-2014 Reappropriation NCM
2014-60 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
Defeated
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1487
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-61 12-23-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-62 12-23-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-63 12-23-2014 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-64 1-13-2015 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2014-65 1-13-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2014-66 1-13-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-1 1-29-2015 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2015-2 1-29-2015 Special Improvement District
amendment
NCM
2015-3 2-10-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-4 2-10-2015 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2015-5 2-24-2015 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2015-6 2-10-2015 Assignment agreement for
acquisition of property
NCM
2015-7 2-10-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-8 2-10-2015 Deed acceptance NCM
2015-9 2-24-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2015-10 2-24-2015 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2015-11 2-24-2015 Acceptance of dedication of
land
NCM
2015-12 3-10-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-13 3-10-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-14 3-10-2015 Police Department: special
law enforcement officers
amendment
Ch. 123, Art. III
2015-15 3-10-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1488
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-16 3-24-2015 Acquisition of property NCM
2015-17 4-14-2015 Reappropriation NCM
2015-18 4-14-2015 Acceptance of drainage
easement
NCM
2015-19 4-14-2015 Acquisition of property NCM
2015-20 4-14-2015 Sale of property NCM
2015-21 4-14-2015 Electric Utility service
agreement
NCM
2015-22 4-28-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-23 4-28-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-24 4-28-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-25 4-28-2015 Appointment of
redevelopment entity for Four
Corners redevelopment
project
NCM
2015-26 4-28-2015 Appointment of
redevelopment entity for
Newcomb redevelopment
project
NCM
2015-27 6-9-2015 Newcomb Hospital
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
2015-28 6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2015-29 6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2015-30 6-23-2015 Deed of easement NCM
2015-31 7-14-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-32 8-11-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-33 9-8-2015 Renewed consent to South
Jersey Gas Company
NCM
2015-34 9-8-2015 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2015-35 9-8-2015 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1489
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-36 9-8-2015 Fire Department Ch. 56
2015-37 9-8-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-38 9-22-2015 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2015-39 9-22-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-40 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
Not adopted
2015-41 9-22-2015 Rental property: registration
and occupancy permits for
residential buildings
Ch. 485, Art. I
2015-42 10-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2015-43 10-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2015-44 10-27-2015 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2015-45 10-27-2015 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2015-46 11-24-2015 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2015-47 11-24-2015 Bond NCM
2015-48 11-24-2015 Bond NCM
2015-49 12-8-2015 Lease bid acceptance NCM
2015-50 12-22-2015 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2015-51 12-22-2015 Utilities: Municipal Electric
Utility operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2015-52 1-12-2016 Pilot agreement for project
tax exemption
NCM
2015-53 1-12-2016 Appropriation NCM
2015-54 1-12-2016 Bond cancellation NCM
2016-1 1-26-2016 Officers and employees:
Municipal Prosecutor
amendment
Ch. 110, Art. V
2016-2 1-26-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1490
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-3 1-26-2016 Use of eminent domain
authorized
NCM
2016-4 2-23-2016 Acceptance of donation from
PG Super 25 Mid-Atlantic for
upgrades to Landis Park
NCM
2016-5 2-23-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-6 Not adopted
2016-7 4-12-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
2016-8 4-26-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-9 4-26-2016 Appointing City Council as
redevelopment entity for
Energy and Minerals
Condemnation
Redevelopment Area
NCM
2016-10 5-10-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
2016-11 5-24-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-12 5-24-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-13 5-24-2016 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2016-14 5-24-2016 Police Department:
employment of off-duty police
officers amendment
Ch. 123, Art. VII
2016-15 5-24-2016 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 216
2016-16 5-24-2016 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 651
2016-17 6-14-2016 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2016-18 6-14-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
2016-19 6-28-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-20 Not adopted
2016-21 8-9-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-22 8-9-2016 Vacant, abandoned and
nuisance property
amendment
Ch. 530
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1491
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-23 8-9-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-24 8-9-2016 Demolition of structures Ch. 635
2016-25 8-23-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-26 9-13-2016 City Center Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2016-27 9-13-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-28 9-13-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-29 9-13-2016 Pilot agreements for project
tax exemption
NCM
2016-30 9-13-2016 Department of Finance
amendment; officers and
employees: Chief Financial
Officer amendment
Ch. 50; Ch. 110,
Art. IV
2016-31 9-27-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-32 9-27-2016 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2016-33 Not adopted
2016-34 9-27-2016 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
2016-35 9-27-2016 Establishing City Green Team NCM
2016-36 10-11-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-37 10-11-2016 Pilot agreements for project
tax exemption
NCM
2016-38 10-11-2016 Bond NCM
2016-39 10-25-2016 Signature practice for checks NCM
2016-40 10-25-2016 Deed acceptance NCM
2016-41 10-25-2016 Land donation acceptance NCM
2016-42 10-25-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-43 11-22-2016 Bond NCM
2016-44 11-7-2016 Easement NCM
2016-45 11-22-2016 Pilot agreements for project
tax exemption
NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1492
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-46 11-22-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-47 11-22-2016 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2016-48 11-22-2016 Acquisition of property NCM`
2016-49 1-10-2017 PILOT agreement NCM
2016-50 1-10-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-1 2-24-2017 Water-Sewer Utility
amendment
Ch. 687, Part 4
2017-2 1-24-2017 Municipal Electric Utility and
Water-Sewer Utility
administration amendment
Ch. 687, Part 2
2017-3 2-14-2017 Department of Law
amendment
Ch. 84
2017-4 2-14-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-5 2-14-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-6 2-14-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-7 2-14-2017 Bond amendment NCM
2017-8 2-14-2017 Development Corporation
amendment
Ch. 29
2017-9 2-14-2017 Intermunicipal agreement
establishing NJPPA
NCM
2017-10 2-14-2017 Municipal Electric Utility and
Water-Sewer Utility
administration amendment
Ch. 687, Part 2
2017-11 2-14-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-12 2-28-2017 Signature practice for checks NCM
2017-13 2-28-2017 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
2017-14 2-28-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-15 2-28-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-16 2-28-2017 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1493
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-17 3-14-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-18 3-14-2017 Lease agreements NCM
2017-19 3-14-2017 Carnivals amendment Ch. 269
2017-20 3-14-2017 Department of Licenses and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 92
2017-21 3-28-2017 Lease agreement NCM
2017-22 3-28-2017 Police Department: Police
Chaplain amendment
Ch. 123, Art. VIII
2017-23 3-28-2017 Police Department: special
law enforcement officers
amendment
Ch. 123, Art. III
2017-24 3-28-2017 Officers and employees: Tax
Assessor amendment
Ch. 110, Art. II
2017-25 4-11-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-26 4-11-2017 Residency preference
amendment
Ch. 151
2017-27 4-11-2017 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
2017-28 4-11-2017 Economic assistance for
deployed military personnel
Ch. 335
2017-29 4-11-2017 Bond NCM
2017-30 4-25-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-31 4-25-2017 Bond NCM
2017-32 5-9-2017 Appropriation NCM
2017-33 5-9-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-34 5-9-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2017-35 5-23-2017 Appropriation amendment NCM
2017-36 6-27-2017 Rescinding sale of property
(Ord. No. 2008-51)
NCM
2017-37 6-27-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-38 6-27-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-39 Not adopted
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1494
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-40 6-27-2017 Water-Sewer Utility
amendment
Ch. 687, Part 4
2017-41 6-27-2017 Municipal Electric Utility
operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2017-42 Not adopted
2017-43 7-11-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-44 7-11-2017 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 300
2017-45 7-11-2017 Acceptance of drainage
easement
NCM
2017-46 7-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
2017-47 7-11-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-48 7-11-2017 Municipal Electric Utility
operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2017-49 7-25-2017 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 157
2017-50 8-8-2017 Department of Licenses and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 92
2017-51 8-8-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-52 8-8-2017 Fire Department amendment Ch. 56
2017-53 8-8-2017 Bond NCM
2017-54 8-8-2017 Bond NCM
2017-55 8-8-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-56 8-22-2017 Auctions and auctioneers
amendment
Ch. 230
2017-57 8-22-2017 Landis Theater Foundation
Board of Directors
Ch. 81
2017-58 8-22-2017 Professional services
agreements and contracts:
award of professional service
agreements and contracts
without competitive bidding
Ch. 126, Art I
2017-59 9-12-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-60 9-12-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1495
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-61 9-12-2017 Bond NCM
2017-62 9-12-2017 Acceptance of land NCM
2017-63 9-26-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-64 9-26-2017 Bond NCM
2017-65 9-26-2017 Utilities: Municipal Electric
Utility operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2017-66 10-10-2017 Land donation acceptance NCM
2017-67 10-10-2017 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2017-68 Not adopted
2017-69 10-24-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-70 10-24-2017 Cable television franchise
amendment
Ch. A730
2017-71 10-24-2017 Department of Public Works
amendment
Ch. 135
2017-72 10-24-2017 Department of Administration
amendment
Ch. 5
2017-73 10-24-2017 Energy and Minerals
Condemnation
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
2017-74 10-24-2017 Appropriation NCM
2017-75 11-14-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-76 11-6-2017 Lease agreement NCM
2017-77 11-14-2017 Center City Redevelopment
Plan amendment
NCM
2017-78 11-14-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-79 11-28-2017 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2017-80 11-28-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-81 Not adopted
2017-82 12-12-2017 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2017-83 12-12-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-84 12-12-2017 Acceptance of property NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1496
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-85 12-12-2017 Land use amendment Ch. 425
2017-86 12-12-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2017-87 12-12-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-88 12-26-2017 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2017-89 12-26-2017 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-90 12-26-2017 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 216
2017-91 Not adopted
2017-92 1-16-2018 Utilities: municipal electric
utility operations amendment
Ch. 687, Part 1
2017-93 1-16-2018 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-94 1-16-2018 Classified positions and
salaries amendment
NCM
2017-95 1-16-2018 Vehicles and traffic: public
highways amendment
Ch. 694, Part 1
(footnote only)
2017-96 1-16-2018 Rental property: registration
and occupancy permits for
residential buildings
amendment
Ch. 485, Art. I
2017-97 1-16-2018 Vacant, abandoned and
nuisance property
amendment
Ch. 530
2017-98 1-16-2018 Appropriation NCM
2018-1 1-30-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-2 1-30-2018 Acceptance of Land NCM
2018-3 1-30-2018 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 511
2018-4 1-30-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-5 1-30-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-6 1-30-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 537
2018-7 2-13-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1497
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-8 2-27-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-9 3-13-2018 Utilities: Municipal Electric
Utility Operations
Amendment
Ch. 687, Pt. 1
2018-10 3-13-2018 Exceed Budget; Establish Cap
Bank
NCM
2018-11 3-27-2018 Street Vacation NCM
2018-12 3-27-2018 Officers and Employees:
Municipal Prosecutor
Amendment
Ch. 110, Art. V
2018-13 3-27-2018 Department of Health
Amendment
Ch. 62
2018-14 3-27-2018 Police Department:
Composition; Membership;
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 123, Art. I
2018-15 3-27-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-16 3-27-2018 Acceptance of Property NCM
2018-17 3-27-2018 Utilities: Municipal Electric
Utility Operations
Amendment
Ch. 687, Pt. 1
2018-18 4-10-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-19 4-10-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-20 4-10-2018 Utilities: Municipal Electric
Utility Operations
Amendment
Ch. 687, Pt. 1
2018-21 Not Adopted
2018-22 4-10-2018 Development Corporation
Amendment
Ch. 29
2018-23 4-10-2018 Police Department:
Composition; Membership;
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 123, Art. I
2018-24 4-24-2018 Emergency Management
Amendment
Ch. 36
2018-25 5-8-2018 Claims Approval Amendment Ch. 19
2018-26 5-8-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2018-27 5-8-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1498
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-28 5-8-2018 Land Use: Subdivision and
Site Plan Review and
Approval Amendment
Ch. 425, Art. VI
2018-29 5-8-2018 Transfer of Property NCM
2018-30 5-22-2018 Transfer of Property NCM
2018-31 6-12-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-32 6-12-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2018-33 6-27-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-34 6-26-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-35 6-26-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-36 6-26-2018 Appropriation NCM
2018-37 6-26-2018 Utilities: Water-Sewer Utility
Amendment
Ch. 687, Pt. 4
2018-38 7-17-2018 Agreement NCM
2018-39 7-17-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2018-40 7-17-2018 Library, Public: Establishment
and Management Amendment
Ch. 431, Art. I
2018-41 7-31-2018 Fees: Records of Vital
Statistics Amendment
Ch. 350, Art. I
2018-42 7-31-2018 Fire Prevention: General
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 372, Art. I
2018-43 7-31-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: Public
Highways Amendment
Ch. 694, Pt. 1
2018-44 8-14-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-45 7-11-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2018-46 8-28-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-47 9-11-2018 Agreement NCM
2018-48 9-11-2018 Acceptance of Land NCM
2018-49 9-11-2018 Lease NCM
2018-50 9-25-2018 Agreement NCM
2018-51 9-12-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1499
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-52 10-9-2018 Police Department:
Composition; Membership;
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 123, Art. I
2018-53 10-9-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-54 10-23-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-55 10-23-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-56 10-23-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2018-57 10-23-2018 Construction Codes, Uniform
Amendment
Ch. 300
2018-58 11-13-2018 Tobacco and Electronic
Smoking Devices Amendment
Ch. 660
2018-59 11-13-2018 Animals: Animal Control
Amendment
Ch. 224, Art. I
2018-60 11-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: Public
Highways Amendment
Ch. 694, Pt. 1
2018-61 10-10-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2018-62 11-13-2018 Bond NCM
2018-63 11-13-2018 Agreement NCM
2018-64 11-27-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-65 11-27-2018 Agreement NCM
2018-66 11-27-2018 Appropriation NCM
2018-67 11-27-2018 Agreement NCM
2018-68 11-27-2018 Utilities Amendment Ch. 687
2018-69 11-27-2018 Utilities Amendment Ch. 687
2018-70 11-27-2018 Structures, Demolition of
Amendment
Ch. 635
2018-71 11-27-2018 Industrial Commission
Amendment
Ch. 74
2018-72 12-11-2018 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-73 12-11-2018 Utilities Amendment Ch. 687
2018-74 12-11-2018 Bond NCM
2018-75 12-26-2018 Agreement NCM
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1500
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-76 1-2-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-77 1-22-2019 Agreement NCM
2018-78 1-22-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-79 1-22-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2018-80 1-22-2019 Police Department:
Employment of Off-Duty
Police Officers Amendment
Ch. 123, Art. VII
2019-1 2-12-2019 Agreement NCM
2019-2 2-12-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2019-3 2-12-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2019-4 2-12-2019 Police Department: Director
of Public Safety Amendment
Ch. 123, Art. II
2019-5 2-12-2019 Bicycles, Skateboards and
Similar Vehicles Amendment
Ch. 239
2019-6 2-12-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2019-7 2-12-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2019-8 2-26-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2019-9 2-26-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2019-10 2-26-2019 Taxation: Exemptions for
Residential Improvements
Ch. 647, Art. IV
2019-11 2-26-2019 Taxation: Exemptions for
Industrial and Commercial
Improvements
Ch. 647, Art. V
2019-12 2-26-2019 Rental Property: Registration
and Occupancy Permits for
Residential Buildings
Amendment
Ch. 485, Art. I
2019-13 2-26-2019 Appropriation NCM
2019-14 3-12-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1501
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2019-15 3-12-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2019-16 3-12-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2019-17 3-12-2019 Bond NCM
2019-18 3-12-2019 Bond NCM
2019-19 3-12-2019 Drug-Free Zones: Drug-Free
School Zones Amendment;
Drug-Free Public Building
Facility Zones; Drug-Free
Public Parks; Drug-Free
Public Housing Facilities
Ch. 327, Art. I;
Ch. 327, Art. II;
Ch. 327, Art. III;
Ch. 327, Art. IV
2019-20 3-26-2019 Land Use Amendment Ch. 425
2019-21 3-12-2019 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
2019-22 3-12-2019 Land Use Amendment Ch. 425
2019-23 3-12-2019 Water: Connection with
Public Supply Amendment
Ch. 710, Art. I
2019-24 3-12-2019 Classified Positions and
Salaries Amendment
NCM
2019-25 3-12-2019 Bond NCM
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-26 4-23-2019 Bond NCM 28
2019-27 4-9-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
2019-28 4-9-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
2019-29 4-9-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
2019-30 4-9-2019 Parks and
Recreation:
Background
Checks
Amendment
Ch. 507, Art.
IV
28
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1502
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-31 4-9-2019 Checks,
Returned
Amendment
Ch. 280 28
2019-32 4-9-2019 Appropriation NCM 28
2019-33 4-23-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
2019-34 5-14-2019 Police
Department:
Composition;
Membership;
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 123, Art.
I
28
2019-35 5-14-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 425 28
2019-36 5-28-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
2019-37 5-28-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
2019-38 5-28-2019 Redevelopment
Plan
NCM 28
2019-39 5-28-2019 Redevelopment
Plan
NCM 28
2019-40 5-28-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 425 28
2019-41 6-11-2019 Restaurants
Amendment
Ch. 563 28
2019-42 6-11-2019 Claims
Approval
Amendment
Ch. 19 28
2019-43 6-25-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1503
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-44 6-25-2019 Fire
Department
Amendment
Ch. 56 28
2019-45 7-9-2019 Tobacco and
Electronic
Smoking
Devices: Sale
to Minors;
Vending
Machines and
Self-Service
Displays
Amendment
Ch. 660, Art.
I
28
2019-46 7-9-2019 Utilities:
Collection of
Utility
Billings
Ch. 687, Art.
5
28
2019-47 7-9-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
2019-48 7-23-2019 Administration,
Department
of
Amendment
Ch. 5 28
2019-49 8-13-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
2019-50 8-13-2019 Easement NCM 28
2019-51 8-13-2019 Transfer of
City Property
NCM 28
2019-52 8-13-2019 Utilities:
Water-Sewer
Utility
Amendment
Ch. 687, Pt. 4 28
2019-53 8-13-2019 Fees: Water
and Sewage
Disposal
Systems
Amendment
Ch. 350, Art.
II
28
§ DL-1 VINELAND CODE § DL-1
1:1504
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-54 8-27-2019 Classified
Positions and
Salaries
Amendment
NCM 28
2019-55 8-27-2019 Administration,
Department
of
Amendment
Ch. 5 28
2019-56 8-27-2019 Utilities:
Water-Sewer
Utility
Amendment
Ch. 687, Pt. 4 28
2019-57 8-27-2019 Utilities:
Water-Sewer
Utility
Amendment
Ch. 687, Pt. 4 28
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1505