Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Vernon of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Council of the
Township of Vernon, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1
through 566, together with an Appendix, published in two volumes, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the
Township of Vernon," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the two-volume Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office
of the Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by
the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Vernon by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Vernon" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Vernon, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the two-volume book
containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of
the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent
to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Township Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Vernon to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 VERNON CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and
not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of
this Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. This ordinance
specifically repeals the prior Code of the Township of Vernon, adopted
5-20-1974.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 9-26-2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. All franchise agreements.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)*
*Editor's Note: Schedule A of Ordinance No. 06-07 may be found on file
in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 1-13 VERNON CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted 4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3]
§ 1-15. General rules of construction.1
In the construction of the Code of the Township of Vernon, and of all other
ordinances of the Township, words and phrases shall be read and construed
with their context, and shall, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Township Council or unless another or different meaning is expressly
indicated, be given their generally accepted meaning, according to the
approved usage of the language. Technical words and phrases, and words
and phrases having a special or accepted meaning in the law, shall be
construed in accordance with such technical or special and accepted
meaning.
§ 1-16. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, or unless there is something in the
subject or context repugnant to such construction, or unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Council, the following words and phrases,
when used in the Code of the Township of Vernon or in any other ordinances
of the Township, shall have the meanings herein given:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Business Administrator of the Township duly
appointed pursuant to law.[Added 9-26-11 by Ord. No. 11-21]
AND; OR — "And" may be construed as meaning "or," and "or" as to "and,"
if the sense requires it.
CHARTER — The Mayor-Council Plan pursuant to the Optional Municipal
Charter Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, and
any and all statutory provisions of the State of New Jersey applicable to the
Township.[Amended 9-26-11 by Ord. No. 11-21]
COUNCIL — The Municipal Council of the Township of Vernon.
COUNTY — The County of Sussex, New Jersey.
GENDER — Words importing the masculine gender shall apply to females
as well as to males, and to firms, associations, bodies corporate, and other
artificial persons.
GENERAL LAW — Any law or provision of law, not inconsistent with the
Optional Municipal Charter Law heretofore or hereafter enacted, which is
by its terms applicable or available to all municipalities, and the following
additional laws whether or not such additional laws are so applicable or
available to all municipalities: legislation relating to taxation, local courts,
education, health, public authorities serving more than one municipality,
and municipalities in unsound financial condition.
1. Editor's Note: Original § 1-1, What constitutes "Revised General Ordinances;" designation,
which previously preceded this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
GOVERNING BODY — The Municipal Council of the Township of Vernon,
duly elected as provided by law, or such other duly authorized body as shall
be charged by law with governing the Township.
HIGHWAY or PUBLIC HIGHWAY — See "street," infra.
MINOR — A person under 18 years of age.
MONTH — A calendar month.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Vernon.
NEW JERSEY ADMINISTRATIVE CODE or N.J.A.C. — The official instrument
of the state for codification of its rules.
NEW JERSEY STATUTES or N.J.S.A. — That body of statutory law containing
revisions of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and known as the "New
Jersey statutes," as amended and supplemented.
NUMBER — Words used in the singular number include the plural, and
words used in the plural include the singular number.
OATH — Includes "affirmation"; and "swear" and "sworn" include "affirm"
and "affirmed."
OCCUPANT — See "tenant," infra.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL (AND THE TITLE OF AN OFFICER OR OFFICIAL)
— Shall be construed as if the words "of the Township of Vernon" followed
it.
OR — See "And."
OWNER — Includes sole owner and any part owner, joint owner, tenant
in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety,
of the whole or of a part of a building or land, and personal property.
"Person" includes corporations, companies, societies, firms, partnerships,
associations, organizations and any other group or entity acting as a unit,
as well as an individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes goods and chattels, rights and credits,
moneys and effects, evidences of debt, chooses in action and all written
instruments by which any right to, interest in, or lien or encumbrance
upon, property or any debt of financial obligation is created, acknowledged,
evidenced, transferred, discharged or defeated in whole or in part, and
every thing, except real property as herein defined, which may be the
subject of ownership.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUND, PUBLIC SQUARE or PUBLIC PLACE — Severally, any
and every public ground, public square, public park or other public place
within the Township which is within the jurisdiction and control of the
Township, and which is or may be in general use by all citizens, and in which
all have an equal right of passage and repassage at will.
§ 1-16 VERNON CODE § 1-16
1:8
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, and all
related rights thereto and interests therein.
REVISED STATUTES or N.J.S.A. — That body of statutory law known as
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey (1937) containing the general and
permanent laws of the state adopted on December 20, 1937, as amended
and supplemented.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street or highway between the curbline or
the lateral line of a shoulder, or, if none, the lateral line of the roadway, and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STREET — Includes highways, roads, avenues, boulevards, courts, public
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, footpaths and all other public highways for
vehicular or pedestrian travel.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Vernon in the County of Sussex.
TOWNSHIP COUNCIL — The governing body of the Township of Vernon.
WEEK — Seven days.
WRITING — Except as to signatures, "writing" and "written" include
printing and any other mode of representing words, letters, and figures.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 1-17. Effect of repeal of certain ordinances.
Whenever an ordinance that repeals an earlier ordinance or part thereof is
itself repealed, such repeal shall not revive the former ordinance or part
thereof, unless specific provision is made therefor.
§ 1-18. Official Seal.
The Seal heretofore provided and used by and for the Township as its official
seal is hereby continued as the Official Seal of the Township.
§ 1-19. Violations and penalties.
A. Whenever no specific penalty is provided in the Code of the Township of
Vernon or in any other ordinance of the Township for the punishment of
an act which is prohibited or which is declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or for the nonperformance of an act which is required to be
done, the violation of any such provision shall be punished, as allowed
by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, as amended, by a fine not exceeding $2,000, or
such maximum penalty as permitted under New Jersey statutes as
amended, and/or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days; provided,
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:9
§ 1-20. Appointments to positions. [Added 1-22-2001 by Ord. No.
01-01; amended in entirety 9-26-11 by Ord. No. 11-21]
Whenever the Council is authorized by any provision of general law to
appoint the members of any board, authority or commission, such power
of appointment shall be deemed to vest in the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council, unless the specific terms of that general law clearly
require a different appointment procedure or appointment by resolution, in
which case the appointment shall be by the Council.
however, that when the maximum penalty fixed by an applicable state
statute is less, by force of said statute or by judicial construction, than
any penalty fixed in the Code of the Township of Vernon, then the
limitations of such state statute shall be applicable. In such cases where
a fine exceeding $1,250 is sought to be imposed for a housing or zoning
violation, the defendant shall be provided a period of 30 days from
the notice of violation or the summons to cure or abate the alleged
violating condition and shall have the opportunity to appear before a
court of competent jurisdiction for a hearing on the issue. The court
may impose the higher fine after the thirty-day period if the court
determines that the cure or abatement is not substantially complete.
[Amended 2-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-04]
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation of the Code of the Township of Vernon or of any other
ordinance of the Township, punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both,
occurs or continues.
C. The imposition of fine or imprisonment as punishment for a violation of
the Code of the Township of Vernon or of any other ordinances of the
Township shall not be deemed to be in lieu of any other provision
therein providing for revocation or suspension of any license or permit
issued thereunder.
D. In such cases where a fine exceeding $1,250 is sought to be imposed for
a housing or zoning violation, the defendant shall be provided a period
of 30 days from the notice of violation or the summons to cure or abate
the alleged violating condition and shall have the opportunity to appear
before a Court of competent jurisdiction for a hearing on the issue. The
Court may impose the higher fine after the 30 day period if the Court
determines that the cure or abatement is not substantially complete.
[Added 2-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-04]
§ 1-19 VERNON CODE § 1-20
1:10
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11

ARTICLE I
Administration of Township Government
§ 5-1. Form of government.
Effective July 1, 2011, the Township of Vernon shall be governed by the
"Mayor-Council Plan" of the Optional Municipal Charter Law, N.J.S.A.
40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 5-2. Exercise of legislative and executive functions.
A. The Township shall be governed by an elected council, and an elected
mayor and by such other officers and employees as may be duly
appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-31 to 40:69A-48, general law or
ordinance.
B. For the purpose of the construction of all other applicable statutes,
unless the explicit terms and context of the statute require a contrary
construction, any administrative or executive functions assigned by
general law to the governing body shall be exercised by the Mayor, and
any legislative and investigative functions assigned by general law to
the governing body shall be exercised by the Council. Those functions
shall be exercised pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Mayor-
Council Plan of government, unless other procedures are required by
the specific terms of the general law.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:13

ARTICLE II
Mayor and Council
§ 5-3. Office of the Mayor.
A. Executive power. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-39, the executive power of
the Township shall be exercised by the Mayor, subject to the procedures
set forth in the Mayor-Council Plan of government.
B. General powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Mayor shall be
to:
(1) Enforce the charter and ordinances of the municipality and all
general laws applicable thereto;
(2) Report annually to the council and to the public on the state of the
municipality, and the work of the previous year; the Mayor shall
also recommend to the council whatever action or programs the
Mayor deems necessary for the improvement of the municipality
and the welfare of its residents. The Mayor may from time to time
recommend any action or programs the Mayor deems necessary or
desirable for the municipality to undertake;
(3) Supervise, direct and control all departments of the Township
government and shall require each department to make an annual
and such other reports of its work as the Mayor may deem
desirable;
(4) Require such reports and examine such accounts, records and
operations of any board, commission or other agency of municipal
government, as the Mayor deems necessary;
(5) Prepare and submit to the council for its consideration and
adoption an annual operating budget and a capital budget,
establish the schedules and procedures to be followed by all
municipal departments, offices and agencies in connection
therewith, and supervise and administer all phases of the
budgetary process;
(6) Supervise the care and custody of all municipal property,
institutions and agencies, and make recommendations concerning
the nature and location of municipal improvements and execute
improvements determined by the Council;
(7) Sign all contracts, bonds or other instruments requiring the
consent of the Township;
(8) Review, analyze and forecast trends of municipal services and
finances and programs of all boards, commissions, agencies and
other municipal bodies, and report and recommend thereon to the
Council;
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:15
(9) Supervise the development, installation and maintenance of
centralized budgeting, personnel and purchasing procedures as
may be authorized by ordinance;
(10) Negotiate contracts for the Township, subject to Council approval;
(11) Assure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the
Township or its inhabitants in any statute, franchise or other
contract are faithfully kept and performed;
(12) Serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member of all appointive bodies in
Township government of which the Mayor is not an official voting
member.
C. Appointment power.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint all officers and employees for whose
selection or appointment no other provision is made by Charter,
ordinance or general law.
(2) The Mayor shall appoint the directors of each department with the
advice and consent of the Council. Each director shall serve during
the term of office of the Mayor and until the appointment and
qualification of a successor.
(3) The Mayor shall have such further appointment power as is
provided by general law or this code.
(4) The Mayor may remove any director after giving the director notice
and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing the director, the
Mayor shall file written notice of the Mayor's intention with the
Council, and such removal shall become effective on the 20th day
after the filing of the notice unless the Council prior to that day
adopts a resolution by a two-thirds vote of the whole membership of
the Council disapproving the removal.
(5) Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required by the Charter or
the Administrative Code to be filled by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council and if there is no holdover incumbent,
the Mayor may temporarily fill a vacancy (in the absence of any
contrary provision in the Charter or ordinances) by appointing an
acting officer, including the designation of the Mayor as Acting
Director in the event of a vacancy in any department. The
appointee shall have all the functions, powers and duties of the
office until it shall be permanently filled. Any such appointment
shall terminate 90 days after the date of the appointment unless the
Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or more extensions of
such period of up to 90 days.
D. Attendance and participation in Council meetings. The Mayor may
attend meetings of the Council and may take part in discussions of
Council, but shall not vote except in the case of a tie on the question of
§ 5-3 VERNON CODE § 5-3
1:16
§ 5-4. Township Council.
filling a vacancy in the Council, in which case the Mayor may cast the
deciding vote.
E. Approval or veto of ordinances. All ordinances adopted by the Council
shall be submitted to the Mayor and the Mayor shall within ten (10)
days after receiving an ordinance either approve the ordinance by
signing it or return it to the Council by delivering it to the Township
Clerk, together with a statement setting forth the Mayor's objections to
the ordinance or to any item or part thereof. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:69A-41, no ordinance or any item or part thereof shall take effect
without the Mayor's approval unless the Mayor fails to return the
ordinance to the Council within ten (10) days after it has been
presented to the Mayor or unless Council, upon reconsideration after
the third day following its return by the Mayor, shall by a vote of 2/3 of
the total membership of the Council resolve to override the Mayor's
veto.
F. Acting Mayor. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-42, the Mayor shall
designate the Business Administrator, any other department head or
the Township Clerk to act as Mayor whenever the Mayor shall be
prevented by absence from the Township, disability or other cause from
attending to the duties of the Mayor's office. During such time, the
person so designated by the Mayor shall possess all of the rights,
powers and duties of the Mayor. Whenever the Mayor has been unable
to attend to the duties of the Mayor's office for a period of 60
consecutive days for any of the above-stated reasons, an Acting Mayor
shall be appointed by the Council, who shall succeed to all the rights,
powers and duties of the Mayor or the then Acting Mayor.
G. Election; term of office. The Mayor shall be elected by the voters of the
Township at a regular municipal election held on the Tuesday after the
first Monday in November in the years in which municipal officers are
to be elected and shall serve for a term of four (4) years beginning on
January 1 next following his or her election. [Amended 2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
A. Legislative power. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-36, the legislative power
of the Township shall be exercised by the Township Council, except as
may be otherwise provided by general law, subject to the procedures
set forth in this plan of government. Legislative powers shall be
exercised by ordinance, except for the exercise of those powers that
under this plan of government or general law do not require action by
the Mayor as a condition of approval for the exercise thereof and may,
therefore, be exercised by resolution, including, but not limited to:
(1) The override of a veto of the Mayor.
(2) The exercise of advice and consent to the actions of the Mayor.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:17
(3) The conduct of a legislative inquiry or investigation.
(4) The expression of disapproval of the removal by the Mayor of
officers or employees.
(5) The removal of any municipal officer for cause.
(6) The adoption of rules for the Council.
(7) The establishment of times and places for Council meetings.
(8) The establishment of the Council as a committee of the whole and
the delegation of any number of its members as an ad hoc
committee.
(9) The declaration of emergencies respecting the passage of
ordinances.
(10) The election, appointment, setting of salaries and removal of
officers and employees of the Council, subject to any pertinent civil
service requirements and any pertinent contractual obligations and
within the general limits of the municipal budget.
(11) The designation of official newspapers.
(12) The approval of contracts presented by the Mayor.
(13) The actions specified as resolutions in the Local Budget Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.) and the Local Fiscal Affairs Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:5-1 et seq.).
(14) The expression of Council policies or opinions which require no
formal action by the Mayor.
B. General powers and duties. The Council has the general powers and
duties to:
(1) Adopt the annual budget of the Township and salary ordinances
establishing salaries for all department directors and Township
employees and elected officials as required.
(2) At the Council's discretion, separate and apart from the required
Township audit, cause to be made an annual audit of the Township's
accounts and financial transactions as required by law. Such annual
audit, if caused, shall be made by a registered municipal
accountant of the State of New Jersey appointed by the Council and
shall not be the same auditor as retained by the Township as the
Township Auditor.
(3) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37.1, deal with employees of the
Department of Administration and other administrative
departments solely through the Mayor or designee. All contact with
the employees and all actions and communications concerning the
administration of the government and the provision of municipal
§ 5-4 VERNON CODE § 5-4
1:18
service shall be through the Mayor or designee, except as
otherwise provided by law. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the Council's inquiry into any act or problem
of the administration of the Township. Any Council member may at
any time require a report on any aspect of the government of the
Township by making a written request to the Mayor.
(4) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37(b), remove, by at least 2/3 vote of
the whole number of the Council, any Township officer other than
the Mayor or a member of the Council, for cause, upon notice and
an opportunity to be heard, unless otherwise provided by state
statutes.
(5) Require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and
submit sworn statements regarding said officer's official duties and
the performance thereof and otherwise to investigate the conduct
of any department, office or agency of the Township government.
The Council may, by a majority vote of the whole number of its
members, require the Mayor or designee to appear before Council,
sitting as a committee of the whole, and to bring before the Council
those records and reports and officials and employees of the
Township as the Council may determine necessary to ensure
clarification of the matter under study.
(6) At the Council's discretion, by a majority vote of the whole number
of its members, designate any number of its members as an ad hoc
committee to consult with the Mayor or designee to study any
matter and report to the Council President.
(7) Appoint a Township Clerk pursuant to § 5-40 as hereinafter set
forth.
(8) Adopt rules and regulations for conduct of business at its annual
organization meeting.
(9) Establish, alter or abolish such committees, commissions or
agencies of the Township as permitted by law.
(10) At the Council's discretion, separate and apart from Township
mandated committees or commissions or agencies, create advisory
committees to assist it in its legislative function.
(11) Reserve one business meeting in January for the Mayor to present
the State of the Township Address to the Council and to the public.
C. Membership; term of office. The Township Council shall consist of five
(5) members, elected at-large by the voters of the Township at a regular
municipal election held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in
November in the years in which municipal officers are to be elected.
The terms of the members of the Council shall be four (4) years,
beginning on January 1 next following their election. [Amended
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:19
§ 5-5. Clerk of Council and secretary of committees.
The Township Clerk shall serve as clerk of the Council and as secretary of
any special legislative committees of the Council appointed pursuant to the
charter.
§ 5-6. Meetings of Council.
A. Presiding officer; temporary presiding officer. The Council President
shall be appointed to a one (1) year term, shall preside at all meetings of
the Council and shall have a voice and vote in its proceedings. In the
absence of the Council President, the Clerk shall call the Council to
order and it shall thereupon elect a temporary presiding officer for the
time being.
B. Attendance by Clerk; minutes. The Township Clerk shall attend all
meetings of the Council and shall keep the minutes of the proceedings
of the Council. The minutes of each meeting of the Council shall be
signed by the officer presiding at the meeting and by the Clerk and shall
be available to the public.
C. Regular meetings.
(1) The Council shall meet annually for organization within seven (7)
days of January 1st.
(2) Within seven days following the annual organization of the Council,
the Council shall:
(a) Prominently post and maintain posted throughout the year the
annual schedule of meetings in at least one public place
reserved for such or similar announcements;
(b) Mail, telephone, fax or hand-deliver to at least two
newspapers, which newspapers shall be designated by the
Council to receive such notices because they have the greatest
likelihood of informing the public within the Township of such
meetings, one of which shall be the official newspaper, where
any such has been designated by the Council or if the Council
has failed to so designate, where any has been designated by
the Sussex County Board of Freeholders; and
(c) File with the Township Clerk a schedule of the regular
meetings of the Council to be held during the succeeding year.
Such schedule shall contain the location of each meeting to the
extent it is known and the time and date of each meeting. In
the event that such schedule is thereafter revised, the Council,
within seven days following such revision, shall post, mail and
submit such revision in the manner described above.
D. Special meetings.
§ 5-5 VERNON CODE § 5-6
1:20
(1) The Council President may, at any time, and upon written request
of any three members of the Council shall, call a special meeting.
The call for a special meeting shall specify the purpose of the
meeting and no business shall be transacted at any special meeting
other than that specified.
(2) The Clerk shall forthwith give notice thereof by telephone or fax to
each member of the Council, at such place as each member of the
Council shall have previously designated for that purpose, and shall
also serve or cause to be served a written copy of the call upon each
member of the Council, by delivery of a copy to each member of the
Council personally or by leaving a copy at the usual place of abode
of each member of the Council. The Police Department shall
cooperate with the Clerk in effectuating such service of notice.
(3) Unless as otherwise provided in Subsection D of this section, there
shall be written advance notice of at least 48 hours, giving the time,
date, location and, to the extent known, the agenda of the special
meeting, which notice shall accurately state whether formal action
may or may not be taken and which shall be:
(a) Prominently posted in at least one public place reserved for
such or similar announcements;
(b) Mailed, telephoned, faxed or hand-delivered to at least two
newspapers, which newspapers shall be designated by the
Council to receive such notices because they have the greatest
likelihood of informing the public within the Township of such
meeting, one of which shall be the official newspaper, where
any such has been designated by Council; and
(c) Filed with the Township Clerk.
E. Meetings to be public; attendance by personnel. All regular and special
meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. The Attorney, Clerk
and such other Township officers and employees as may be required by
general or special order of the Council shall attend regular and special
meetings of the Council.
F. Release of Executive Session Minutes from Regular and Special Council
Meetings.
(1) The Township Clerk or her designee shall attend all executive
session meetings of the Vernon Township Council and shall prepare
a confidential set of draft minutes of each executive session
meeting for approval by the Township Council at the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting unless exigent circumstances delay the
preparation of such minutes, in which case the minutes shall be
presented at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting
following the delay.
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:21
§ 5-7. Rules of order and procedure governing Council meetings.
(2) The Council shall consider for approval the draft executive session
minutes and the proposed redactions, and shall vote on the
approval of the minutes. The Council may discuss the approval of
the draft minutes in executive session if there are issues
concerning the draft minutes which require confidential discussion.
Upon approval for public release, the executive session minutes
shall be available to the public on the following business day.
(3) The Township Clerk will maintain a privilege log describing the
general topic discussed, the date on which the topic was discussed.
The log will be appended to each set of draft executive session
minutes presented to the Township Council. The list shall be
reviewed by the Township Council as part of the current minute
approval process to ascertain if the legitimate reason for
confidentiality continues to exist.
(4) The Township Attorney shall be responsible for determining when
executive session minutes should be redacted for release to the
public. If the Township Attorney determines that the legitimate
reason for confidentiality no longer exists with regard to a
particular executive session discussion, the Township Clerk shall
make the minutes available to the public in unredacted form on the
following business day.
A. Quorum. A majority of all the members elected to the Council shall
constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the Council. If
no member of the Council is present one-half hour after the appointed
time for any meeting, the Clerk may adjourn the meeting.
B. Preparation of agenda. The agenda for each regular and special
meeting of Council shall be prepared by the Township Clerk or its
designee and approved by the Council President. The agenda for each
regular meeting of the Council shall include only such matters of
Council business as have been presented or delivered to the Clerk by
the Mayor, Business Administrator or Councilpersons not later than
12:00 noon on the Tuesday preceding the meeting. Emergent matters
may be added if necessary and approved by the Council President. As
soon as the agenda for each meeting has been prepared, a copy shall be
delivered to each member of Council and each department head. Upon
approval, copies shall also be distributed to the press and to interested
citizens upon request. [Amended 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-21]
C. Order of business. The order of business of the Township Council
meetings shall be set annually by resolution of the Township Council.
D. Conduct of meetings.
(1) Meeting of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with the
statutes and common law of the State of New Jersey. In the event an
§ 5-6 VERNON CODE § 5-7
1:22
existing law does not address a procedural issue, such item shall
be resolved in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, current
edition.
(2) Council members shall be allowed to attend meetings via
telephone. Council members shall only be allowed to attend two
meetings via telephone during any calendar year. No more than two
Council members can attend the same meeting via telephone. If a
Council member attends a meeting via telephone, the Council
member must be present by the telephone for the entire meeting.
There shall be a speakerphone present at Council meetings to
ensure that members of the public attending the meeting can hear
any member(s) attending a meeting via telephone. [Added
10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-212]
(3) Reading of the minutes. The minutes of the previous meeting of the
Council may be approved without reading if the Clerk has
previously furnished each member of the Council with a copy
thereof, but upon request of any member of the Council, the
minutes or any part thereof shall be read prior to approval.
(4) Presiding officer may debate, vote, etc. The Council President or
such other member of the Council as may be presiding may move,
second and debate from the chair, and may vote on any question,
subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules
imposed on all members, and the presiding officer shall not be
deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a member of the
Council by reason of the member acting as the presiding officer.
(5) Privilege of closing debate. The member of the Council moving the
adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of
closing the debate.
(6) Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by
the Council may be made only at the meeting at which such action
was taken. It may be made either immediately during the same
session, or at a recessed or adjourned session of such meeting.
Such motion may be made only by one of the prevailing side, but
may be seconded by any member, and may be made at any time and
have precedence over all other motions and it shall be debatable.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member of the
Council from making or remaking at a subsequent meeting of the
Council any motion previously made or considered.
(7) Remarks of member of Council; when entered in minutes. A
member of the Council may request, through the presiding officer,
the privilege of having an abstract of the member's statement on
any subject before the Council not exceeding 100 words entered in
2. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection D(2) through (7) as
Subsection D(3) through (8).
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:23
the minutes. If the Council consents, such abstract shall be entered
in the minutes.
(8) Synopsis of debate; when entered in minutes. The Clerk may be
directed by the presiding officer, with consent of the Council, to
enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question
coming regularly before the Council.
E. Addressing the Council.
(1) At every meeting of the Governing Body, a portion of the meeting
shall be dedicated to public comment as required by N.J.S.A.
10:4-6, et. seq., generally, and more specifically N.J.S.A. 10:4-12.
(2) Any person desiring to address the Council shall first seek to be
recognized by the Council President or presiding officer and state
their name and address for the record. There will be a limited
period of public comment at the beginning of every meeting where
speakers will be limited to three minutes. During the first period for
public comment each speaker may speak only on items on the
current agenda. The total time for public speaking at the beginning
of the meeting is limited to 1/2 hour (30 minutes) to provide the
governing body sufficient time to complete its work. [Amended
10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-21]
(3) There will be a second period of public comment at the end of each
Council meeting. Speakers will be limited to three minutes where
the public may speak on any topic. [Added 10-17-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-213]
(4) Presentations. When approved by the Council for a presentation,
taxpayers or residents of the Township or their authorized legal
representatives or parties with legitimate interest may address the
Council and public.
F. Additional rules of conduct. [Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-214]
(1) No one will approach the microphone for public comment unless
invited by the Township Clerk, Council President, or presiding
officer as part of a public hearing or during one of the public
comment periods.
(2) No profanity or obscenity is to be used or will be allowed. Anyone
using profanity will be warned to not use profanity or obscenities. If
after receiving a warning, a person continues to use profanity or
obscenities, the person will be asked to step away from the
microphone and be seated.
(3) No audible comments from the audience will be permitted.
3. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E(3) as Subsection
E(4).
4. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection G.
§ 5-7 VERNON CODE § 5-7
1:24
§ 5-8. Procedure governing ordinances and resolutions.
(4) No person shall cause a disturbance or disrupt the meeting through
the use of loud or abusive language. If a person fails to cease with
disruptive behavior after being warned, the person will be ejected
from the chambers and may not return during the rest of the
meeting in progress.
(5) All cell phones and beepers must be placed in silent mode.
G. Enforcement of decorum. The Chief of Police, or such member or
members of the Police Department as the Chief may designate, shall be
sergeant at arms of the Council meetings and shall be in attendance at
Council meetings when requested by the Mayor and/or Council
President. The sergeant at arms shall carry out all orders and
instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of
maintaining order and decorum at the meeting.
A. Preparation and adoption.
(1) Copies of each ordinance and resolution, in typewritten form, shall
be made available by the Clerk to each member of the Council at
least 48 hours prior to introduction, provided that the failure of the
Clerk to make such mailing shall not invalidate any action taken by
the Council.
(2) Except as may otherwise be provided in the Charter, all ordinances
shall be adopted and published, and shall take effect, in the manner
required or provided by general law.
B. Review by Mayor of proposed administrative ordinance or resolution.
Any ordinance or resolution which affects the administration of any
department of the Township government shall be submitted to the
Mayor prior to its introduction, for the Mayor's review and comment.
C. Resolutions. Resolutions, unless laid over by a majority vote of the
Council, shall be acted upon at the same meeting at which they are
introduced.
D. Voting.
(1) The vote of the Council upon every ordinance and resolution shall
be taken by the Clerk by roll call, and the Clerk shall record in the
minutes the yes and no votes and abstentions, as the case may be,
for each question put to vote.
(2) The effect of an abstention is as follows:
(a) Where a statute or the common law requires a specific, fixed
number of actual affirmative votes for a majority, an abstention
is considered a negative vote.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-8
1:25
§ 5-9. Restrictions on employment. [Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
The Township of Vernon and agencies created by it or under its control shall
not employ, for compensation, any former elected or appointed mayor or
member of the Township's governing body, for a period of one year following
the end of the office whether by expiration of the term, resignation,
removal, or otherwise.
§ 5-10. through § 5-11. (Reserved)
(b) Where a Council person is disqualified due to conflict of
interest or a personal involvement with the subject to be
considered, the abstention is not counted as either a yes or no
vote, and the person is not counted for purposes of establishing
the quorum for the vote.
(c) Except as provided for in Subsections D(2)(a) and (b), an
abstention or failure to vote shall be counted as an affirmative
vote.
§ 5-8 VERNON CODE § 5-10
1:26
ARTICLE III
General Administration—Departments
§ 5-12. Departments and offices; departments enumerated.
A. The Township shall have a Department of Administration and such
other departments, not less than two (2) and not exceeding nine (9) in
number, as the Council may establish by ordinance. All of the
administrative functions, powers and duties of the Township, other than
those vested in the offices of the Township clerk and the Township tax
assessor, shall be allocated and assigned among and within such
departments.
B. The offices of the Township Clerk and the Township Tax Assessor shall
be subject to such general administrative procedures and requirements
as are departments of the Township government, including, but not
limited to, the preparation and submission of an annual budget and of
such periodic budget reports as are generally required of departments,
and such accounting controls, central purchasing practices, personnel
procedures and regulations, and central data processing services as are
generally required of departments.
C. Each department shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Each
department head shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor
appointing him, and until the appointment and qualification of his
successor. The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint the Township Assessor and all other Township officers not
assigned within Township departments, subject to the terms of any
general law providing for these offices, unless a different appointment
procedure is clearly required by this plan of government or by general
law.
D. The Mayor may in the Mayor's discretion remove any department head
and, subject to any general provisions of law concerning term of office
or tenure, any other Township executive officer who is not a
subordinate departmental officer or employee, after notice and an
opportunity to be heard. Prior to removal the Mayor shall first file
written notice of his intention with the Council, and such removal shall
become effective on the 20th day after the filing of such notice unless
the Council shall prior thereto have adopted a resolution by a two-thirds
vote of the whole number of the Council, disapproving the removal.
E. In the event of the removal or failure of reappointment of a Business
Administrator, that Administrator may, upon the enactment of an
ordinance, be entitled to a three-months' written notice of the removal
or non-reappointment, or if the Mayor determines that the removal
shall be immediate, then the Administrator may, upon the enactment of
an ordinance, be paid any unpaid balance of his salary plus his salary
for a maximum of the next three calendar months following the effective
date of the mayor's action unless the removal is for good cause. For the
§ 5-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-12
1:27
purposes of this subsection, "good cause" shall mean conviction of
a crime or offense involving moral turpitude, the violation of the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-163 through 40:69A-167 or the violation of
any code of ethics in effect within the municipality.
F. Department heads shall appoint subordinate officers and employees
within their respective departments and may, with approval of the
Mayor, remove such officers and employees, subject to the provisions of
Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes, where that Title is effective in the
Township, or other general law.
G. Departments and offices established within the Township are as follows:
(1) Department of Administration;
(2) Office of the Clerk;
(3) Department of Finance;
(4) Department of Public Works;
(5) Department of Planning and Development;
(6) Department of Public Safety; and
(7) Department of Recreation and Community Development;
(8) Department of Fire Prevention. (Added 3-12-2012 by Ord. No.
12-03)
§ 5-12 VERNON CODE § 5-12
1:28
ARTICLE IV
Boards and Committees
§ 5-13. Boards, bodies, commissions and committees.
§ 5-14. (Reserved)
A. The following boards and bodies of the Township are hereby continued:
(1) Land Use Board as set forth in Section 330-6.
(2) Environmental Commission;
(3) Open Space Board [reserved];
(4) Historic Preservation Commission;
(5) Recreation Committee;
(6) Municipal Alliance Committee; and
(7) Senior Citizen Committee.
B. Attendance Policy. A member of any board, committee, commission,
authority or other agency of the Township of Vernon not subject to state
guidelines for removal of such members may be removed for
absenteeism, and the vacancy created by such removal shall be filed in
the same manner as originally appointed.
C. Vacancy as a result of Non-Attendance. The office of any person
appointed to a specified term, with or without compensation, by the
Mayor or Township Council, including persons appointed to any board,
committee, commission, authority or other agency relating to a joint or
shared service, shall be deemed vacant whenever the member, without
being excused by majority by the authorized members of such body,
fails to attend and participate at meetings of such body for a period of
six (6) consecutive weeks, or three (3) consecutive meetings, whichever
shall be of longer duration, at the conclusion of such period, provided
that such body shall notify the appointing authority in writing of such
determination. Further, such board, committee, commission, authority
or other agency may refuse to excuse only with respect to those failures
to attend and participate that are not due to legitimate illness.
D. Removal of Board or Committee Member. By majority vote, the Council
of the Township of Vernon may remove any member of the board,
committee, commission, authority or agency for cause, on written
charges served upon the member, and after an opportunity for a
hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel. A vacancy on the board, committee, commission,
authority or agency occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 5-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-14
1:29

ARTICLE V
Emergency Management Control Powers
§ 5-15. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are to empower the Township Mayor of the
Township of Vernon to make orders, rules and regulations to preserve the
resources and property of the Township of Vernon and of the residents
and to protect the health, welfare and safety of the public during times of
emergency. See also Vernon Township Emergency Management Plan and
Operation Manual.
§ 5-16. Powers of Mayor.
The Mayor is empowered to make orders, rules and regulations as may
be necessary adequately to meet the various problems presented by any
disaster or emergency and to amend or rescind such orders, rules and
regulations.
§ 5-17. Notice of rules and regulations.
§ 5-18. through § 5-19. (Reserved)
A. All such orders, rules and regulations made by directive of the Mayor
shall be given to the Township Clerk of the Township of Vernon who
shall forthwith post such orders, rules and regulations in a prominent
and conspicuous place. The posting of such orders, rules and
regulations shall constitute sufficient notice to the public.
B. The Mayor shall also notify each and every member of the Council of
the Township of Vernon, if practically possible, at the time the Mayor
issues, amends or rescinds an order, rule and regulation under the
powers granted by this article.
§ 5-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-18
1:31

ARTICLE VI
General Administration—Departments Heads; Purchasing
§ 5-20. Duties of department heads.
The head of a department, subject to the Charter and the Code of the
Township of Vernon and the approval or direction of the Mayor, shall:
§ 5-21. Full-time service.
Every Township officer and employee whose compensation is established on
a full-time basis shall devote the entire time during business hours to the
duties of the office or employment.
§ 5-22. Interest in contracts.
No officer or employee shall have any interest, directly or indirectly, in any
contract or job for work or materials or the profits thereof to be furnished
to or performed for the Township.
§ 5-23. Purchasing.
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of the department.
B. Direct and supervise the subordinate officers and employees of the
department and make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
C. Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to the
departmental appropriations.
D. Maintain such records of work performance and unit costs thereof as
may be approved or required by the Mayor.
E. Provide such information and reports on the work of the department as
may from time to time be required by the Mayor.
F. Exercise such other or different powers of administration, supervision
and direction as the Mayor may delegate.
A. General procedure.
(1) All materials, supplies and equipment, work and labor under
contract, required by any department, office or agency of the
Township shall be purchased by or under the direction and
supervision of the Mayor.
(2) Purchases shall be authorized only upon requisition of a
department head which shall be made to the Mayor at such times
and in such form as the Mayor may prescribe or approve. Except as
the Mayor may specifically authorize in case of emergency, no
purchase shall be made, and no bill, claim or voucher shall be
approved, unless the procedures prescribed by or pursuant to
statute and the Code of the Township of Vernon have been followed.
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-23
1:33
§ 5-24. Departmental rules and regulations.
§ 5-25. Commitments and disbursements of funds.
B. Purchasing agent.
(1) The Mayor may designate an administrative officer of the Township
to serve as purchasing agent.
(2) The purchasing agent shall:
(a) Purchase, store and distribute all supplies, material and
equipment according to need and efficient purchasing
methods.
(b) Establish and enforce suitable specifications and standards for
all supplies, material and equipment to be purchased for the
Township.
(c) Inspect deliveries to determine their quality, quantity and
compliance with these specifications and standards.
(d) Accept or reject the deliveries in accordance with the results of
inspection.
(e) Control any general storerooms or stockrooms which the
Council may authorize.
(3) The purchasing agent may:
(a) Make transfers of supplies, material and equipment between
departments, offices and agencies.
(b) Sell surplus, obsolete, unused or waste supplies, material and
equipment.
(c) Make any other sales authorized by the Council.
A. No rule or regulation made by any department, officer, agency or
authority of the Township, except such as relates to the organization or
internal management of the municipal government or a part thereof,
shall take effect until it is filed with the Township Clerk. The Council
shall provide for the prompt publication of such rules and regulations.
B. The Clerk shall maintain a current compilation of all such rules and
regulations, which shall be available for public inspection during
business hours.
A. Certification of available funds. No department, office or agency of the
municipal government shall expend or commit any funds of the
Township unless the Treasurer, through the Division of Treasury, shall
first certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and
funds available for the purpose.
§ 5-23 VERNON CODE § 5-25
1:34
§ 5-26. through § 5-29. (Reserved)
B. Certification of department head that contract completed. Prior to
payment of any bill, claim or demand against the Township, a
department head shall certify that the materials, supplies or equipment
have been received according to purchase order or that the work, labor
or services have been rendered according to order or contract.
C. Disbursements. Disbursements in payment of bills, claims and demands
shall be made by the Treasurer upon preaudit and approved by the
Mayor. Every warrant shall be payable to the order of the person
entitled to receive it, and shall specify the purpose for which it is drawn
and the account or appropriation to which it is chargeable. Each
warrant check shall bear the signature of the Treasurer or Acting
Treasurer, the Mayor or Township Clerk or Deputy Township Clerk as
the case may be. Two signatures are required on each check.
§ 5-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-26
1:35

ARTICLE VII
Department of Administration
§ 5-30. Department established; Business Administrator.
There shall be a Department of Administration, the head of which shall be
the Business Administrator.
§ 5-31. Functions, powers and duties.
Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor, the Business
Administrator shall:
A. Appointment. The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the
Council, appoint a Business Administrator, who shall be chosen solely
on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with special
reference to actual experience in or knowledge of the duties of the
office and who shall serve until the appointment and qualification of a
successor. At the time of the appointment, the Business Administrator
need not be a resident of the Township or the state, but during the
Business Administrator's tenure of office, the Business Administrator
may reside outside the Township only with the approval of the Council
as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-44.
B. Full-time position; holding of other offices. The Business Administrator
shall devote full time to the duties of the office, except that nothing
herein shall prevent the Business Administrator from also holding any
other appointive municipal office of the Township and fulfilling the
duties thereof.
C. Acting Business Administrator. Whenever and so long as there is a
vacancy in the office of Business Administrator, the Mayor may serve as
Acting Business Administrator without additional compensation, or the
Mayor may appoint another suitable person to act as Acting Business
Administrator. Any such appointment shall terminate after 90 days,
unless the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or more
extensions. The Acting Business Administrator shall have all the
functions, powers and duties of the Business Administrator.
A. Assist in the preparation of the budget;
B. Administer a centralized purchasing system;
C. Be responsible for the development and administration of a sound
personnel system;
D. Perform such other duties as council may prescribe.
E. The Business Administrator shall, subject to the direction of the Mayor,
supervise the administration of each of the departments established by
ordinance. For this purpose, the Business Administrator shall have
power to investigate the organization and operation of any and all
§ 5-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-31
1:37
§ 5-32. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein shall derogate from the powers and duties of the elective
or appointive officials of the Township or of the boards and commissions
thereof established pursuant to law or authorize the Business Administrator
to exercise the powers and duties thereof.
§ 5-33. Township Attorney.
departments, to prescribe standards and rules of administrative
practice and procedure, and to consult with the heads of the
departments under his jurisdiction; provided that with respect to any
department of law or department of audit, accounts or control, the
authority of the Business Administrator under this subsection shall
extend only to matters of budgeting, personnel and purchasing.
A. Appointment; Term. There is hereby established an Office of Law which
shall be filled by the Township Attorney. The Township Attorney shall be
appointed by the Council for a term of one year and shall receive such
compensation as provided by the Council.
B. Powers and Duties. Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the
Township Attorney shall:
(1) Serve as legal advisor on all matters of Township business;
(2) Represent the Township in all judicial and administrative
proceedings in which the Township or any of its officers or agencies
may be a party or have an interest;
(3) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Township;
(4) Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorneys and
technical and professional assistants as Council may authorize for
special or regular employment in the Department of Law.
C. Limitation on Power to Compromise. The Township Attorney shall not,
without the approval of the Council by resolution, be empowered to
compromise, settle or adjust any rights, claims, demands or causes of
action in favor of or against the Township, nor to permit, offer or
confess judgment against the Township, nor to accept any offer of
judgment in favor of the Township. Nothing in this section shall operate
to limit or abridge the discretion of the Township Attorney in regard to
the proper conduct of the trial of any action or proceeding or to deprive
him of the powers and privileges ordinarily exercised in judicial
proceedings by counsel acting for private clients.
§ 5-31 VERNON CODE § 5-34
1:38
§ 5-34. Bureau of Animal Control. [Amended 11-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-17]
There shall be, within the Department of Police, a Division called Vernon
Township Bureau of Animal Control. The Division Head shall be the
Certified Animal Control Officer. The Certified Animal Control Officer shall
be appointed by and subject to removal by the Mayor. Subordinate officers
and employees of the Bureau of Animal Control may also be appointed
and removed by the Mayor. The Certified Animal Control Officer shall be
supervised by the Chief of Police or his designee.
This provision of the Township Code will expire three (3) years from the
date of the adoption of this Ordinance No. 2017-17 and Animal Control
will revert to being within the Department of Administration unless this
provision of the Township Code is renewed.
§ 5-35. Division of Tax Assessments.
§ 5-36. Division of Personnel.
A. Within the Department of Administration, there is hereby established a
Division of Assessments, the head of which shall be the Tax Assessor.
B. Prior to appointment, the Tax Assessor shall be qualified by training and
experience in municipal taxation, the valuation and assessment of
property for purposes of ad valorem taxation and shall be certified as a
municipal tax assessor as provided by general law.
C. With the assistance of such personnel as may be authorized by
ordinance, the Tax Assessor shall:
(1) Value all real and personal property in the Township for the
purposes of assessment and taxation in accordance with general
law, the Charter and ordinances, and exercise all the powers of a
municipal assessor pursuant to law;
(2) Prepare the tax list and duplicate as required by law, and maintain
adequate assessment records of each and every parcel of real
property assessed or exempted;
(3) Have custody of and maintain an up-to-date Township Tax Map and
provide for the recording thereon of all changes in ownership or
character of the property;
(4) Make appraisals of property for any municipal purpose upon
direction of the Mayor.
A. There is hereby established, within the Department of Administration, a
Division of Personnel, the head of which shall be the Personnel
Administrator.
§ 5-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-36
1:39
§ 5-37. through § 5-39. (Reserved)
B. The Personnel Administrator, subject to the direction and supervision of
the Business Administrator, shall serve as professional advisor and staff
of the Division and shall:
(1) Develop, administer, and evaluate all recruitment and training
programs.
(2) Assist the Business Administrator with the administration of all
pension funds and programs of the Township and retirements
thereto.
(3) Assist the Business Administrator with the administration of all
matters pertaining to health benefits, group life insurance and
workers' compensation coverage for all Township officials and
employees.
(4) Maintain and administer the personnel policies of the Township.
(5) Assist the Business Administrator with the administration of an
employee disciplinary action system, affirmative action, and
grievance procedures and hearings.
(6) Assist and advise the Township Mayor, if so requested, with
collective bargaining negotiations and labor relations of the
Township.
(7) Assist and advise the Township Mayor, if so requested, in the
interviewing and employee evaluation process.
(8) Develop and administer employee development programs,
workshops, and activities, independently and at the request of the
Township Mayor, as needed to maintain a supportive and
productive work environment.
(9) Develop, administer, and perform other personnel-related duties as
requested by the Business Administrator.
(10) Assist and advise all employees with regard to personal or workrelated
issues which are not conductive to a supportive and
productive work environment.
(11) Assist in the maintenance of the central payroll system and all
social security, pension and insurance records required for
Township personnel.
§ 5-36 VERNON CODE § 5-37
1:40
ARTICLE VIII
Office of the Clerk
§ 5-40. Appointment; qualifications; term.
§ 5-41. Ordinances and resolutions.
§ 5-42. Custodian of records.
The Clerk shall have custody of and shall safely keep all records, books
and documents of the Township, except those committed by the Charter or
ordinance to any other office or transferred thereto by the Mayor. The Clerk
shall, upon request and upon the payment of the fees prescribed therefor by
ordinance or resolution of the Council, for the use of the Township, furnish
a certified copy of any such paper in custody, under the Corporate Seal of
the Township.
§ 5-43. Corporate Seal; custody; use.
A. There shall be an office of the Township Clerk, the head of which shall
be the Township Clerk.
B. The Clerk shall be appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et seq.5 by
the Council and shall, prior to appointment, be qualified by training and
experience to perform the duties of the Clerk's office. [Amended
11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-306]
A. The Clerk shall engross all ordinances and all resolutions of a
permanent character in books to be provided for that purpose. After
each ordinance the Clerk shall also engross and certify the proof of
publication thereof as required by law. Each ordinance and resolution
so engrossed shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk, who shall
attest that it was duly adopted upon a date stated, and when so signed
the engrossed copy shall be deemed to be a public record of the
ordinance or resolution. Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to
engross, sign or certify as herein required shall not impair or affect the
validity of any ordinance which has been duly adopted.
B. At the close of each year, the Clerk shall properly index the record
books, compilation or codification of ordinances and resolutions. Where
the Council has not appointed a firm or other agency to compile and
codify the ordinances and resolutions of the Council, it shall be the
obligation of the Clerk, with the advice and assistance of the Township
Attorney, to bind, compile or codify all ordinances and resolutions, or
true copies thereof, which remain in force.
5. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. was repealed by P.L. 2015, c. 95, § 47, effective 8/10/2015.
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C, regarding the term and
compensation of the Clerk.
§ 5-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-43
1:41
§ 5-44. Deeds and surety bonds.
The Clerk shall:
§ 5-45. Powers, functions and duties.
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by the Charter and ordinances and subject to the supervision and direction
of the Council, the Clerk shall:
A. The Official Corporate Seal of the Township is hereby continued. The
Seal shall be kept in the Office of the Clerk who shall be the custodian
thereof.
B. The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal to be affixed to instruments
and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Council
or when necessary to exemplify any document on record in the Clerk's
office or to certify any act or paper which, from the records in the office,
shall appear to have been a public act of the Township or a public
document. The Clerk shall not affix the said Seal or cause or permit it to
be affixed to any other instrument or writing or other paper, unless
required by law or ordinance.
A. Have custody of all deeds and leases of property owned by the
Township;
B. Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Township as obligee, or any other form of security, given
by any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on account of
work done or to be done in or for the Township.
A. Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the general
election law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or
ordinance.
B. Administer the provisions of the Township ordinances with reference to
the licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are
required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
C. Issue such licenses as may be authorized by the Council pursuant to the
State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.) and the
ordinances of the Township.
D. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance, or delegated by the Council.
E. Issue certificates as to liability for assessment for municipal
improvements, pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 54:5-18.1 et seq.) and such
other certificates as may be prescribed by general law or ordinance.
F. The Township Clerk is hereby authorized and delegated to approve or
deny the granting of raffle and bingo licenses for events to be
conducted in the Township of Vernon.
§ 5-43 VERNON CODE § 5-45
1:42
G. Perform the duties of Registrar.
§ 5-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-45
1:43

ARTICLE IX
Department of Finance
§ 5-46. Establishment; Director as head; qualifications.
§ 5-47. Functions and duties of Chief Financial Officer.
The Chief Financial Officer, subject to the direction and supervision of the
Mayor, shall:
A. There is hereby established a Department of Finance, the head of which
shall be the Chief Financial Officer.
B. The Director shall be qualified as per N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.
A. Serve as the Chief Financial Officer of the Township;
B. Supervise the work of the Department and its divisions;
C. Compile the current expense estimates for the budget for the Mayor;
D. Compile the capital estimates for the budget for the Mayor;
E. Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and
have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations
are not exceeded;
F. Establish and maintain a general accounting system for the Township
government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; keep
books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office,
department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of
appropriation contained in the budget, each of which accounts shall
show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the
unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; require
reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and
spending agency of the Township government to be made daily or at
such intervals as he may deem expedient;
G. Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution
of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles used by any
office, department or agency of the Township government, whenever
the Mayor shall transfer this power to the Director;
H. Submit to the Council through the Mayor a monthly statement of all
receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact
financial condition of the Township;
I. Prepare for the Mayor, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete
financial statement and report; and
J. Through the divisions established by this chapter and otherwise, and
subject to the requirements of the State Division of Local Government,
§ 5-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-47
1:45
§ 5-48. Division of Treasury.
§ 5-49. Duties of Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall:
the Charter and the Township Code, the Chief Financial Officer shall be
responsible for:
(1) Accounting, pre-auditing and control of all Township revenues and
expenditures;
(2) Custody, receipt and disbursement of Township funds;
(3) Safety and investment of the Township's investments;
(4) Management of the Township's debt;
(5) Development of financial policies for recommendation to the
Mayor; and
(6) Safeguarding of the Township's financial interests to the fullest
extent.
A. Within the Department of Finance, there is hereby established a
Division of Treasury, the head of which shall be the Treasurer.
B. Prior to appointment, the Treasurer shall be qualified by training and
experience in governmental accounting, budget operation and controls,
and in systems and methods of financial management.
A. Maintain the central books of account of the Township according to
such forms, standards and procedures as shall be prescribed or
approved by the Director of Finance. Any and all Township officials
shall, upon request of the Treasurer, place at the Treasurer's disposal
all records, books, warrants, documents, bonds, reports and papers in
their custody belonging to the Township, which the Treasurer may
deem necessary, to aid in keeping such accounts;
B. Enforce the uniform system of accounts for all departments of the
Township government prescribed by the Director of Finance;
C. Preaudit all payrolls, bills, claims and demands against the Township
upon certification by a department head that the amount is due and
unpaid according to the records and information of the Department;
D. Require reports of receipts and disbursements from each department of
the Township government to be made daily or at such intervals as will
most efficiently protect the Township's interest;
E. Maintain a central payroll system, and all social security, pension and
insurance records required for Township personnel;
§ 5-47 VERNON CODE § 5-49
1:46
§ 5-50. Central Cashier.
Within the Division of the Treasury there shall be a Central Cashier's Office.
All cash receipts of the Township government, except fines imposed for
traffic violations or in the Municipal Court, shall be received and accounted
for by the Cashier. Until such time as the Mayor shall determine that proper
procedures have been established for such central receipt and collection
of the various service charges, fees, and license fees required under the
Charter or ordinances, they may be received and accounted for as
heretofore.
§ 5-51. Division of Tax Collections.
F. Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded; pass upon each proposed expenditure for conformity with
the Charter and ordinances of the Township; and unless the division
head shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of
appropriation and available funds, no appropriation shall be
encumbered and no commitment or expenditure shall be made;
G. Keep books and records of account for the exercise of the foregoing
financial and budgetary control over each department of the Township
government and keep such accounts as will show the amount of each
appropriation, the cumulative amount paid therefrom and the unpaid
obligations and the unencumbered balance thereof.
A. Within the Department of Finance there is hereby established a Division
of Tax Collections, the head of which shall be the Tax Collector.
B. Prior to appointment, the Tax Collector shall be qualified by training
and experience in municipal tax and revenue administration.
C. The Tax Collector's duties shall include:
(1) Administer the work of the Division;
(2) Receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal
property taxes, charge and receive penalties and interest pursuant
to law, and account for all collections in such form and manner, and
at such times, as may be prescribed or approved by the Director of
Finance;
(3) Receive and safely keep and disburse all moneys raised and
received for the public schools and keep separate accounts thereof;
provided that no money shall be paid out of the public school funds
by the Collector except on warrant signed by the President and
Secretary of the Board of Education pursuant to an order or
resolution passed at a stated meeting of the Board of Education and
entered in its minutes;
(4) Keep a full and systematic account of all cash receipts and
disbursements by the Division of Tax Collections in proper books
§ 5-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-51
1:47
approved by the Director of Finance; and shall, at least once every
month, and more often if the Council requires, furnish the Council,
through the Mayor, with a statement of all moneys received and
expended by the Collector, including school moneys, subsequent to
the Mayor's last report; and
(5) Annually, during the month of January, make a full report to the
Council of the Collector's receipts and expenditures during the
preceding calendar year, and shall, whenever required, lay before
the Council for examination and audit all books and papers
pertaining to the Collector's office.
(6) Make or cause to be made, and certify, searches for tax and other
liens on real property in the Township as may be authorized by law,
and charge and collect for the use of the Township the fee required
pursuant to law for any such search;
(7) Perform the functions of a collector of taxes under general law,
including, without limitation thereto, the preparation and mailing
of tax bills, and the maintenance of tax accounting records in such
manner as may be prescribed or approved by the Director of
Finance; and assist the Assessor in preparation of the annual tax
list and duplicate.
§ 5-51 VERNON CODE § 5-51
1:48
ARTICLE X
Department of Public Works
§ 5-52. Establishment; Director of Public Works as head;
qualifications.
§ 5-53. Powers and duties of Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall:
§ 5-54. through § 5-62. (Reserved)
A. There is hereby established a Department of Public Works, the head of
which shall be the Director of Public Works.
B. Prior to appointment, the Director of Public Works shall have
experience and education sufficient to perform the duties and
responsibilities of the office. The Director of Public Works shall hold and
maintain a certified public works administrator's certificate as required
by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6a et seq.
A. Be responsible for the proper and efficient conduct of all public works
functions of the municipal government;
B. Supervise and direct the work of the Department of Public Works;
C. Provide technical advice and assistance to all other departments as
needed;
D. Have power, with the approval of the Mayor and within the limits of
available appropriations, to engage such specialized and consulting
engineers for specific projects and purposes as deemed necessary for
the proper administration of the functions of the Department;
E. Subject to the supervision and direction of the Mayor, administer the
work of the Department through such divisions as are provided by this
article and otherwise.
§ 5-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-54
1:49

ARTICLE XI
Department of Planning and Development
§ 5-63. Establishment.
There is hereby established the Department of Planning and Development.
§ 5-64. Organization of Department.
Within the Department of Planning and Development there shall be the
following divisions:
§ 5-65. Division of Planning and Zoning.
§ 5-66. Division of Building.
Within the Department of Planning and Development, there shall be a
Division of Building which shall consist of a State Uniform Construction
Code Enforcing Agency.
A. Division of Planning and Zoning.
B. Division of Building.
A. Within the Department of Planning and Development, there shall be a
Zoning Officer, as provided for Chapter 330, Land Development.
B. The Office of the Zoning Officer shall be under the direction of the
Zoning Officer who shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 5-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-66
1:51

ARTICLE XII
Department of Public Safety
§ 5-67. Establishment; Mayor as head.
There is hereby established a Department of Public Safety, the head of
which shall be the Mayor who shall serve without any additional
compensation.
§ 5-68. Organization of Department. [Amended 3-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-03]
Within the Department of Public Safety, there shall be the following
divisions and agencies:
§ 5-69. Division of Police; Chief of Police as head.
Within the Department of Public Safety, there shall be a Division of Police,
also known as the "Police Department," the head of which shall be the Chief
of Police. The police force as heretofore established is hereby continued as
the Division of Police and is subject to all laws and ordinances relating to a
municipal police department.
§ 5-70. Office of Emergency Management.
The Office of Emergency Management as heretofore established pursuant
to law is continued within the Department of Public Safety. The members
shall be appointed by the Mayor. It shall have such functions, powers and
duties as may be prescribed by general law, executive order, ordinance or
resolution.
§ 5-71. (Reserved) [Amended 3-12-2012 by Ord. No. 12-03]
A. Division of Police.
B. Office of Emergency Management.
§ 5-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-71
1:53

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Recreation and Community Development
§ 5-72. Establishment; Director as head.
There is hereby established a Department of Recreation and Community
Development, the head of which shall be the Director of Recreation and
Community Development.
§ 5-73. Duties of Director of Recreation and Community
Development.
The Director of Recreation and Community Development shall be
responsible, among other responsibilities which may be assigned from time
to time, for:
A. The maintenance and upkeep of all Township parks, playgrounds, ball
fields and other recreational facilities of the Township, whether owned
or leased, and to ensure their safe operation.
B. The creation and administration of a full schedule of recreational
opportunities for children and adults in Vernon Township.
C. The issuing of permits for the Township's fields, parks and recreation
facilities, and to coordinate with the Township's non-profit and civic
groups.
D. The providing of administrative services for the Senior Citizen Program
in the Township of Vernon, supervise Township-sponsored activities
designed for senior citizens and coordinate the programs for senior
citizens, including the Vernon Township Nutrition Site.
E. Assisting the Office of the Township Mayor with the development and
administration of Township projects and transactions.
F. Researching and proposing special funding through grants and other
practicable sources for the good of the Township.
G. Preparing and submitting project and management operating reports
and associated expenditures and budgets related to Township projects
and transactions.
H. Under the direction of the Township Mayor, establishing administrative
procedures to ensure maximum service is provided at reasonable cost.
I. Disseminating information on programs, both internally and to other
agencies and interested parties.
J. Stimulating public interest in community development, including the
organization, philosophy, and objectives of community development
programs and projects to other agencies and the community.
§ 5-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-73
1:55
K. Assisting the Township Mayor in the formulation of mechanisms for
improved coordination and program design regarding community
development.
L. Maintaining and organizing appropriate records and files for projects
assigned by the Office of the Township Mayor.
§ 5-73 VERNON CODE § 5-73
1:56
ARTICLE XIV
Department of Fire Prevention
[Added 3-12-2012 by Ord. No. 12-03]
§ 5-74. Establishment; Fire Marshal as head.
There is hereby established a Department of Fire Prevention, the head of
which shall be the Fire Marshal.
§ 5-75. Duties of Fire Marshal.
The Fire Marshal shall be responsible, among other responsibilities which
may be assigned from time to time, for:
§ 5-76. through § 5-83. (Reserved)
A. The inspection of all buildings and structures within the Township in
conformity with the New Jersey and National Fire Safety Codes.
§ 5-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-76
1:57

ARTICLE XIVA
Environmental Commission
§ 5-84. Commission continued; purpose of Commission. [Amended
11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
§ 5-85. Members; alternate members; appointment; terms;
vacancies. [Amended 11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
§ 5-86. Powers of Commission. [Amended 11-28-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-26]
§ 5-87. Records and annual report. [Amended 11-28-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-26]
The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report to the Council.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., an
Environmental Commission of five members is hereby continued.
A. A Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor,
one of whom shall also be a member of the Land Use Board, and all of
whom shall be Township residents. The members shall serve without
compensation.
B. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairperson
of the Commission.
C. The terms of office of the Commissioners shall be for three years and be
staggered.
A. The Commission shall have power to conduct research into the use and
possible use of the open land areas of the Township and may coordinate
the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes.
B. The Commission may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books,
maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems
necessary for its purposes.
C. The Commission shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or
privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other
wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such
areas.
D. The Commission may from time to time recommend to the Land Use
Board plans and programs for inclusion in a Township Master Plan and
the development and use of the open areas of the Township.
§ 5-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-88
1:59
§ 5-88. Appropriations. [Amended 11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
The Council may, but is not required to, appropriate funds for the expenses
incurred by the Commission. The Commission may appoint a recording
secretary and payment for the same shall be within the limits of funds
appropriated to the Commission, if any.
§ 5-89. (Reserved for future use.)
§ 5-88 VERNON CODE § 5-89
1:60
ARTICLE XV
Open Space Committee
§ 5-90. Establishment of Open Space Committee.
There shall not be established, at this time, an Open Space Committee in
the Township of Vernon. The Township Council shall research, investigate,
negotiate and complete open space transactions in its discretion including
the management of the Open Space Trust Fund, as established in the
historical note below.
[Historical Note: Under Ord. No. 00-16 the Township was authorized to
collect a tax of $0.02 per $100 of assessed value for a period of five years
beginning in the year 2001, with said tax dollars to be dedicated to farmland
preservation and to preserving open space. Ord. No. 06-29 proposed the
collection of an open space tax. The public question required by law to
collect the open space tax failed to obtain voter approval on 11-7-2006. Ord.
No. 07-18 proposed the collection of an open space tax. The public question
required by law to collect the open space tax failed to obtain voter approval
on 11-6-2007. Ord. No. 06-29 and Ord. No. 07-18 may be found on file in the
office of the Township Clerk.]
§ 5-91. through § 5-93. (Reserved)
§ 5-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-91
1:61

ARTICLE XVI
Historic Preservation Commission
§ 5-94. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. There is hereby created in and for the Township of Vernon a commission
to be known as the "Historic Preservation Commission."
B. The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of seven members
and two alternates who shall serve without compensation except that
the Commission members shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in
the performance of official business approved in advance by the
Township Council.
C. Membership.
(1) The Commission positions shall be filled by persons who are
interested in and qualified to contribute to the preservation of
historic buildings, structures, sites and objects. The Commission
shall comprise the following categories:
(a) Class A: persons who are knowledgeable in building design and
construction or in architectural history.
(b) Class B: persons who are knowledgeable or have demonstrated
an interest in local history.
(c) Class C: persons who are residents of the Township and who
hold no other municipal office, position or employment, except
for membership on the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(2) There shall be at least one member each from Class A and Class B;
three members may reside outside the Township. Both alternates
shall meet the qualifications of Class C members.
D. Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve
for four-year terms except that, of the first members appointed, two
members shall serve for one year, two members shall serve for two
years and the three other members shall serve for three years. The
alternate members shall initially and thereafter serve two-year terms.
All members may, at the expiration of their terms, be eligible for
appointment to four-year terms. If a Commission member is also a
member of the Land Use Board, the term of membership of such
Commission member shall be the term of membership on the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be. Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner in which the previous incumbent was
appointed, and such vacancy appointment shall be only for the balance
of the unexpired term.
E. The Commission shall adopt internal rules and procedures for the
transaction of its business subject to the following:
§ 5-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-94
1:63
§ 5-95. Duties.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the responsibility to:
(1) The Commission shall elect from its members a Chairman and Vice
Chairman.
(2) A quorum for the transaction of all business shall be four members.
[Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06]
(3) All Commission minutes and records shall be public records and all
Commission meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings
Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
(4) The Commission shall employ, designate or elect a Secretary who
need not be a member of the Commission. The Secretary shall keep
minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings, including
voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations
and decisions. All such materials shall be made of public record.
(5) Commission meetings shall be scheduled at least once every
month, or as often as required to fulfill its obligations to advise the
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or governing body.
(6) No Commission member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he or she has directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest.
F. A member of the governing body shall be designated each year as a
liaison with the Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Prepare a survey of historic sites of the municipality pursuant to criteria
identified in the survey report;
B. Make recommendations to the Land Use Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the Master Plan and on the implications
for preservation of historic sites of any other Master Plan elements;
C. Advise the Land Use Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the
recommended capital improvement program;
D. Advise the Land Use Board on applications for development pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110;
E. Provide written reports pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111 and § 330-149
of this article on the application of the Zoning Ordinance provisions
concerning historic preservation; and
F. Carry out such other advisory, educational and informational functions
as will promote historic preservation in the Township, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) To review historical survey material and, if necessary, to update
such material at least once every year to incorporate any newly
§ 5-94 VERNON CODE § 5-95
1:64
required historical documentation and to reflect changes to the
resource's integrity or condition.
(2) To recommend sites to be designated as historic landmarks in
accordance with the procedures established in this article.
(3) To conduct research on and, if necessary, to nominate any
additional significant resources to the State and National Register
of Historic Places. If the Township becomes certified under the
state's Certified Local Government (CLG) Program, the
Commission shall, in accordance with the state's CLG guidelines,
nominate, review and comment on all state and national registered
nominations for historic resources with the Township of Vernon.
(4) To assist other public bodies in aiding the public in understanding
historic resource significance and methods of preservation.
(5) To advise the governing body on the relative merits of proposals
involving public lands to restore, preserve and protect historical
buildings, places and structures; to prepare long-range plans; for
the purpose of securing state, federal and other grants in aid to
assist in carrying out the other purposes of this article.
(6) To secure the voluntary assistance of the public and (within the
limits of the budget established by the governing body for the
Historic Commission's operation) to retain consultants and experts
and incur expenses to assist the Historic Preservation Commission
in its work.
(7) To cooperate with local, county, state or national historical
authorities, governmental bodies or organizations to maximize
their contributions to the intent and purposes of this article.
(8) To advise and assist property owners and other persons and
groups, including neighborhood organizations, who are interested
in historic preservation.
(9) Within the limits of its budget, to undertake educational programs,
including the preparation of a publication aimed at stimulating
interest in and sensitivity to historic preservation; and the placing
of historic markers on structures.
(10) To report at least annually to the Planning Board on the state of
historic preservation in the Township and recommend measures to
improve same.
(11) To adopt and promulgate such regulations and procedures not
inconsistent with this article as are necessary and proper for the
effective and efficient performance of the duties herein assigned.
(12) To perform any other lawful activities which shall be deemed
necessary to further the purposes of this article.
§ 5-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-95
1:65

ARTICLE XVII
Board of Recreation
§ 5-96. Board created.
There is established the "Board of Recreation of the Township of Vernon."
§ 5-97. Membership; appointment; terms; compensation.
§ 5-98. Duties and responsibilities.
The Board of Recreation shall have an advisory role with respect to:
A. The Mayor may, in his or her discretion, appoint up to seven persons,
who shall be citizens and residents of the Township, as members of the
Board. All appointments shall be for the term of three years, except that
the initial appointments shall be staggered. Vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired term only. The members shall serve until their respective
successors are appointed and shall qualify.
B. The Board shall elect one of its members as Chairman and shall also
select a Secretary from among its members. The members shall receive
no compensation for their services.
A. Regulations applicable to Township parks, playgrounds, and
recreational facilities;
B. Program development, administration and organization;
C. Existing fields and parks usage and development;
D. Issues and matters designed to effectuate parks and pathways purposes
and to make recommendations concerning the design and
implementation of a parks and pathways system to enhance and expand
opportunities for parks and pathways purposes;
E. The acquisition or lease of property for recreational purposes;
F. Capital acquisitions and improvements for the Recreation Department;
and
G. The proposed annual budgets for operational and capital improvements
for the Recreation Department and provide comment to the Township
Council on the priorities, facility improvements and maintenance, fees
and participation levels anticipated in the budget;
H. A review of all recreation initiatives and offer comment on the balance
between age and interest groups, active and passive recreation
activities, other park-related issues and supported recreation, for
voluntary recreation organizations in calendar and facility use;
§ 5-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-98
1:67
I. Being a catalyst for volunteer help with Township-sponsored and
supported recreation by active participation and by enlisting others to
serve; and
J. Promoting the Township's recreation, parks, pathways and open space
programs throughout the community.
§ 5-98 VERNON CODE § 5-98
1:68
ARTICLE XVIII
Municipal Alliance Committee
§ 5-99. Establishment; purpose.
There is hereby established the Vernon Township Municipal Alliance
Committee (the "Alliance Committee") for the purpose of consulting with
the local advisory committee on alcoholism and drug abuse to identify
alcoholism and drug prevention, education and community needs and
implementing alliance programs.
§ 5-100. Membership; organization; compensation.
§ 5-101. Duties.
The Vernon Township Municipal Alliance Committee shall implement the
alliance programs formulated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-9.
A. The Alliance Committee may consist of the following:
(1) Chief of Police.
(2) President of the School Board.
(3) Superintendent of Schools.
(4) Student Assistance Coordinator.
(5) Representative of the Parent/Teacher Home and School
Association.
(6) Representative of the Local Bargaining Unit for Teachers.
(7) Representative of the Chamber of Commerce.
(8) Municipal Court Judge.
(9) Representatives of local civic associations.
(10) Representatives of local religious groups.
(11) Private citizens.
B. The Committee shall elect one of its members as Chairman and shall
also select a secretary from among its members. No member shall be
compensated for their services on the Committee.
§ 5-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-101
1:69

ARTICLE XIX
Senior Citizen Committee
§ 5-102. Committee established; purpose.
A Senior Citizens Committee is hereby established for the Township of
Vernon to promote the welfare of the Vernon senior citizens through social,
recreation, and education programs. The Senior Citizens Committee will
act as spokesperson and represent the Vernon senior citizens in any issues
presented to the Township. The Senior Citizens Committee will assist with
the administration and operation of the Senior Center to obtain maximum
utilization of the facilities.
§ 5-103. Membership.
The Senior Citizens Committee shall consist of seven members appointed by
the Township Council. The initial Committee should consist of two members
appointed for terms of one year, two members appointed for terms of two
years, and three members appointed for terms of three years. Thereafter
all appointments shall be for a term of three years. All vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term. The Committee shall elect one of its members
as Chairman and shall also select a Secretary from among its members. No
member shall be compensated for their services on the Board.
§ 5-104. Advisory nature of Committee; bylaws.
A. The Senior Citizens Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the
Township Council in furtherance of the purposes set forth in § 5-99 of
this chapter.
B. The Senior Citizens Committee may from time to time prepare bylaws
governing its operation subject to the review and approval by the
Township Council.
§ 5-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-104
1:71
Chapter 12
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
§ 12-1. Authority to operate.
The Township Council may authorize a cable television company to operate
within the Township on a nonexclusive basis in accordance with N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq. as well as N.J.A.C. 14:18-1.1 et seq. and all relevant federal
statutes and regulations. Authority for a cable television company to
operate within the Township shall be granted by ordinance.
§ 12-2. Existing franchise.
Any existing cable television franchise ordinance shall continue in effect
until expiration.
Chapter 18
CHANGE WORK ORDER POLICY
§ 18-1. Adoption of policy.
The policy attached hereto and made a part hereof and titled "Change Work
Order Policy for Construction, Reconstruction and Major Repairs Contracts
and for Materials, Supplies and Equipment Which Are Part of Construction
Contracts" is hereby adopted by the Township Council of Vernon, New
Jersey.7
Chapter 30
CLAIMS
7. Editor's Note: Said policy is on file in the Township offices, where it is available for review
and inspection.
§ 5-104 VERNON CODE § 18-1
1:72
ARTICLE I
Claims Approval Procedure
[Adopted 2-2-1976 by Ord. No. 76-1]
§ 30-1. Administrative procedures established.
§ 30-2. Submission of voucher by claimant.
Any person claiming payment from the Township of Vernon shall first submit
a detailed statement of the items or demand necessitating such claim to the
responsible executive agency, specifying particularly how the bill or demand
is made up, and a certification of the party claiming payment that it is
correct. No bill, claim or demand shall be considered for payment unless
the voucher has attached to it (or includes) a certification of a department
head (or other municipal official responsible for certain functions) or of his
duly designated representative, having personal knowledge of the facts that
the goods have been received by, or the services rendered to, the Township
of Vernon, and that those services or goods are consistent with any existing
duty to audit, warrant and make recommendations on all claims or bills.
§ 30-3. Submission of claim. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
The bill of claim duly certified shall be presented to the Mayor for approval
of payment.
§ 30-4. Review of claim; approval method. [Amended 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-08]
Claims shall be considered by the Mayor for approval. If a claim is rejected
by the Mayor, it shall be referred to the Chief Financial Officer with any
instructions given at the time of disapproval. Generally, the method of
approval is as follows:
A. The administration of the daily business of the Township of Vernon
should be conducted in a lawful, orderly, and efficient manner.
B. The administration of the daily business of the Township of Vernon is
becoming increasingly more complex.
C. The Mayor and Township Council of the Township of Vernon recognizes
that written procedures should be established to specifically set forth
rules and regulations governing the administrative procedures to be
followed by the municipal agencies, employees and the public in the
conduct of municipal business.
D. The following administrative procedures shall be established to insure a
lawful, orderly and efficient manner in which such business shall be
conducted within the Township of Vernon.
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:73
§ 30-5. Recording of claim.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes, indicating that the governing body has by formal action approved
the same with appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or rejected.
All records pertaining to approved and disapproved bills or claims shall be
available for public inspection.
§ 30-6. Payment of claim.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
The approved claims shall be turned over to the Chief Financial Officer
who shall prepare the checks for payment of claims. The checks shall be
signed by the Mayor, Clerk or Deputy Clerk and countersigned by the Chief
Financial Officer. After preparing the checks, they shall be recorded in the
proper book of accounts.
A. Encumbrances are to be signed by the Department Head and presented
to the Mayor.
B. If the encumbrance is approved, then it is to be forwarded to the Chief
Financial Officer to confirm that the funds are available.
C. No purchases shall be made if the encumbrance is disapproved or if the
funds are not available.
D. A voucher is to be made out to the vendor with the invoice attached and
submitted to the Chief Financial Officer.
E. Voucher for payment must be approved by the Mayor.
F. A record of all payments shall be presented to the Township Council at
its next regular meeting.
§ 30-4 VERNON CODE § 30-6
1:74
ARTICLE II
Disbursement of Claims
[Adopted 1-26-2004 by Ord. No. 04-01]
§ 30-7. Payment of claims and wages by check; certifying and
approval officers. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
In accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17(b)(2), all monies
disbursed by the Township of Vernon for payment of claims and wages and
salaries shall be made by checks signed by the Mayor and countersigned
by the Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Vernon as contained on
vouchers approved by the Chief Financial Officer, said officials to be the
certifying and approval officers of the Township.
§ 30-8. (Reserved)
(Deleted 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08)
§ 30-9. Auditing of financial statements. [Amended 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-08]
The Mayor must cause the Township's financial statements to be audited,
including said claims.
§ 30-10. Financial procedures and internal controls.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16 et seq. shall be followed and the
financial procedures and internal controls of the Township of Vernon are
hereby approved and shall be followed by all Township departments and
agencies; said procedures and internal controls are in writing and available
in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 30-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-10
1:75
Chapter 37
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 37-1. Municipal Court established.
The Municipal Court of the Township, as heretofore established, is hereby
continued.
§ 37-2. Name of Court.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Township of Vernon."
§ 37-3. Municipal Court seal.
The Municipal Court shall have an official seal which shall bear the impress
of the name of the Court.
§ 37-4. Appointment of Judge; qualifications; term.
The Municipal Court of the Township shall have a Judge who shall be known
as the "Judge of the Municipal Court." The Judge shall be appointed by the
Council and shall have the qualifications required by law. The Judge shall
serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment and until a
successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 37-5. Compensation of Judge.
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be compensated by an annual salary
as fixed by ordinance. The compensation so paid shall be in lieu of any and
all other fees.
§ 37-6. Jurisdiction; powers and duties.
The Municipal Court and the Judge thereof shall have, possess and exercise
all the jurisdiction, powers, functions and duties which are or may be
conferred by law and the applicable rules of the Supreme Court of New
Jersey.
§ 37-7. Municipal Court Administrator. [Amended 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-08]
The Mayor shall appoint the Municipal Court Administrator as required
by N.J.S.A. 2B:12-10. The Court Administrator shall possess and maintain
the requisite certification as provided for under N.J.S.A. 2B:12-11. The
Municipal Court Administrator shall be compensated by an annual salary as
fixed by ordinance. Compensation shall be in lieu of any and all other fees.
§ 37-8. Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 30-10 VERNON CODE § 37-8
1:76
§ 37-9. Municipal Public Defender; application fee.
Chapter 44
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 89.
§ 44-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
A. The Mayor; subject to the approval of the Council, shall appoint a New
Jersey licensed attorney to serve as Municipal Prosecutor for a term
ending on the 31st day of December of the year of appointment.
[Amended 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-30]
B. The Municipal Prosecutor shall appear on behalf of the Township:
(1) Before the Municipal Court whenever such services shall be
necessary or required;
(2) In prosecutions for violations of municipal ordinances and in other
matters;
(3) In such other and different matters as may be required by the rules
of the New Jersey Supreme Court governing the courts of this
state.
A. Appointment; term. The Mayor, subject to approval of the Council, shall
appoint a Municipal Public Defender, who shall be a New Jersey
licensed attorney, to provide representations to persons entitled by law
to the appointment of counsel before the Municipal Court. The
appointment shall be made annually and run for the remainder of the
calendar year. Appointment shall be by resolution of the Council stating
a fixed fee to be paid in installments as a professional service contract,
without bidding in accordance with the Local Public Contracts Law.8
[Amended 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-30]
B. Application. An individual defendant applying for the services of the
Public Defender shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $200 prior
to the Court considering the application. A payment plan may be
permitted; however, payments shall not extend beyond four months.
The Municipal Court Judge has the discretion to waive all or a portion of
this fee if the circumstances warrant.
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 37-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1
1:77
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — A present or former municipal employee,
appointee, official, elected official or member of the various boards,
agencies and commissions of the Township of Vernon, whether full or part
time, appointed, elected or hired.
§ 44-2. Indemnification.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 59:10-1 et seq. and subject to the
provisions of this chapter, the Township of Vernon is authorized to provide
for the defense of actions brought against its municipal officials and shall
indemnify such officials to the extent permissible by law and hereinafter set
forth and shall save harmless and protect such persons from financial loss
resulting from litigation. Such indemnification shall arise out of any action
or legal proceeding of a noncriminal nature directly related, or incidental
to, the performance of the duties of the position or office held by such
municipal official. The Township of Vernon may indemnify an official for
exemplary or punitive damages resulting from the official's civil violation
of state or federal law, if, in the opinion of the Council of the Township of
Vernon, the acts committed by the official upon which damages are based
did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an
intentional wrong.
§ 44-3. Notification of Township; cooperation with Township.
The municipal official shall not be entitled to indemnification or
reimbursement pursuant to this chapter unless, within 10 calendar days
of the time such official is served with any summons, complaint, process,
notice, demand or pleading, the official delivers the original or a copy
thereof to the Township Attorney. The municipal official shall be obliged
to cooperate with the Township in the conduct of the official's defense.
Whenever competent and disinterested legal counsel is available to the
Township through any insurance coverage, the municipal official shall be
obliged to be represented by such counsel. If the Township wishes to use
the Township Attorney or the attorney for any board or committee of the
Township to defend that action, the municipal official shall be obligated
to be represented by that attorney unless there is a conflict of interest.
The refusal of the municipal official to cooperate with the Township shall
terminate the Township's obligation to reimburse the municipal official.
§ 44-4. Method to provide for defense; attorney's fees.
A. If the Township Council determines to provide a defense as authorized
by this chapter, it may do so by:
(1) Hiring an attorney of its choice; or
(2) Reimbursing the municipal official for reasonable attorney's fees
and costs incurred in connection with the defense of the act.
B. A resolution shall be adopted appointing counsel for the defense and
determining counsel fees. The hourly rate shall not exceed the then rate
§ 44-1 VERNON CODE § 44-4
1:78
§ 44-5. Limitations.
§ 44-6. Reduction of reimbursement.
The amount the Township is obliged to reimburse the municipal official shall
be reduced by any insurance coverage payable to the municipal official by
the net amount (that is, any recovery less attorneys fees, disbursements
and court costs) of any money received by the municipal official in any
counteraction against the person or persons bringing the action against
him.
paid to the Township Attorney without a written resolution of the
Council.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Township and/or Township
Attorney from demanding and reviewing periodically any costs and
attorney's fees in connection with the defense of the municipal official.
In the event a dispute over attorney's fees arises, the Township reserves
the right to submit the dispute to the Fee Arbitration Committee of the
District or pursue any other course of legal action.
A. The Township shall not be obligated to provide reimbursement in the
following instances:
(1) Where the act or omission was not within the scope of employment
or authority;
(2) Where the act or omission complained of was because of actual
fraud, willful misconduct or actual malice;
(3) Where the legal proceeding is instigated or brought by the
Township of Vernon against the municipal official;
(4) Where the legal proceeding involves a question concerning the
election laws;
(5) Where the action is brought against the Township by the municipal
official.
B. If any such legal proceeding shall be dismissed or finally determined in
favor of the municipal official or employee, the official or employee shall
be reimbursed for the expense of the defense, provided that:
(1) The employee proves that the act or omission was within the scope
of employment or authority; and
(2) The Township fails to prove the act or omission complained of was
because of actual fraud, willful misconduct or actual malice.
§ 44-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-7
1:79
§ 44-7. Approval of settlement.
If the legal proceeding is terminated by an agreement among or between
the parties, then the Township shall not be obligated to reimburse the
municipal official unless the Township approves the settlement agreement.
§ 44-8. Cause attributable to counterclaim or crossclaim.
If the municipal official files a counterclaim or crossclaim in the legal
proceedings, the Township shall not be obligated to reimburse for any
attorney fees or court costs attributable to such.
§ 44-9. Time of payment.
The obligation of the Township to reimburse a municipal official for
expenses shall arise upon final determination of the legal proceedings. In its
discretion the Township may reimburse a municipal official for a portion of
expenses incurred prior to a final decision.
§ 44-10. Precedence of statute applied to police.
To the extent N.J.S.A. 40A:14-155 provides broad indemnification to
members of the Township of Vernon Police Department, that statute shall
supersede this chapter.
§ 44-11. Effective date; effect on prior actions.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law. Any legal proceeding which may be covered by this chapter which
has not been reduced to a final judgment as of the date of passage shall be
covered by the terms of this chapter.
§ 44-12. Exclusions.
This chapter does not provide for the defense and indemnification of
engineers, accountants, attorneys or other professionals who provide
services to the Township. Those professionals, who are not employed by
the Township on a full-time basis, must carry malpractice insurance for
themselves as a condition of employment by the Township.
Chapter 52
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention – See Ch. 263. Fire safety – See Ch. 269.
§ 44-7 VERNON CODE § 52-1
1:80
§ 52-1. Title.9
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Fire Department
Ordinances of the Township of Vernon."
§ 52-2. Establishment and authorization of volunteer fire
departments.
§ 52-3. Qualifications for membership.
No person shall hereafter become a member of the Fire Department of
the Township of Vernon, or any unit thereof, unless above the age of 18,
a citizen of the United States of good moral character, a resident of the
Township of Vernon, County of Sussex. He shall be physically fit to perform
the duties of a fireman, evidenced by a certificate to that effect by a
licensed, practicing physician of the State of New Jersey, after physical
examination for that purpose.
§ 52-4. Performance of duties; attendance.
Every member of the Fire Department shall, in each and every year, perform
at least 60% of his/her duties to be comprised of actual attendance and
duty at fires and drills; and a record shall be kept of such attendance and
duty by the Chiefs of the Fire Departments, and reported to the Mayor and
Township Council annually.
§ 52-5. Application for membership; acceptance. [Amended
11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-30]
Every person seeking to join the Fire Department shall make application
to the Department which he desires to join, and, upon his election to
membership by vote of a majority of the unit present and voting, he shall
become a member in good standing of the Fire Department after approval
A. There is hereby authorized and established in Vernon Township
volunteer fire departments to be composed of four departments to be
known as:
(1) Vernon Township Fire Department No. 1, Inc.
(2) Pochuck Valley Volunteer Fire Department, Inc.
(3) Vernon Township Fire Department, Engine Company, No. 1
Highland Lakes Division.
(4) McAfee Volunteer Fire Department No. 1.
B. There shall be such additional departments as the Mayor and Township
Council may authorize and approve.
9. Editor's Note: See Chapter 250, Article IV for waivers of Township fees for local volunteer
ambulance squads and local volunteer fire departments.
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-5
1:81
of his membership by the Chiefs, and his name shall be entered on a roll of
fireman kept by the Administrator's Office.
§ 52-6. Exemption certificates.
Exemption certificates may be issued to members of the Fire Department
who shall have served seven years in active duty, under municipal control,
as required by law of April 29, 1935, as amended May 26, 1936.
Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40A:14-55 et seq.
§ 52-7. Clothing allowance. [Added 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
A. The Township shall pay an annual clothing allowance to members of the
Vernon Township Fire Department, the Pochuck Valley Fire
Department, the Highland Lakes Fire Department, the McAfee Fire
Department, the Vernon Township Ambulance Squad and the Glenwood
Pochuck Volunteer Ambulance Corps as set forth in this section.
B. The allowances shall be based upon 12 month period from January 1st
to December 31st each year.
C. The amount of the yearly clothing allowance shall be $300 per year.
D. In order to be eligible for a clothing allowance the member must:
(1) Be a full, active member 18 years old or older in good standing
(junior members are not eligible);
(2) Have 2 years of active service with the department in which they
serve;
(3) Be up to date on State mandated training; and
(4) Have attended 30% of Emergency calls and 50% of all Department
drills/training.
(5) Have a valid New Jersey Driver's License.
E. The Chief or presiding officer of each department is responsible for the
submission of the list of qualified members.
F. The Chiefs and Department Treasurers are exempt from the above
requirements and will automatically receive the stipend.
G. No member would be allowed to receive a stipend from more than one
department.
H. The amounts payable to the members will be reviewed and certified by
the Chiefs or presiding officers and treasurers of the departments to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Township.
I. All "run sheets" will be filed with the CFO and will be subject to audit.
§ 52-5 VERNON CODE § 52-7
1:82
Chapter 59
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: The Advisory Board of Health was discontinued 4-27-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 81
PAYROLL
§ 52-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-7
1:83

ARTICLE I
Payroll Account
§ 81-1. Establishment.
At the first meeting of the Governing Body in January of each year, there
shall be approved an account to be designated the "Township of Vernon
Payroll Account," and from time to time the Treasurer, upon receipt of a
warrant for the amount due such payroll account, shall deposit the same
to the credit of the payroll account, charging the appropriate budgetary
accounts therewith.
§ 81-2. Chief Financial Officer to draw checks.
The Chief Financial Officer shall thereafter draw checks on said payroll
account to the employees to payment therefrom.
§ 81-3. Approval.
At each regular meeting of the Governing Body, the Chief Financial Officer
shall submit for approval or ratification, as the case may be, the necessary
payrolls for the amount due the employees for compensation. The payroll
shall be approved by the Governing Body if correct.
§ 81-4. Errors or adjustments.
In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Chief Financial Officer
shall, and it shall be his duty to, see that such error or adjustment is
properly corrected and appropriate record made thereof.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:85

ARTICLE II
Third-Party Payroll
[Adopted 12-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-25]
§ 81-5. Authorization and services.
The County of the Township of Vernon hereby authorizes the use of a thirdparty
disbursement service organization for payroll and payroll tax services.
Services to be performed by the third party disbursement organization shall
include:
§ 81-6. Transfer of funds.
All disbursements on behalf of the local unit shall be made directly from
the local unit's bank account to the appropriate governmental agency. The
transfer of Township funds to any other account, including one maintained
by the third-party disbursement organization, shall be prohibited.
§ 81-7. Renewal.
The Governing Body shall, by Resolution, approve any renewal or extension
of a contract with the third-party disbursement organization.
A. Preparing the necessary documentation and executing disbursements
from the local unit's bank account on behalf of the local unit;
B. Use of electronic means for the disbursing of funds;
C. Data collection, agency report preparation, calculation of withholding
or direct deposit of payroll disbursements.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-7
1:87

ARTICLE III
Local Unit Requirements
§ 81-8. Approval Officer.
The Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Vernon is hereby designated
as the Approval Officer to be responsible for authorizing and supervising the
activities of the third-party disbursement organization. In addition to such
other statutory responsibilities of the Approval Officer, the Chief Financial
Officer shall reconcile and analyze all general ledger accounts affected by
the activities of the third-party disbursement organization.
§ 81-9. Notification.
The third-party disbursement organization shall provide the Governing
Body with notification in the event:
§ 81-10. Qualifications.
The Chief Financial Officer shall qualify disbursing organizations pursuant
to the requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.5.
§ 81-11. Contract review.
Prior to the execution of any contract for the provision of third-party
disbursement services, the contract shall be reviewed and approved by the
Chief Financial Officer of the local unit as to terms, including satisfaction of
the requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.5 and 17.6.
§ 81-12. Contract renewal.
Prior to the execution or renewal of a contract, the Chief Financial Officer
shall complete a review of the services rendered under the contract. Such
review shall be conducted in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.5.
A. The disbursing organization detects irregularities that may indicate
potential fraud, noncompliance with appropriate laws, common
dishonesty, or gross incompetence on the part of the Approval Officer;
or
B. The disbursing organization experiences circumstances that could
jeopardize its ability to continue operations or otherwise interrupt the
service provided to the local unit.
§ 81-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-12
1:89

ARTICLE IV
Eligibility Requirements for Disbursing Organizations
§ 81-13. Eligibility requirements.
Disbursing organizations shall meet the following conditions and/or
requirements:
§ 81-14. Location of offices.
All disbursing organizations shall have offices within a distance acceptable
to the Chief Financial Officer of the local unit such that the physical delivery
and receipt of documents and records can occur in a manner that assures
the delivery of paychecks on regularly scheduled paydays.
A. The disbursing organization shall provide evidence of satisfactory
internal control, evidence of which shall be required by the Chief
Financial Officer. Such evidence may be:
(1) The disbursing organization's Report on Policies and Procedures
Placed in Operation and Tests of Operating Effectiveness,
performed pursuant to AICPA (American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants) Statement on Auditing Standards No. 70;
(2) A completed SysTrust™ examination with an unqualified report on
Availability, Security, Integrity and Maintainability completed in
accordance with AICPA/CICA (Canadian Institute of Chartered
Accountants) SysTrust™ Principles and Criteria for Systems
Reliability; or
(3) Evidence of compliance with a mutually agreed upon external
standard for determination of the sufficiency of a system of internal
controls that support the work to be performed in accordance with
the policies established by the local unit.
§ 81-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-14
1:91

ARTICLE V
Contract Terms and Conditions
§ 81-15. Contracts.
Third-party disbursement organizations performing services for the
Township shall be required to enter into a written agreement for such
services consistent with the terms and conditions set forth herein and in
accordance with requirements established by the statutes and regulations
of the State of New Jersey. All contracts between a local unit and disbursing
organization shall:
§ 81-16. Complaint procedure.
All disbursing organizations shall have a written complaint procedure in
existence. At a minimum, the complaint procedure shall require that a
complaint log be maintained, which shall be available to the local unit for
inspection.
§ 81-17. Independent auditor.
Upon reasonable notice, the disbursing organization shall allow an
independent auditor compensated by the local unit to examine its internal
controls applying SAS 70 standards, SysTrust™ standards or other standards
and procedures mutually agreed upon to ensure accurate, complete and
timely work product. Upon completion, the independent auditor's report
shall be provided to the Chief Financial Officer and Governing Body and
shall be for internal use only.
A. Contain adequate provisions to indemnify the local unit against any
losses incurred as a result of the actions or inactions of the disbursing
organizations;
B. Require the disbursing organization to be responsible for the errors and
omissions of its employees or agents, particularly where those errors
and omissions prevent timely disbursements on behalf of the local unit
from being made, including penalties, finds, interest, and damages; and
C. In those cases where the disbursing organization takes possession of
local unit funds, require adequate insurance to cover such losses as
may arise as a result of errors, omissions, failure to perform or
dishonesty in amounts at least equal to the highest level of exposure to
the local unit for 30 days. Such exposure as regards cash shall be based
on at least the amount of money accessible by the disbursing
organization during said 30-day period and shall not include moneys
that the disbursing organization cannot divert to its own benefit.
§ 81-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-18
1:93
§ 81-18. Disputes.
All disputes between the parties and disputes concerning the contract or its
operation shall be in writing and forwarded to the other party via registered
mail. All contracts shall have appropriate provisions for:
§ 81-19. Reports of disbursements.
Within five working days of each disbursement on behalf of a local unit, the
disbursing organization shall provide to the Chief Financial Officer, reports
and documentation supporting the disbursements. The contract shall also
specify the information required by the local unit to enable it to reconcile
its books and records.
§ 81-20. Corrections and adjustments.
All corrections and adjustments must be completed and provided to the
local unit promptly. All adjustments and reports of adjustments resulting in
disbursements must be reported consistent with the provisions of Section
81-19 above.
§ 81-21. Notices and communications.
Copies of notices, memoranda, complaints or other correspondence
received by the disbursing organization regarding local unit accounts shall
be forwarded to the local unit within 48 hours or receipt.
§ 81-22. N.J.S.A. 40A:11-15(5) and 18A:18A-42(d).
Contracts for third-party disbursement services are not data processing
service contracts under N.J.S.A. 40A:11-15(5) and 18A:18A-42(d).
§ 81-23. Contract termination.
All contracts for third-party disbursement services shall have appropriate
provisions for termination of the contract, including, but not limited to,
termination for failure to perform on the part of the disbursing organization.
§ 81-24. Contract execution.
All contracts entered into between local units and disbursing organizations
for the provision of third-party disbursement services shall be in writing and
executed by all parties, including intermediaries, such as banks providing
payroll services as part of a compensating balance agreement.
A. Dispute resolution between the parties;
B. The service of process to the disbursing organization in New Jersey;
and
C. Application of New Jersey law.
§ 81-18 VERNON CODE § 81-25
1:94
§ 81-25. Demand for payment requirements.
The contract for third-party disbursement services must require that no
disbursement is made unless the demand for payment meets the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16, N.J.S.A. 18A:19-2 and this chapter.
§ 81-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-25
1:95
Chapter 89
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification – See Ch. 44.
§ 81-25 VERNON CODE § 81-25
1:96
ARTICLE I
Health Insurance for Retired Police Officers
[Adopted 7-26-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13]
§ 89-1. Eligibility for paid health benefits.
§ 89-2. Coverage for spouse and dependent children.
§ 89-3. Option to forego coverage for cash payment. [Amended
4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
A. Individuals employed with the Township of Vernon as of January 1,
1999, and who are eligible to retire within the meaning of the PFRS
(Police and Firemen's Retirement System) shall be entitled to receive
paid health benefits after retirement and up until age 65 with coverage
equal to that of an active duty employee. When the retiree reaches the
age of 65, the Township shall provide the retiree with a supplemental
integrated coverage policy which shall be secondary to the retiree's
Medicare coverage.
B. Individuals hired by the Township of Vernon after January 1, 1999, who
retire within the meaning of PFRS and who have served in a full-time
capacity in Vernon Township for 15 years shall be entitled to receive
health benefits after retirement up until they reach the age of 65 with
coverage equal to that of an active duty employee. When the retiree
reaches the age of 65, the Township shall provide the retiree with a
supplemental integrated coverage policy which shall be secondary to
the retiree's Medicare coverage.
A. Upon the death of the retired police officer, coverage will be continued
for his or her spouse, provided that the officer was married to the
spouse at the time of his retirement, and will be continued for his or her
dependent children, provided the children were designated as
dependents at the time of the police officer's retirement, until the death
or remarriage of the spouse, or until receipt of other coverage by that
spouse, or until the spouse reaches the age of 65, whichever occurs
first.
B. After retirement, no new dependents may be added to the police
officer's coverage. However, if a retired officer who had coverage for his
or her spouse at the time of retirement remarries, the new spouse may
receive coverage as provided for in Subsection A above. However, upon
the death of that officer, all coverages for the new spouse will
terminate.
A. A retired police officer may apply to not be covered for medical
insurance under the Township's insurance plan in exchange for a onetime
cash payment equal to 1/2 of the savings on the cost to the
Township for providing coverage to said employee for one year. The
§ 89-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-3
1:97
police officer may not, thereafter, apply to rejoin the Township's
insurance plan.
B. Upon the expiration of the current collective bargaining agreement that
requires payments to employees for the above-noted waiver of health
benefits, such language shall be modified in the contract to match the
above and shall be included in any successor collective bargaining
agreement.
§ 89-3 VERNON CODE § 89-3
1:98
ARTICLE II
Sick Leave at Retirement
[Adopted 5-30-2002 by Ord. No. 02-16]
§ 89-4. Employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements.
Employees who are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement (CBA)
shall be entitled to receive a sum equal to 1/2 of the number of sick days
the employee has accumulated on the date of retirement as defined by the
Public Employment Retirement System, subject to a cap equal to the then
lowest benefit being provided under all CBAs of the Township with respect
to payment for accumulated sick days, paid at the employee's then current
rate at the time of said retirement. Said payment shall be made within 45
days of the last date of work after retirement.
§ 89-5. Employees covered by individual contracts.
Employees who are covered by individual contracts with the Township shall
have the issue of accumulated sick leave governed by the language of
the contract or, if not covered by the individual contract, shall receive a
sum equal to 1/2 of the number of sick days accumulated on the date of
retirement as defined by either the Public Employment Retirement System
or the Police and Fire Retirement System (to be determined by which
system the employee is contributing), subject to a cap equal to the then
lowest benefit being provided under all CBAs of the Township with respect
to payment for accumulated sick days, paid at the employee's then current
rate at the time of said retirement. Said payment shall be made within 45
days of the last date of work after retirement.
§ 89-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-5
1:99

ARTICLE III
Health Benefits upon Retirement for Full-Time Employees Not
Subject to a Collective Bargaining Agreement
§ 89-6. Health benefits. [Adopted 10-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-19]
For all full-time Township employees hired on or after January 1, 2010,
and who are not subject to a collective bargaining agreement between the
Township and a recognized collective bargaining unit, and who retire within
the meaning of the New Jersey Public Employees' Retirement System and/
or the New Jersey Police and Fireman's Retirement System:
A. The employee will continue to be eligible to receive single health
insurance coverage under the Township's health insurance plan upon
contribution to the same amount of premium percentage as that
contributed by current non-union Township employees, and, further,
subject to the same co-pay amounts as that paid by current non-union
Township employees. Any insurance obtained under this section is
subject to changes in, benefits provided, premium contribution and/or
co-pay amounts.
B. The Township will provide coverage for the employee's spouse, samesex
partner and/or dependents upon contribution by the employee of
the then-current Township group premium rate for insurance and
applicable co-pay amounts until the employee is age 65 and to age 25
for dependents, at which times coverage for the spouse, same-sex
partner and/or dependents shall cease. Any insurance obtained under
this section is subject to changes in benefits provided, premium
contribution and/or co-pay amounts.
C. Upon reaching age 65 and/or qualification for Medicare, the Township's
health insurance coverage for the employee will be to provide the
employee with single coverage Basic AARP Medicare Supplemental
Insurance until the death of the employee. The Township will not
provide any other health insurance benefits.
§ 89-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-6
1:101

ARTICLE IV
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Added 6-24-2010 by Ord. No. 10-08; Amended in entirety on
9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-21]
§ 89-7. Establishment of Defined Contribution Retirement Program.
N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1, et seq. created the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program to provide retirement benefits to various county and municipal
officials., N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2 requires the governing body of each county,
municipality, and other local entity to adopt, as appropriate, either a
resolution or ordinance to determine the positions that are substantially
similar in nature to the advice and consent of the Senate for appointments
by the Governor of the State, pursuant to guidelines or policy that shall be
established by the Local Finance Board in the Department of Community
Affairs, and for which officials appointed to such positions shall be eligible
for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement Program,
subject to the provisions of law. The Council of the Township of Vernon has
considered the guidelines issued by the Local Finance Board.
§ 89-8. Eligibility for participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 89-9. Positions exempt from participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed exempt
from participation in the Defined Contribution Retirement Program
membership:
A. Township Council Members; and
B. Township Mayor.
A. Tax Collector;
B. Chief Financial Officer;
C. Construction Code Official;
D. Tax Assessor;
E. Registered Municipal Clerk;
F. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
G. Public Works Manager.
§ 89-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-10
1:103
§ 89-10. Compliance with State regulations.
This ordinance shall be implemented, construed and subject to N.J.S.A
43:15C-1 et seq. as amended from time to time, and any regulations or
guidance documents from the Local Finance Board or the Division of
Pensions and Benefits.
§ 89-10 VERNON CODE § 89-10
1:104
ARTICLE V
Waiver of Health Benefits
[Adopted 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
§ 89-11. Waiver payments.
A. Effective January 1, 2019: Except as required by current collective
bargaining agreements, the Township shall not provide payments to
employees for waiving health benefits provided by the Township unless
a resolution is passed by the Council, no later than the close of the open
enrollment period of the previous year, permitting such waiver
payments.
B. Upon the expiration of current collective bargaining agreements that
require payments to employees for waiver of health benefits, no such
payments shall be included in any successor collective bargaining
agreement.
C. The CFO shall provide to the Council by September 1 of each year a
cost-benefit analysis for health insurance waivers which shall include
the number of persons who currently have health benefits waivers, the
number of persons likely to take a health benefit waiver for the
following year, the likely type of coverage those waiving the benefits
may obtain, the employee contribution for the given year for those who
would be seeking a waiver and the total overall savings to the Township
as well as any other information deemed necessary by the CFO.
D. If the Council chooses to offer waiver payments for health benefits for a
given benefit year, the Council may at its option adopt a resolution
authorizing the waiver payments no later than close of the open
enrollment period for health benefits for that upcoming benefit year.
E. Health benefits waivers shall be the lesser of $5,000 or 25% of the
saved premium for one year.
§ 89-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-11
1:105

ARTICLE VI
Bereavement Leave for Non-Union Employees
[Adopted 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
§ 89-12. Bereavement leave for non-union employees.
Township employees that are not members of unions shall be afforded the
same amount of bereavement leave given to employees that are members of
unions.
§ 89-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-12
1:107

ARTICLE VII
Anti-Nepotism Policy
[Adopted 7-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
§ 89-13. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTORS — Contractors, independent contractors, subcontractors,
vendors, professionals appointed pursuant to the fair and open process
or the non-fair and open process or person, persons or business working
for the Township whose employment is limited in scope or duration to a
specific project with the Township and subject to either a bid proposal or a
solicitation of quotes. (Examples would include, but not be limited to: road
projects; construction projects; projects). Employment with contractors
shall be considered for the purpose of this section as employment with the
Township.
DEPARTMENT — Any department within the government structure of the
Township of Vernon, whether existing pursuant to the Township Code or
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — Any person holding the position of Mayor or Council
member of the Township of Vernon.
RELATIVE — Spouse or significant other, child, parent, stepchild, sibling,
grandparent, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, grandchild, niece, nephew, uncle,
aunt or any other person related by blood or marriage.
SUPERVISOR — Any employee of the Township of Vernon having
supervisory duties and powers over another employee within the Township
of Vernon.
TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT — Any employment (or employee thereunder)
which is not full-time or regular part-time, and shall include, without
limitation, seasonal employees including, but not limited to, seasonal
employees affiliated with Township recreation and leaf pick-up programs.
§ 89-14. Applicability.
A. The prohibitions set forth in these anti-nepotism regulations shall apply
to all contractors, and full-time and regular part-time positions of the
Township of Vernon, but shall not apply to any temporary employment.
B. Subject to the exception in § 89-15 below, this section and the
prohibition against certain hiring contained herein shall be applied
prospectively only from the effective date of this chapter, and shall not
in any way be construed to prohibit or make unlawful any current
employment relationship or situation or the hiring or promotion of any
person currently employed by the Township of Vernon as of the effective
date of this chapter which may technically be in violation of the terms
hereof but for its prospective application. For purposes of interpreting
§ 89-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-14
1:109
§ 89-15. Restrictions on hiring, supervision and promotions of
employees.
The following restrictions shall apply to the hiring and promotion of
employees to employment positions for the Township of Vernon:
this exception, persons appointed to positions of employment with the
Township of Vernon for a set term shall be considered current
employees notwithstanding the fact that the then term may have ended.
Such persons holding positions of employment with the Township of
Vernon under a set term may be hired to any position in the Township,
rehired, reappointed or promoted, as may be the case, without violating
this chapter.
A. Elected officials. No elected official of the Township of Vernon shall be
considered for employment or hired to a position of employment with
the Township of Vernon either during his or her term of office or within
four years after the expiration of the term. No elected official shall
serve as Council liaison to any department that employs any relative of
that elected official.
B. Relative of elected officials. No person who is a relative of any elected
official of the Township of Vernon shall be considered for employment
as an employee of the Township of Vernon. This shall not restrict nor
prohibit the continued employment of individuals to a position with the
Township of Vernon where a relative of an employee is elected as a
Mayor or Council member after the date of the employee's start of
employment with the Township of Vernon.
C. Promotion of existing employees. Notwithstanding the prospective
applications as to the remainder of this chapter as applied above, no
elected official may participate in the promotion process or hiring
process in the Department of any existing employee who is a relative of
the elected official as the case may be. The elected official shall abstain
from participation in such personnel action as it applies to such
relative.
D. Appointments. No relative of an elected official of the Township of
Vernon shall be appointed to the position of any Township of Vernon
professional who receives compensation, or any Township of Vernon
board or commission which has more than an advisory role and/or one
in which the members receive compensation.
E. Department heads. No person who is a relative of any department head
of the Township of Vernon shall be considered for employment as an
employee of the Township of Vernon. This shall not restrict nor prohibit
the continued employment of individuals to a position with the
Township of Vernon where a relative of a department head is hired
before the effective date of this chapter.
§ 89-14 VERNON CODE § 89-16
1:110
§ 89-16. Purpose.
This policy is not for the purpose of depriving any citizen of an equal
chance for employment with the Township of Vernon, but is solely intended
to eliminate the potential for preferential treatment of the relatives of the
members of the governing body and/or any department head.
§ 89-17. Current employees.
Except as may be otherwise expressly provided for herein, this chapter shall
not affect the employment of any present Township of Vernon employee, nor
shall it be construed or enforced in such manner as to violate, abridge or
impair any rights of individuals employed or affiliated with the Township
under any collective bargaining agreement, employment contract, or any
state or federal law protecting the employment rights of any such
individuals. If, however, an employee of the Township of Vernon becomes
an elected official of the Township of Vernon following the adoption of
this article, the employee must either resign their employment with the
Township of Vernon or resign from the office to which they were elected.
§ 89-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-17
1:111
Chapter 94
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Health insurance for retired police
officers — See Ch. 89, Art. I.
Police services — See Ch. 98.
Public access to records — See Ch. 110.
Police dogs — See Ch. 148, Art. I.
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
§ 89-17 VERNON CODE § 89-17
1:112
ARTICLE I
Establishment, Organization and Personnel
§ 94-1. Division of Police continued; positions. [Amended 9-13-2004
by Ord. No. 04-25; 5-29-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08; 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-08; 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
There is hereby continued in and for the Township of Vernon a Police
Division, as part of the Department of Public Safety, which may consist of
a Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police, and such numbers of Captains,
Lieutenants, Sergeants and patrol officers as may, from time to time, be
authorized by further ordinance of the Township Council. When positions
are so authorized, the Mayor shall make appointments to the authorized
positions. The Police Division, upon adoption of this chapter, shall consist
of the following authorized positions: one Chief of Police, one Captain, two
Lieutenants, up to six Sergeants and up to 30 patrol officers.
§ 94-2. Director of Public Safety; appropriate authority;
promulgation of rules and regulations. [Amended 9-13-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-25; 5-29-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
The Mayor is appointed the Director of Public Safety and is further
designated as the appropriate authority as provided by law. The appropriate
authority shall be responsible for the overall performance of the Police
Division and shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the
government of the Police Division and for the discipline of its members as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
§ 94-3. Police Chief. [Amended 9-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-25]
The Police Chief shall be the head of the police force and shall be directly
responsible to the appropriate authority for the efficiency and routine dayto-
day operations of the police force. The Police Chief shall, pursuant to the
rules and regulations established by the appropriate authority:
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the force and its officers
and personnel.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of force.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
D. Delegate such authority as deemed necessary for the efficient operation
of the force to be exercised under the direction and supervision of the
Chief.
§ 94-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-4
1:113
§ 94-4. Functions of Division of Police. [Amended 9-13-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-25]
The Police Division and the members thereof shall preserve the peace,
protect life and property and prevent crime by the exercise of all of the
powers, functions and duties which may be prescribed by law for a
municipal police force generally or by any provision of any lawfully adopted
ordinance of the Township requiring said enforcement, including but not
limited to the administration and enforcement, regulation, direction,
control, restriction, and movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and
use of the streets by vehicles and persons in the Township or as otherwise
provided by law. The members of the Police Division shall have the power to
serve and execute all process issuing from the Municipal Court of Vernon or
such other process as permitted by law.
§ 94-5. Requirements for probationary patrolman; appointment.
A. To be eligible for appointment as a probationary patrolman, the
applicant must have the following qualifications:
(1) Be a citizen of the United States.
(2) Be of good moral character.
(3) Be able to read and write the English language intelligently.
(4) Be not less than 18 years of age nor more than 35 years of age at
the announced closing date for filing applications for the position or
as otherwise approved by the New Jersey Police and Fireman
Retirement System. [Amended 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
(5) Be in good health, sound in mind and body.
(6) Exhibit, prior to appointment, a certificate from the Township
Physician that the applicant is physically capable of performing the
duties which will be required as a probationary patrolman10.
[Amended 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
B. Probationary patrolmen shall be appointed on the basis of merit and as
the result of a competitive examination that fairly tests and determines
the qualifications, fitness and ability of the applicant to perform the
duties of the position to which they seek appointment. Preference shall
be given to those applicants who are residents of the Township of
Vernon at the time they file for the examination for appointment to the
Police Department as allowed by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1a. The aforesaid
examination shall be conducted at such time and in such manner as the
Mayor shall determine. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-29;
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08; 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
10.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 10-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-23.
§ 94-4 VERNON CODE § 94-6
1:114
§ 94-6. Patrolmen; appointment.
No person shall be eligible as a patrolman without having first been a
probationary patrolman for at least one year.
§ 94-7. Promotions.
Promotion in the Division of Police shall be made in accordance with the
Civil Service Act, N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 4A:1-1.1.
§ 94-8. Captains; duties. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08;
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08; 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
§ 94-9. Removal; suspension; fines; reduction in rank. [Amended
9-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-25]
Except as otherwise provided by law, no permanent member or officer of
the police force shall be removed from office, employment or position for
political reasons or for any cause other than incapacity, misconduct, or
disobedience of rules and regulations established for the government of the
Police Division and force, nor shall any member or officer be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank from or in office, employment, or position
therein except for just cause and only pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-147 et seq.
§ 94-10. (Reserved)11
§ 94-11. Illness or injury. [Amended 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
A. Captain shall have the powers vested in them by law, subject to such
rules and regulations and orders as may, from time to time, be
established in writing by the Mayor.
B. Captain shall promptly report to the internal affairs officer any and all
infractions of rules, orders and regulations, or any unfitness for the
performance of duties, and submit to the Chief of Police in writing a
report containing such information.
A. Any member of the Division of Police who shall be unable to report for
duty by reason of any injury or incapacitating illness shall immediately
report that fact to the immediate superior officer who, upon receiving
any such report, shall notify the Chief of Police via the chain of
command.
B. Procedures for handling injuries or incapacitating illnesses of an
employee shall be guided by the Police Division's Rules and
Regulations, policies and procedures, collective bargaining
agreements, and the Township employee handbook.
11.Editor's Note: Former § 94-10, Annual physical examinations, as amended, was repealed
1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03.
§ 94-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-12
1:115
§ 94-12. Injury or illness while on duty. [Amended 1-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-03]
Any member of the Division who shall sustain any injury or become ill while
on duty shall immediately report such fact to the immediate superior officer
or any command officer.
§ 94-13. Rules and regulations; knowledge of rules and ordinances.
§ 94-14. Salaries; vacations.
§ 94-15. Court appearances by members. [Amended 1-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-03]
Members of the Division of Police shall be required to appear in court, as
required by rule or regulation, or as directed.
A. The Mayor shall, from time to time, make rules and regulations
concerning the conduct and duties of the officers and members of the
Division, the kinds of uniforms and insignia to be worn by them and
concerning such other matters as may be necessary for the proper
regulation of the Division of Police. [Amended 5-29-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
B. The rules and regulations shall be issued in writing and shall have the
same force and effect as though included in this chapter.
C. The rules and regulations, when promulgated, shall become binding
upon each member of the Division of Police.
D. Every member of the Division shall be familiar with the rules and
regulations of the Division of Police and with the various ordinances of
the Township.
A. The members of the Division of Police shall receive for their respective
services such salaries as may, from time to time, be established by
ordinance or resolution. [Amended 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
B. Members of the Division shall be entitled to such annual vacations, with
pay, as may, from time to time, be established by the Council.
§ 94-12 VERNON CODE § 94-15
1:116
ARTICLE II
Special Police
[Amended 9-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-25]
§ 94-16. Appointments. [Amended 5-29-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
In such cases as the Township Council shall authorize the appointment of
either or both Class One and/or Class Two special police officers pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., the Mayor shall appoint such special police
officers to fill such authorized positions in accordance with the provisions
of the cited statutes, and the special police officers shall serve pursuant to
said law. The Township of Vernon is hereby deemed a resort municipality for
the purpose of the number of positions which may be established under the
statute.
§ 94-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-16
1:117

ARTICLE III
Mutual Police Assistance Agreement
§ 94-17. Authority to enter into reciprocal ordinances.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 et seq., in the event of emergency,
widespread disaster, conflagration or where it appears that an emergency,
widespread disaster or conflagration may develop and which may be beyond
the control of a single municipality, governing bodies of two or more
municipalities, by reciprocal ordinances, may enter into agreements with
each other for mutual aid in such cases of emergency.
§ 94-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-17
1:119

ARTICLE IV
Fees for Police Services
§ 94-18. Fees and charges. [Amended 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
Fees and charges established for certain services extended and materials
distributed by the Division of Police are included in Chapter 250, Fees and
Escrows, Article II.
§ 94-19. Services provided at headquarters; days and times.
The viewing or reviewing of reports or of photographs of accident scenes
shall be permitted and conducted at Division of Police headquarters daily,
Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 94-20. Receipts issued; disposition of fees.
A. The Division of Police shall issue receipts for all fees and charges
received for the services extended or materials furnished.
B. All fees and charges collected under this article shall be delivered to the
Township Treasurer and thereafter deposited by him in the appropriate
account of the Township.
§ 94-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-20
1:121
Chapter 98
POLICE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250 Police Department — See Ch. 94.
§ 94-20 VERNON CODE § 94-20
1:122
ARTICLE I
Outside Services
[Adopted 10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-32; amended in its entirety
2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-03]
§ 98-1. Authority to establish trust funds for payment for outside
services.
The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized and directed to establish
such dedicated by rider trust funds as are required to provide for escrows
for funds to be paid to off-duty police officers and special police officers as
and for payment for duties so performed under the terms of the collective
bargaining agreement by and between the Township and the PBA for
regular police officers or separate agreement for special police officers.
§ 98-2. Fees for off-duty police officers and special police officers.
A fee is hereby established in the amount of $6 to be paid to the Township
for each hour of off-duty work performed by police officers for private
persons and entities. Said amount is presently established as follows:
employer social security (7.65%); workers' compensation insurance
(3.12%); and administrative costs representing the balance. The fee for
special police officers is $2.75 per hour.
§ 98-3. Payment of funds; escrow.
Estimated funds to be used for off-duty work of police officers or for special
police officers must be paid by the private persons or entities and escrowed
pursuant to this article prior to the utilization of the off-duty police officer
or special officer. Such estimated amount shall be established by the Chief
of Police and the Chief Financial Officer or designee. Excess funds shall be
promptly returned to the private person or entity after performance of all
work or off-duty work and submission of required paperwork. If funds are
not available in escrow, special police officer work or regular police officer
off-duty work will not be permitted.
§ 98-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:123
Chapter 99
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 531.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 407.
Motorized sport bikes — See Ch. 542.
Towing — See Ch. 518.
Vehicles in parks and recreation areas — See
Ch. 413.
§ 98-3 VERNON CODE § 98-3
1:124
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 99-1. Title.
These regulations may be known and cited as "Chapter 99 of the Code of
the Township of Vernon," or as the "Traffic Ordinance."
§ 99-2. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 99-3. Repeal.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Vernon are hereby repealed,
except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any
ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 99-4. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter for any reason are held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 99-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-09]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute or
otherwise provided for in the Township Code or unless the penalty is
expressly set forth in the Local Supplemental Violations Bureau Schedule of
the Township of Vernon, every person convicted of a violation of a provision
of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $100 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-5
1:125

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 99-6. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 99-7. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 99-8. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule II of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in said Schedule II attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 99-9. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule III of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in said Schedule III attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 99-10. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV at any time between the hours listed in said Schedule IV of
any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 99-11. Off-street parking.
Parking in these areas shall be restricted as described in Schedule V
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 99-12. Snow and other emergencies.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway or an ice condition exists and salt/sanding
procedures must be followed, an emergency shall exist, and no vehicle
shall be parked on either side of the street, road or highway or portions
thereof, within Vernon Township. This prohibition shall remain in effect
until after the snow/ice has ceased and until all streets are plowed/
sanded sufficiently so parking does not interfere with the flow of traffic.
[Amended 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 02-39]
§ 99-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-12
1:127
§ 99-13. (Reserved)12
§ 99-13.1. Removal and storage. [Added 8-16-1982 by Ord. No.
82-19]
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal, before regaining possession of the vehicle.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
C. The effectiveness of this section is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
D. Reserved. [Deleted 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-09]
E. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary "EMERGENCY NO
PARKING" signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence,
the ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of said "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs when
weather conditions, accidents, fires, public celebrations or any
necessary road repairs or construction dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic. Notification that the "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are
being or will be posted shall be given to the operator of any vehicle
which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs. [Amended
8-18-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
12.Editor's Note: Original § 99-13, Abandoned vehicles, was deleted 2-27-2006 by Ord. No.
06-07. Refer to Ch. 531, Vehicles, Abandoned.
§ 99-12 VERNON CODE § 99-13.1
1:128
ARTICLE III
Vehicle Exclusions
§ 99-14. Vehicles over certain weights excluded. [Amended
6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-12]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI, except for the pickup
and delivery of materials on such streets, said Schedule VI being attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 99-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-14
1:129

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 99-15. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 99-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-15
1:131

ARTICLE V
Through Streets, Stop Intersections and Yield Intersections
§ 99-16. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 99-17. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 99-18. Yield Intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 99-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-18
1:133

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 99-19. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XI attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 99-20. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 99-21. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 99-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-21
1:135

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions
§ 99-22. Left turn prohibition.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XIV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 99-23. U-turn prohibition.
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 99-24. All turns prohibited.
No person shall make a turn of any kind (left, right or U-turn) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XVI attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 99-24.1. Right turn prohibition. [Added 3-25-1985 by Ord. No.
85-9; amended 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-18]
No person shall make a right turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XVII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 99-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-24.1
1:137

ARTICLE VIII
Schedules
§ 99-25. Schedule I: No Parking; Appalachian Trail Residential
Permit Parking Area. [Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-18;
11-7-1983 by Ord. No. 83-19; 9-24-1984 by Ord. No. 84-18; 9-5-1985
by Ord. No. 85-20; 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-19; 11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-12; 5-22-17 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 99-7, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts
of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Canistear Road
[Added 9-25-2000
by Ord. No. 00-24]
North 281 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Orchard Lane for a
length of 160 feet (441 feet south
of the southerly curbline of
Orchard Lane)
Canistear Road
[Added 9-25-2000
by Ord. No. 00-24]
South 315 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Orchard Lane for a
length of 75 feet (390 feet south
of the southerly curbline of
Orchard Lane)
Carol Drive [Added
7-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-22]
South For a distance of 500 feet from
the intersection of Carol Drive
with County Route 517
Church Street Both Between the most northerly
intersection of Omega Drive and
Vernon Crossing Road
Breakneck Road North From the easterly curbline of
Alturas Road to a point 500 feet
east therefrom
North Shore Drive South From a point opposite the
westerly curbline of Willow Road
to a point 350 feet west
therefrom
Old Glenwood Circle
[Added 7-8-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-22]
East For a distance of 150 feet from
the intersection of Old Glenwood
Circle with Carol Drive
Old Glenwood Circle
[Added 7-8-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-22]
West For a distance of 75 feet from the
intersection of Old Glenwood
Circle with Carol Drive
§ 99-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-25
1:139
Name of Street Side Location
Sussex County Route
517 [Added
7-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-23; amended
10-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-33]
North From Carol Drive to Ann Place
Sussex County Route
517 [Added
7-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-23; amended
10-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-33]
North From Carol Drive to the
Appalachian Trail Crosswalk on
Route 517
Sussex County Route
517 [Added
7-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-23; amended
10-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-33]
North For a distance of 25 feet south
from the Appalachian Trail
Crosswalk on County Route 517
(no parking here to corner)
Sussex County Route
517 [Added
7-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-23; amended
10-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-33]
South From Ann Place to Meadowlark
Lane
Wawayanda Road Both From the intersection of Barry
Drive South to the entrance of
Wawayanda State Park
B. Appalachian Trail Residential Permit Parking Area. [Added 5-22-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-07]
(1) Defined. The Mayor and Council of the Township of Vernon have
determined that there is an acute problem or potential problems
for providing safe, on-street parking on Carol Drive, Old Glenwood
Circle, Meadowlark Drive, Cove Court, Vlietstra Drive, Thistle
Avenue, Ivy Place, Ann Place and CR517. The Mayor and Council
have, therefore, determined that the greater public interest will be
served by insuring convenient and reasonable access to homes and
that the following limitations on parking will promote such an
interest.
(2) Designation of Appalachian Trail Residential Permit Parking Area.
Parking shall be prohibited on streets in the Appalachian Trail
Residential Permit Parking Area, except to vehicles that display a
parking permit issued by the Vernon Township Police Department
pursuant to this section of the Township Code ("Appalachian Trail
§ 99-25 VERNON CODE § 99-25
1:140
Resident Parking Permit"). The Appalachian Trail Permit Parking
Area shall include:
(a) Carol Drive
(b) Old Glenwood Circle
(c) Meadowlark Drive
(d) Cove Court
(e) Vlietstra Drive
(f) Thistle Avenue
(g) Ivy Place
(h) Ann Place
(3) Permit types; resident parking permits. Residents who live in the
Appalachian Trail Residential Permit Parking Area are eligible for a
permit that allows the resident or their guest to park a vehicle on a
road within the Appalachian Trail Residential Permit Parking Area.
An Appalachian Trail Resident Parking Permit is nontransferable
and shall be valid for up to 365 days from the date the permit is
issued. An Appalachian Trail Resident Parking Permit must be
surrendered to the Vernon Township Police Department
immediately if the person to whom the permit(s) was issued no
longer resides within the Appalachian Trail Residential Permit
Parking Area.
(4) Permit applications. Permits shall only be issued to homeowners or
tenants within the Appalachian Trail Residential Permit Parking
Area or persons leasing a home within the Appalachian Trail
Residential Permit Parking Area. To obtain an Appalachian Trail
Resident Parking Permit, a home owner or tenant shall present
proof of ownership or residency, such as a lease agreement, tax bill
or utility bill, to the Vernon Township Police Department confirming
said residency. Upon the presentation of proof of residency, up to
five (5) Appalachian Trail Resident Parking Permits will be issued
for no fee. The Vernon Township Police Department may issue more
than five (5) permits, upon a resident showing good cause for
issuance of additional permits.
(5) Display of permit. Upon the issuance of an Appalachian Trail
Resident Parking Permit, the resident or guest will display the
permit in the windshield of their vehicle so it can be easily observed
by the Vernon Township Police Department.
(6) Restrictions and penalties. All vehicles parked within the
Appalachian Trail Residential Permit Parking Area shall comply
with Title 39 of the statutes of the State of New Jersey. Any
§ 99-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-25
1:141
§ 99-26. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours. [Amended
7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-19; 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-8, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
All streets, roads,
highways or
portions thereof
within the
Township of
Vernon
[Amended
12-16-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-39]
Both 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
All
Canistear Road
[Amended
9-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-24]
North 9:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
From the intersection of
Orchard Lane to 281 feet
south. 441 feet south
from the intersection of
Blueberry Lane
Canistear Road
[Amended
9-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-24]
South 9:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
From the intersection of
Orchard Lane to 315 feet
south. 390 feet south
from the intersection of
Orchard Lane to the
intersection of Blueberry
Lane
violation of this section of the Township Code shall be subject to a
fine of $100.00.
(7) Designation of areas that do not require permits. Vehicles may be
parked at the following areas of CR517 and permits are not
required to park at these locations:
(a) CR517 northbound shoulder, north of Meadowlark Drive and
south of Carol Drive as marked by signage.
(b) CR517 southbound shoulder, north of Carol Drive for a
distance of 1,050 feet, as marked by signage.
(c) Parking is prohibited on any other area of CR517 between
Vlietstra Drive and Ann Place.
(d) All vehicles parked within the above listed areas shall comply
with Title 39 of the Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 99-25 VERNON CODE § 99-27
1:142
§ 99-27. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-9, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the hours indicated upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Breakneck Road Both All From Kewaskum Road to
County Road 515 (Stockholm
Road)
County Road 515
[Added
3-4-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-4]
Both All From the southerly curbline of
NJ Route 94 to a point 400
feet southerly therefrom
County Road 517 Both All From the easterly curbline of
NJ Route 94 to Old Rudetown
Road
NJ Route 94
[Added
2-15-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-09]
West All West side beginning at the
southerly curbline of Church
Street and extending 250 feet
southerly therefrom
§ 99-28. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking Certain Days.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-10, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Route 94 West All 15 minutes Beginning 35 feet
south of the
southerly
curbline of
Andrea Drive to a
point 300 feet
south therefrom
§ 99-29. Schedule V: Off-Street Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-11, all vehicles must park within
painted white lines and certain vehicles shall be identified for parking in
reserved locations.
§ 99-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-29
1:143
Parking Area Hours Location
Vernon Municipal
Center parking lot
All Westerly side of Church Street
Vernon Township High
School
All Southerly side of County Road 565
Vernon Valley Shopping
Center
All Easterly side of County Road 515
No parking on either side of access roadway fronting all stores.
No parking on either side of entrance access road "A."
No parking on either side of entrance access road "B."
§ 99-30. Schedule VI: Vehicles Over Certain Weights Excluded.
[Amended 10-15-1979 by Ord. No. 79-16; 6-28-1993 by Ord. No.
93-12]
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-14, vehicles over the registered
gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets
described, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight
(tons) Location
Barrett Road 4 From Hickory Road to the New
Jersey-New York state line
Breakneck Road 4 From Stockholm Road (County Road
515) to Highland Lakes Road
(County Road 638)
Vernon-Stockholm
Road (County Route
515)
4 From the Hardyston Township line
to Route 94
§ 99-31. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-15, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Lounsberry Hollow
School (circular
driveway)
Counterclockwise Entire length
§ 99-29 VERNON CODE § 99-32
1:144
§ 99-32. Schedule VIII: Through Streets. [Amended 8-16-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-18]
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-16, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Appleseed Road Between Panorama Drive and Evergreen Road
Barry Drive North Between Wawayanda Road and Hickory Road
Breakneck Road Between Stockholm Road (CR 515) and
Canistear Road-Wawayanda Road
Canistear Road Between the Vernon Township-Passaic County
corporate line and Breakneck Road-Wawayanda
Road
Cedar Ridge Road-
Woodland Drive
Between McAfee-Glenwood Road (CR 517) and
Cedar Ridge Road
Clover Lane Between Gilbert Drive and Cedar Terrace
Clover Lane South
[Added 8-24-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-8]
From and including its intersection with Alsike
Lane to and including its intersection with
Timothy Lane
Forsythia Avenue Between McAfee-Glenwood Road (CR 517) and
Carnation Street
Grove Drive-Clearview
Terrace-Woodland Trail
Between High Point Terrace and Lake Wallkill
Road (CR 667)
Lake Pochung Road Between McAfee-Glenwood Road (CR 517) and
Glenwood Road (CR 667)
Lakeside Drive (Lake
Panorama)
Between Winding Hill Road and Lakeview Drive
and its westerly terminus
Lincoln Avenue Between Parrish Drive and its northerly terminus
Maple Grange Road Between McAfee-Glenwood Road (CR 517) and
Vernon-Warwick Road (SH 94)
Masker Road Between McAfee-Glenwood Road (CR 517) and
Maple Grange Road
Meadow Lane-Susan
Valley Terrace [Added
8-24-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-8]
From and including its intersection with Rebecca
Drive to and including its intersection with
Sudan Lane
Mott Drive Between McAfee-Vernon Road (SH 94) and
Pleasant Valley Drive
Old Coach Road Between Hamburg-McAfee Road (SH 94) and
Pleasant Valley Drive
§ 99-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-32
1:145
Name of Street Limits
Parrish Drive Between McAfee-Glenwood Road (CR 517) and
its westerly terminus
Pleasant Valley Drive Between Hamburg-McAfee Road (SH 94) and
West Shore Drive
Sammis Road-
Lounsberry Hollow
Road
Between McAfee-Glenwood Road (CR 517),
southerly intersection, and McAfee-Glenwood
Road (CR 517), northerly intersection
Valley Drive West-
Hemlock Drive-Cedar
Terrace
Between Lounsberry Hollow Road and Marigold
Road
Valley Drive-Gilbert
Drive
Between McAfee-Glenwood Road (CR 517) and
Zinnia Drive
Vlietstra Drive Between McAfee-Glenwood Road (CR 517) and
Gilbert Drive
Wallkill Road Between Glen Road and Owens Station Road
(CR 642)
Wallkill Road Between Owens Station Road (CR 642) and the
New York -New Jersey State Line
Walnut Hill Drive Between Vlietstra Drive and its southerly
terminus
Wawayanda Road Between Breakneck Road-Canistear Road and
the entrance to Wawayanda State Park
Winding Hill Road-
Lakeview Drive-
Panorama Drive
Between Glenwood Road (CR 565) and Winding
Hill Road
§ 99-33. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections. [Amended 8-16-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-18]
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-17, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign on At Its Intersection With
Apple Way Mango Drive
Appleseed Road Evergreen Road
Butternut Road Dogwood Trail
Carnation Street Gardenia Road
Cedar Terrace Marigold Road
Clover Lane Thistle Avenue
Decker Pond Road Glen Road
§ 99-32 VERNON CODE § 99-33
1:146
Stop Sign on At Its Intersection With
Dogwood Trail Birch Drive
Dorchester Drive Lounsberry Hollow Road
Edsall Drive, the westerly
approach facing eastbound
traffic
Edsall Drive
Elm Street Butternut Road
Evergreen Road Pocasset Road and Muscoda Road
Forsythia Avenue Carnation Street
Gilbert Drive Zinnia Drive
Glen Road Lake Wallkill Road (CR 667) - Wallkill Road
Grove Drive High Point Terrace
Harborside Drive [Added
4-23-2001 by Ord. No.
01-052]
Lakeville Road
Locust Road Black Oak Drive
Locust Road Butternut Road
Lounsberry Hollow Road, the
westerly approach facing
eastbound traffic
Apple Way
Mac Peek Road [Added
12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
07-463]
Sand Hill Road
Mott Drive Baldwin Drive
Nasturtium Avenue Clover Lane
Panorama Drive Winding Hill Road
Pautuck Road Alturas Road
Peary Drive [Added
8-26-1996 by Ord. No.
96-16]
Landrud Road
Rustic Road [Added
8-26-1996 by Ord. No.
96-16]
Cedar Tree Drive
Sandhill Road, the easterly
approach facing westbound
traffic
MacPeek Road
Spruce Drive Beaver Brook Drive
Sunset Trail High Point Terrace
§ 99-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-33
1:147
Stop Sign on At Its Intersection With
Swigert Place [Amended
8-26-1996 by Ord. No.
96-16]
Slayton Road
Swigert Place [Added
8-26-1996 by Ord. No.
96-16]
Telfer Drive
Telfer Drive [Added
8-26-1996 by Ord. No.
96-16]
Bailey Drive
Vlietstra Drive Zinnia Drive
Wallkill Road, the southerly
approach facing northbound
traffic
Owens Station Road (CR 642)
2. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the intersection of
Harborside Drive and Lakeville Road shall be controlled by a stop sign to
be located on the westerly side of Harborside Drive in the Township rightof-
way, at the end of the curbline, along with a twelve-inch-wide white stop
bar extending to the center of Harborside Drive. A double four-inch-wide
yellow stripe, perpendicular to and beginning at the stop bar, shall extend
for 25 feet from the stop bar.
3. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the intersection of Mac
Peek Road and Sand Hill Road shall be controlled by a stop sign to be
located on the easterly side of Mac Peek Road in the Township right-of-way,
along with a 12" wide white stop bar extending to the center of Mac Peek
Road. A double 4" wide yellow stripe, perpendicular to and beginning at
the stop bar shall extend for a minimum of 25 feet from the stop bar. The
yield signs on Sand Hill Road shall be removed, making Sand Hill Road the
through road.
§ 99-34. Schedule X: Yield Intersections. [Amended 8-16-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-18]
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-18, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections:
Yield Sign on At Its Intersection With
Canistear Road Breakneck Road and Wawayanda
Road
Drew Road Sandhill Road
Owens Station Road (CR 642) Wallkill Road
Sudan Lane [Added 8-24-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-8]
Timothy Lane
Wawayanda Road Canistear Road and Breakneck Road
§ 99-33 VERNON CODE § 99-35
1:148
§ 99-35. Schedule XI: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-19, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 99-36. Schedule XII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-20, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 99-37. Schedule XIII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-21, the following described
locations are hereby designated at bus stops:
Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 99-38. Schedule XIV: Left Turn Prohibition.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-22, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Direction Turning Left Onto
Barry Drive North
[Added 11-27-1989
by Ord. No. 89-14]
Northbound Robin's Terrace
Cedar Ridge Drive
[Repealed
11-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-07]
Cherry Ridge Road
[Added 8-28-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-9]
Westbound Canistear Road
McAfee-Glenwood Road
(County Road 517)
[Repealed
11-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-07]
§ 99-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-38
1:149
Name of Street Direction Turning Left Onto
Old Rudetown Road
[Added 9-26-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-19]
Eastbound County Road 517 (Rudetown
Road)
Robin's Terrace
[Added 11-27-1989
by Ord. No. 89-14]
Eastbound Barry Drive North
§ 99-39. Schedule XV: U-Turn Prohibition.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-23, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Location Limits
(Reserved)
§ 99-40. Schedule XVI: All Turns Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-24, no person shall make a turn at
any of the following intersections:
Intersection
Cedar Ridge Drive and McAfee-Glenwood Road (County Road 517).
[Added 11-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
§ 99-40.1. Schedule XVII: Right Turn Prohibition. [Added 3-25-1985
by Ord. No. 85-9; amended 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-18]
In accordance with the provisions of § 99-24.1, no person shall make a right
turn at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Direction Turning Right Onto
County Road 517
(Rudetown Road)
Southbound Old Rudetown Road
East Lakeshore Drive
(Highland Lakes #4)
[Added 11-27-1989
by Ord. No. 89-18]
Westbound Canistear Road
§ 99-38 VERNON CODE § 99-40.1
1:150
ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
§ 99-41. Limits established.
The maximum speed limit for both directions of traffic along the following
streets is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated and within the
location designated. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above designated speed limits as authorized by the
Department of Transportation:
Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Barry Drive North-
Barret Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
25 Between Wawayanda Road and Finch
Road
Barry Drive North-
Barret Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
30 Between Finch Road and Hickory Road
Barry Drive North-
Barret Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
15 Between Hickory Road and New York
State line
Bassetts Bridge Road
(County Road 665)
[Added 7-2-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-8]
40 Entire length
Drew Mountain Road
(County Road 641)
35 From Glenwood Road (County Road
565) to the McAfee-Glenwood Road
(County Road 517)
Drew Road 25 From McAfee-Glenwood Road (County
Road 517) to Sandhill Road
Glenwood Road
(County Road 565)
40 From the southerly Township line to
Glenwood Mountain Road
Glenwood Road
(County Road 565)
35 From Glenwood Mountain Road to
County Road 517
Glenwood-Mountain
Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
30 Between Wallkill Road and 3,600 feet
east of Wallkill Road
§ 99-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-41
1:151
Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Glenwood-Mountain
Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
25 Between 3,600 feet east of Wallkill
Road and County Road 565 (Glenwood
Road)
Highland Lakes Road
(County Road 638)
40 Entire length
Lake Pochung Road
[Added 3-1-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-2]
35 Entire length
Lake Wallkill Road
(County Road 667)
35 From Glenwood Road (County Road
565) to 1,450 feet north of Sleepy
Hollow Road
Lake Wallkill Road
(County Road 667)
40 From 1,450 feet north of Sleepy Hollow
Road to Glen Road
Lakeview Drive (Lake
Panorama) [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
25 Entire length
Lounsberry Hollow
Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
25 Between County Road 565 (Glenwood
Road) and 4,275 feet east of County
Road 565 (Glenwood Road)
Lounsberry Hollow
Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
35 Between 4,275 feet east of County
Road 565 (Glenwood Road) and County
Road 517 (McAfee-Glenwood Road)
MacPeek Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
35 Entire length
Main Street [Added
12-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-45]
25 From the Intersection of County Route
515 to the Intersection of State
Highway 94 and Church Street
Maple Grange [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
40 Between one mile east of County Road
517 (McAfee-Glenwood Road) and
Route 94 (Vernon-Warwick Road)
Maple Grange Road
[Added 3-1-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-2]
35 Between County Road 517 (McAfee-
Glenwood Road) and one mile east of
County Road 517 (McAfee-Glenwood
Road)
§ 99-41 VERNON CODE § 99-41
1:152
Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
McAfee Glenwood Road
(County Road 517)
35 From NJ Route 94 to Drew Road
McAfee-Glenwood Road
(County Road 517)
40 From Drew Road to Vernon Crossing
Road
McAfee-Glenwood Road
(County Road 517)
45 From Vernon Crossing Road to
Lounsberry Hollow Road-Maple Grange
Road
McAfee-Glenwood Road
(County Road 517)
35 From Lounsberry Hollow Road-Maple
Grange Road to a point 2,200 feet
north of Vlietstra Road
McAfee-Glenwood Road
(County Road 517)
45 From a point 2,200 feet north of
Vlietstra Road to the New York State
line
McAfee-Glenwood Road
(County Road 517)
25** Walnut Ridge School Zone
Old Rudetown Road
[Added 3-1-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-2]
35 Entire length
Owens Station Road
[Added 5-29-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-17;
amended 7-13-1987
by Ord. No. 87-15]
45 Between the Wantage Township line
and Lake Wallkill Road
Prices Switch Road
(County Road 315)
35 From Route 94 to the New York State
line
Rudetown Road 40 From Hardyston Township line to State
Highway 94
Sammis Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
25** Rolling Hills Primary School zone
Sammis Road, Zone 1
[Added 3-1-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-2;
amended 9-19-1993
by Ord. No. 83-17]
45 Between County Road 517 and 3,000
feet north of County Road 517, except
25 mph in the Glen Meadow school
zone, during recess or while children
are going to or leaving school, during
opening or closing hours
§ 99-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-41
1:153
Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Sammis Road, Zone 2
[Added 3-1-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-2;
amended 9-19-1993
by Ord. No. 83-17]
30 Between 3,000 feet north of County
Road 517 and Lounsberry Hollow
Road, except 25 mph in the Rolling
Hills Primary School zone, during
recess or while children are going to or
leaving school during opening or
closing hours
Sandhill Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
35 Between Route 94 (McAfee-Vernon
Road) and Drew Road
Sandhill Road [Added
3-1-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2]
45 Between Drew Road and County Road
517 (McAfee-Glenwood Road)
Sleepy Hollow Road
[Added 3-1-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-2]
15 Entire length
Vernon Crossing Road
(County Road 644)
[Added 11-14-1988
by Ord. No. 88-20]
35 Between New Jersey 94 and the Lehigh
and Hudson River Railroad Crossing,
now known as the "New York
Susquehanna and Western Railroad
Crossing"
Vernon Crossing Road
(County Road 644)
[Added 11-14-1988
by Ord. No. 88-20]
40 Between the Lehigh and Hudson River
Railroad Crossing, now known as the
"New York Susquehanna and Western
Railroad Crossing," and County Road
517
Vernon Stockholm
Road (County Road
515)
50 From the southerly Township line to a
point 600 feet south of Conway Drive
Vernon Stockholm
Road (County Road
515)
45 From a point 600 feet south of Conway
Drive to a point 1,325 feet south of
Breakneck Road
Vernon Stockholm
Road (County Road
515)
20* From a point 1,600 feet south of
Breakneck Road to a point 1,200 feet
north of Breakneck Road when
traveling in a northerly direction
Vernon Stockhom Road
(County Road 515)
40 From a point 1,325 feet south of
Breakneck Road to NJ Route 94
Wallkill Road 30 From Glen Road to Owens Station Road
(County Road 642)
§ 99-41 VERNON CODE § 99-41
1:154
Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Wallkill Road 35 From Owens Station Road (Country
Road 642) to the northernmost Vernon
Township line (NY/NJ state line)
Warwick Turnpike
(Moe Mountain Road)
[Added 3-1-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-2]
40 Entire length
Wawayanda Road
[Added 10-5-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-24;
amended 4-14-2003
by Ord. No. 03-09]
35 Entire length, except 25 mph between
Barry Drive North and the Wawayanda
State Park entrance/exit
NOTES:
*For trucks or buses over four tons which shall use lower gears to reach
such speed on all descending steep declivities.
**During recess or while children are going to or leaving school, during
opening or closing hours.
§ 99-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-41
1:155

ARTICLE X
Traffic Control Signals
§ 99-42. Traffic signal established.
A traffic control signal shall be installed and operated at the intersection of:
Intersection
County Route 515 and Main Street shall be controlled by a Traffic Control
Signal in accordance with the as-built traffic signal plan revision dated
August 22, 2008. [Adopted 9-11-2008 by Ord. No. 08-16]
§ 99-43. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with provisions of
an Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes, shall conform to the design, and shall be
maintained in operation, as authorized by the Department of Transportation
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 99-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-43
1:157

ARTICLE XI
No-Passing Zones
§ 99-44. No-passing zones established. [Amended 7-27-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-14]
No-passing zones shall be established and maintained in both directions
along roads as authorized by the NJ Department of Transportation as
follows:
Name of Street Location
Barry Drive North Hickory Road to Wawayanda Road (8,430
feet)
Breakneck Road Vernon-Stockholm Road (County Road 515)
to Canistear Road (12,250 feet)
Canistear Road Sussex-Passaic County Line to Breakneck
Road-Wawayanda Road (31,100 feet)
Drew Road Sandhill Road to McAfee-Glenwood Road
(County Road 517) (3,430 feet)
Lakeview Drive (Lake
Panorama)
Winding Hill Road-Lakeside Drive to
Panorama Drive (1,540 feet)
Lounsberry Hollow Road Glenwood Road (County Road 565) to
McAfee-Glenwood Road (County Road 517)
(10,890 feet)
Maple Grange Road McAfee-Glenwood Road (County Road 517) to
NJ Route 94 (9,320 feet)
Old Coach Road NJ Route 94 to Pleasant Valley Road (3,060
feet)
Old Rudetown Road NJ Route 94 to Rudetown Road (County Road
517) (2,400 feet)
Panorama Drive (Lake
Panorama)
Lakeview Drive to Winding Hill Road (5,060
feet)
Pleasant Valley Drive Cherry Tree Road-Pine Street to NJ Route 94
(2,630 feet)
Sammis Road McAfee-Glenwood Road (County Road 517) to
Lounsberry Hollow Road (6,070 feet)
Sandhill Road Route NJ 94 to McAfee-Glenwood Road
(County Road 517) (10,020 feet)
Wallkill Road Glen Road to New Jersey-New York State line
(16,360 feet)
Wawayanda Road Breakneck Road-Canistear Road to cul-de-sac
at entrance to Wawayanda State Park (15,510
feet)
§ 99-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-44
1:159
Name of Street Location
Winding Hill Road (Lake
Panorama)
Glenwood Road (County Road 565) to
Lakeview Road-Lakeside Drive (4,940 feet)
§ 99-44 VERNON CODE § 99-44
1:160
ARTICLE XII
Parking Meters
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-44
1:161

ARTICLE XIII
Mid-Block Crosswalks
[Added 1-21-1985 by Ord. No. 85-2]
§ 99-45. Mid-block crosswalks established. [Amended 7-26-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-18; 11-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-25]
Mid-block crossings shall be established and maintained at the following
locations:
Name of Street Location
Breakneck Road Beginning at a point 478 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Canistear Road-Wawayanda
Road to a point 22 feet westerly therefrom
Canistear Road Beginning at a point 347 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Orchard Lane to a point 10
feet southerly therefrom
Church Street Beginning at a point 328 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Omega Drive to a point 10 feet
easterly therefrom
Sandhill Road Beginning at a point 386 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Route NJ 94 to a point 10
feet westerly therefrom
Wawayanda Road Beginning at a point 970 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Robin Hood Lane to a point
10 feet southerly therefrom
§ 99-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-45
1:163

ARTICLE XIV
Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction and
Maintenance Operations
[Added 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-15]
§ 99-46. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic control Devices for
Streets and Highways.
The Vernon Township Council hereby finds and declares that problems
of traffic control when traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations, and utility work, above or below
ground which requires blocking the street and obstructing the normal flow
of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous when
not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety,
peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations
directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through and around
construction and maintenance zones and provide safety for the work forces
performing these operations.
§ 99-47. Adoption of Standards.
The Township of Vernon; in the County of Sussex; in the State of New
Jersey does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Control Devices
for Streets and Highways hereafter known as the M.U.T.C.D., except as
hereby supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the normal
flow of traffic. Any person, contractor, utility that fails to comply with the
provisions of the M.U.T.C.D. while performing such work is in violation of
this section.
§ 99-48. Pre-Construction Meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, wishing
to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Vernon
Township Police Department in order to arrange a pre-construction meeting
to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction of work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
approved by the Vernon Township Police Department is in violation of
this section. In some circumstances, it may be required that a Traffic
Control Plan (hereinafter "T.C.P.") be provided to the Vernon Township
Police Department. Such requirement will be determined by the Chief of
Police or his designee.
§ 99-49. Hazardous Conditions.
A person, entity, contractor or utility wishing to conduct work on, under
or above any roadway within Vernon Township shall provide the Vernon
Township Police Department Traffic Safety Bureau with at least two (2)
§ 99-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-49
1:165
emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of emergency
problems at the construction or maintenance site, or arising from the
construction or maintenance being performed, prior to the start of any
work. If for any reason an emergency contact cannot be reached, or if
the emergency contact person does not respond in a timely manner to the
call from the Vernon Township Police Department to correct a hazardous
condition, the Township of Vernon may respond to such hazardous
conditions. The reasonable fees for such emergency service by the Township
shall be charged to the person, entity, contractor or public responsible for
such conditions.
§ 99-50. Hiring of Off Duty Police Officers.
A. Any person, entity, contractor, sub-contractor or utility wishing to
conduct work on, under or above any roadway within Vernon Township,
which is anticipated to take longer than two (2) hours, shall be required
to hire off duty Vernon Township police officers when determined by the
Vernon Township Chief of Police (or his designee) to be necessary to
ensure compliance with the MUTCD, as well as to safely control traffic
through the work zone.
B. The Vernon Township Police Department shall be contacted at least 48
hours before starting work to arrange for the hiring of off duty police
officers.
C. All work on, under or over any roadway within Vernon Township which
is anticipated to take less than two hours may be controlled with civilian
flagmen, unless off duty officers are deemed necessary and approved by
the Vernon Township Chief of Police or his designee. All civilian flagmen
shall use proper NJ DOT approved vests, use NJ DOT approved "Stop"
and "Slow" paddles and must be educated as to the proper operation of
traffic flag controls. If flagmen cannot see each other, they must have
walkie-talkie communication between them.
D. If the work requires any road to be closed to traffic 24 hours a day, the
hiring of off duty officers shall only be required when deemed necessary
and approved by the Vernon Township Chief of Police or his designee.
E. For any off-duty work performed by police officers for private persons
or entities, a three-hour minimum applies for each officer. A
cancellation must be made at least two hours prior to the assignment
start time. If any outside service is cancelled with less than two-hour
notice, the person or entity will incur a charge of three hours per officer
scheduled. The only acceptable notification method for a cancellation
will be to contact the Vernon Township Police Department Dispatch
Center. No other form of notification (i.e. e-mail, text message,
voicemail) is acceptable. [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-13]
§ 99-49 VERNON CODE § 99-51
1:166
§ 99-51. Road Closings, Lane Closings and Detours.
Road closings, Lane Closures and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted
unless approved by the Vernon Township Chief of Police or his designee.
Advance notice of detours must be given to motorists, except in emergent
situations. Advance notice of Lane Closings of roadways in Vernon Township
shall be posted in accordance with the current M.U.T.C.D. Notice to the
Vernon Township Police Department is required before any lane closure.
§ 99-52. Mobile Operations.
Mobile Operations shall not be permitted unless approved by the Vernon
Township Chief of Police or his designee. Advance notice to the Vernon
Township Police Department of Mobile Operations is required in all
circumstances. Any mobile operation shall be in accordance with the
current MUTCD.
For the purpose of this article, a Mobile Operation shall be defined as any
work on the roadways in the Township of Vernon, which begins in one
location and is moved throughout the work day on any roads within the
Township of Vernon (i.e. tree trimming services or pot hole repairs).
§ 99-53. Stop Work.
The Vernon Township Police Department shall have the authority to stop
work being performed within the Township, and to require the removal of
equipment, vehicles and/or stored material within the right-of-way, or the
backfilling of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate
any nuisance and/or safety hazard, or for any violation of this chapter.
§ 99-54. Hours.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work
on any roadway in the Township of Vernon before 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m. by the Vernon Township Chief of Police or his designee. If
it determined by the Vernon Township Police Department that any work
outside the set forth hours would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety
or health hazard, the work shall not be permitted.
§ 99-55. Site Preparation or Maintenance.
No materials, vehicles or equipment are to be placed in any roadway or
sidewalk areas until all construction signs, lights, devices and pavement
markings are installed and approved. All construction signs that will not
apply during construction, such as "Flagman Ahead" signs after all work
has been completed for the day, must be bagged or removed from view of
motorists.
§ 99-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-56
1:167
§ 99-56. Violations and Penalties.
Unless another penalty is provided by New Jersey statute, every person,
entity, contractor or utility convicted of a violation of a provision of this
article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250. For a second offense
and subsequent offenses, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than
$500. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 99-57. Non-Applicability.
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any construction on or
maintenance to any roadway located within the Township of Vernon when
such construction, maintenance or work is performed by the Township of
Vernon, County of Sussex or the State of New Jersey. Non-Applicability
does not apply to any sub-contractors employed by the Township of Vernon,
County of Sussex or the State of New Jersey.
§ 99-56 VERNON CODE § 99-57
1:168
Chapter 110
(RESERVED)
[ Former Chapter 110, Record, Public Access to, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 02-25, was repealed in its entirety
2-26-2009 by Ordinance No. 09-02.]
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 130
ABANDONED PROPERTIES; UNFIT BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 263.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 447.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 205.
§ 99-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-57
1:169

ARTICLE I
Registration and Maintenance of Vacant and Abandoned Residential
Properties and Vacant and Abandoned Residential Properties in
Foreclosure
[Adopted 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1413]
§ 130-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CREDITOR — A state-chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan
association or credit union, any person or entity required to be licensed
under the provisions of the "New Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act,"
P.L. 2009, c. 53 (N.J.S.A. 17:11C-51 et seq.), any foreclosing entity subject to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17, as amended
from time to time) and any entity acting on behalf of the creditor named in
the debt obligation including, but not limited to, servicers.
OWNER — The titleholder, any agent of the titleholder having authority to
act with respect to the vacant property, or any other entity determined by
the Township of Vernon to act with respect to the property.
VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Consistent with
Section 1 of P.L. 2012, c. 70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73), residential real estate,
where a notice of violation has been issued pursuant to § 130-5A and
Subsection b. of Section 1 of P.L. 2014, c.35 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s),14 or
property which any condition on its own or combined with other conditions
present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is
or has been vacant for three or more months. Residential property shall
further be deemed "vacant and abandoned" where a mortgaged property is
not occupied by a mortgagor or tenant. Such evidence would include, but
is not limited to, evidence of the existence of two or more of the following
conditions at the property:
A. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
B.
C. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials on the property;
D.
E. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
F. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 130, Abandoned Properties; Unfit
Buildings, adopted 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-15.
14.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-1
1:171
§ 130-2. Registration of vacant and abandoned properties.
G. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, association management, delivery persons,
or government employees indicating that the residence is vacant and
abandoned;
H.
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off
or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
I.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged,
or continuously unlocked;
J.
A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering,
criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration of the
property.
K.
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or similar
code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities
declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant
and unoccupied;
L.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the
property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or
in danger of freezing;
M.
A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property;
N.
O. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
A. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
vacant and abandoned property, or a creditor who has previously filed a
summons and complaint to foreclose on a residential property which
subsequently becomes vacant and abandoned, or the owner of a vacant
and abandoned property, shall within 30 calendar days after the
building becomes vacant and abandoned or within 30 calendar days
after assuming ownership of the vacant and abandoned property,
whichever is later; or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice from
the Township, and annually thereafter, file a registration statement for
such vacant and abandoned property with the municipal clerk on forms
provided by the Township for such purposes. Any failure to receive
notice from the Township shall not constitute grounds for failing to
register the vacant and abandoned property.
B. Each vacant and abandoned property having a separate block and lot
number as designated in the official tax maps of the Township shall be
registered separately.
C. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of a person 21
§ 130-1 VERNON CODE § 130-2
1:172
§ 130-3. Fee schedule.
The initial registration fee for each vacant and abandoned property under
the provisions of this article shall be $500. The fee for the first annual
renewal shall be $1,500, and the fee for the second annual renewal shall
years or older, designated by the creditor or the owner as the
authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for
receiving process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding on behalf of such creditor in connection with
the enforcement of any applicable code.
D. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of the firm and the
actual name(s) of the owner of the Vacant or Abandoned property or the
firm's individual principal(s) responsible for maintaining the
Abandoned and Vacant property. The owner or the individual or
representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the Abandoned
and Vacant property shall be available by telephone or in person on a
twenty-four-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities
may be the same or different persons. In the case of a creditor, both
entities shown on the statement must maintain offices in the State of
New Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey.
E. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration except for the initial registration which shall be valid
through December 31 of the year in which it was filed. The owner of the
property or the creditor shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building remains vacant and abandoned and
shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in
§ 130-3 for each vacant and abandoned property registered. However, if
a re-occupancy certificate is issued for a property designated as vacant
and abandoned after the annual registration or renewal fee is paid, the
municipality shall prorate and return to the landowner the portion of
the fee allocated to the remainder of the calendar year after the reoccupancy
certificate is issued. [Amended 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-06]
F. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 each year. The
initial registration fee shall be prorated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date.
G. The owner of the property or the creditor shall notify the municipal
clerk within 30 calendar days of any change in the registration
information by filing an amended registration statement on a form
provided by the municipal clerk for such purpose.
H. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township against the
creditor.
§ 130-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-3
1:173
be $3,000. The fee for any subsequent annual renewal beyond the second
renewal shall be $5,000.
§ 130-4. Responsibility for vacant and abandoned properties.
§ 130-5. Notice.
§ 130-6. Enforcement officers.
The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article is
conferred upon the construction official; zoning officer, housing officer,
health officer, and any other duly appointed representatives.
§ 130-7. Violations and penalties.
A. The owner of the property or a creditor filing a summons and complaint
in an action to foreclose on a residential property within the Township
shall be immediately responsible for the care, maintenance, security
and upkeep of the exterior of the property, after the property becomes
vacant and abandoned as defined in this article.
B. Where a creditor is located out-of-state, the creditor shall be
responsible for appointing an in-state representative or agent to act on
the creditor's behalf for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of
§ 130-4A. Notice of said representative or agent shall be provided to the
municipal clerk pursuant to § 130-2C and D, and pursuant to Paragraph
(1) of Subsection a. of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A.
46:10B-51).
A. The enforcement officers designated in this article shall be authorized
to issue a notice to the owner of the property, or a creditor that has filed
a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a residential
property within the Township, if the enforcement officer determines
that the owner of the property or creditor that has filed a summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose on a residential property within the
Township has violated this article by failing to provide for the care,
maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of a vacant and
abandoned property. Where a creditor is an out-of-state creditor, the
notice shall be issued to the representative or agent that has been
identified by the creditor pursuant to § 130-4B and Paragraph (1) of
Subsection a. of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51).
B. The notice referenced in § 130-5(A) shall require the owner or creditor
to correct the violation(s) within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or
within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents an
imminent threat to public health and safety.
C. The issuance of a notice pursuant to § 130-5A shall constitute proof that
a residential property is vacant and abandoned for the purposes of this
article.
§ 130-3 VERNON CODE § 130-7
1:174
A. The owner of a property or a creditor subject to this article that is found
by the municipal court of the Township, or by any other court of
competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to correct a
care, maintenance, security, or upkeep violation cited in a notice issued
pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day
of the violation. Any fines imposed pursuant to this Subsection shall
commence 31 days following the receipt of the notice, except if the
violation presents an imminent risk to public health and safety, in which
case any fines shall commence 11 days following receipt of the notice.
B. An out-of-state creditor subject to this article that is found by the
municipal court of the Township, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-state
representative or agent pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine
of $2,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed on a creditor
for the failure to appoint an in-state representative or agent shall
commence on the day after the ten-day period set forth in Paragraph (1)
of Subsection a. of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51)
for providing notice to the municipal clerk that a summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
C. The owner of a property, or a creditor subject to this article, that is
found by the municipal court of the Township, or by any other court of
competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to register
a vacant and abandoned property pursuant to § 130-2 shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $2,000. Any fines imposed on a creditor under
this subsection shall commence 11 days following receipt of notice from
the Township pursuant to § 130-2A.
D. No less than 20% of any money collected by the Township pursuant to
this article shall be utilized by the Township for municipal code
enforcement purposes and the remaining monies shall go to the
Township's general fund.
E. Nothing in this article is intended to nor shall be read to conflict or
prevent the Township from taking action against buildings found to be
unfit for human habitation or unsafe structures as provided in the
applicable provisions of the Code of the Township and/or the Uniform
Construction Code. Further, any action taken under any such Code
provision other than the demolition of a structure shall not relieve the
owner from its obligation under this article.
§ 130-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-7
1:175
Chapter 133
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned properties and unfit buildings --
See Ch. 130.
Fire prevention -- See Ch. 263.
Land development -- See Ch. 330.
Property maintenance -- See Ch. 447.
Uniform construction codes -- See Ch. 205.
§ 130-7 VERNON CODE § 130-7
1:176
ARTICLE I
Affordable Housing Regulations
[Adopted 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 05-04]
§ 133-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Affordable Housing
Ordinance of the Township of Vernon."
§ 133-2. Purpose.
§ 133-3. Definitions.
A. This article is intended to establish and facilitate how housing
rehabilitation and new construction can be provided for low- and
moderate-income households within the Township of Vernon in order
for the Township to meet its housing obligations as determined by the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH).
B. It is intended to provide technical and financial assistance to eligible
homeowners to rehabilitate homes occupied by low- and moderateincome
households.
C. It is intended to provide a mechanism for eligible homeowners to gain
access to loans and/or grants from the Vernon Township Housing Trust
Fund.
D. Rehabilitation funding shall be obtained from grant programs
sponsored by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs and/or
funding from the Township Housing Trust Fund and/or other sources to
be determined.
E. Vernon Township has entered into three regional contribution
agreements with municipalities in order to partially meet the present
and prospective need component of its obligation (N.J.A.C. 5:93-6).
A. Words and phrases defined in the Fair Housing Act, the Municipal Land
Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and in the Substantive Rules of the
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) (N.J.A.C. 5:93-13) shall be
incorporated in this article as if written herein.
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FAIR HOUSING PROGRAM — The program provided under the terms
of this article.
GROSS INCOME — The total income of all members of an applicant's
household, including but not limited to wages, tips, interest, dividends,
and retirement funds.
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-3
1:177
§ 133-4. Eligibility.
Eligibility is limited to only owners of dwelling units located within Vernon
Township for rehabilitation assistance provided by this article.
HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR — Appointed by the Mayor and may be
retained as an experienced individual or agency to assist in the
administration of the housing rehabilitation program and any program
further approved by the Township Council and COAH.[Amended
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
HOUSING TRUST FUND — The Vernon Township Housing Trust Fund
established for financing low- and moderate-income housing
rehabilitation and development.
INDIGENOUS HOUSING NEED — Deficient housing units occupied by
low- and moderate-income households within a municipality.
REHABILITATION — The restoration of a deficient or substandard
dwelling unit to a safe and sanitary condition as provided herein.
A. A homeowner who is a member of either a low- or moderate-income
household who occupies the dwelling unit to be rehabilitated, or an
owner who rents the same dwelling unit to be rehabilitated to a low- or
moderate-income household shall be eligible for the assistance
provided by this article. The owner must further agree to rent the
rehabilitated dwelling unit to a low- or moderate-income household for
a required minimum time period and rate consistent with COAH
guidelines. In any case, proof of income of the household occupying the
rehabilitated unit shall be required and reviewed by the Housing
Administrator.
B. Any dwelling unit which is proposed for rehabilitation shall be located
in the Township of Vernon and shall be considered deficient or
substandard as determined by the Housing Administrator who may
seek advice from the Township Construction Official. In order to be
deficient, a unit must satisfy any two of the following characteristics:
(1) Constructed prior to 1940.
(2) Occupied by more than one person per room.
(3) No private entrance to the dwelling unit.
(4) No exclusive access to complete plumbing facilities which meet the
health and sanitary codes of Vernon Township.
(5) No adequate kitchen facilities such as piped water, a safe operating
stove or an operating refrigerator.
C. Any unit shall be considered substandard if it has deficiencies that
violate the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Section 8 Existing Housing Quality Standards.
§ 133-3 VERNON CODE § 133-4
1:178
§ 133-5. Effect on homeowner; rights and obligations.
Owners who secure financial assistance under the terms of this article
shall be entitled to the following rights and shall undertake the following
obligations:
§ 133-6. Violations and penalties; restitution.
No financial assistance from the Housing Trust Fund shall be disbursed
to any applicant without full compliance with the requirements of this
article and other applicable regulations. Any person who violates or who
fails to comply with this article or the other applicable regulations shall
be penalized no more than $1,000 and/or jailed no longer than 90 days
pursuant to this article or such other period of time as may be permitted
pursuant to other applicable state regulations and, as part of the penalty,
shall make restitution of any and all funds paid from the Housing Trust
Fund. Nothing herein shall prevent the Township of Vernon from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
D. Upon completion, a rehabilitated unit shall be safe and sound and meet
all health and safety code requirements as certified through the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
E. The homeowner shall, in writing, agree to comply with all the
requirements of this article, the rules and regulations established by
COAH, and any other applicable ordinance of Vernon Township at the
time the agreement for assistance under this article is executed.
A. The right to apply for and receive special property tax assessment
treatment in accordance with applicable state law.
B. The obligation to place a deed restriction on the property specifying
that only low- or moderate-income households may occupy the
designated dwelling unit. The deed restriction shall take effect on the
date the application is approved and money has been made available for
the rehabilitation project. The deed restriction shall be in effect for six
years for owner-occupied units and 10 years for renter-occupied units
as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.2(g). The beginning of the restricted time period
shall be from the date the certificate of occupancy is issued following
completion of the rehabilitation work. Sale of the deed-restricted
property shall not affect the deed restriction.
C. The obligation to sell or rent the dwelling unit at prices within the range
of affordability as set forth by COAH for the period of the deed
restriction. Increases in the affordability controls may be granted upon
written application to and review by the Housing Administrator
assuring compliance with COAH's requirements for changes in the
affordability controls.
§ 133-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-7
1:179
§ 133-7. Administration; marketing.
Under this section, Vernon Township undertakes to actively market, through
advertising in the media, distributing flyers, etc., the availability of rent
or sale price-restricted units, which are to be made available to low- and
moderate-income households. The Housing Administrator is responsible for
these activities.
A. Staff.
(1) The Housing Administrator shall perform the following duties:
(a) Conducting an affirmative marketing program:
[1] Mailing to all homeowners, at least once a year, an
announcement of the Fair Housing Program. This
announcement shall include an explanation of the
eligibility requirements as well as the procedures for
making application for rehabilitation assistance under the
program.
[2] Conducting at least one well publicized public meeting to
outline and answer questions about the Fair Housing
Program.
[3] Issuing periodic press releases to inform the public of
news related to the Fair Housing Program and to promote
interest in the program.
[4] Preparation of information/application packets for
distribution to interested homeowners.
(b) Preparing the necessary applications, financial statements, a
summary of the commitments to the rules and regulations of
the program, and such other forms to be executed in
administering the program. The final set of forms and
documents prepared by the Housing Administrator shall be
approved by the Mayor. The appropriate forms shall include,
along with other data deemed appropriate, proof of ownership,
income qualifications or the occupants of the rehabilitated
unit, the deed restrictions and the time period for affordability
controls applicable to the property, a description of the work to
be performed, the total cost of the work, how much will be a
loan and how much a grant, as well as the method of repaying
any loan. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
(c) Determining the eligibility of the applicant based on the
requirements of this article and the data provided on the forms
required as part of the application procedure.
(d) Maintaining an updated file on available governmental and
nongovernmental programs for financial assistance for lowand
moderate-income households, including eligibility
§ 133-7 VERNON CODE § 133-7
1:180
requirements, application forms, filing deadlines, and whether
funding is currently available.
(e) Providing technical assistance to eligible low- or moderateincome
applicants to apply for financial assistance for housing
rehabilitation from state and federal programs and from the
Housing Trust Fund.
(f) Determining the deficiencies of an applicant's dwelling unit
and submitting the findings in writing to be kept on file as part
of the application.
(g) Maintaining a list of approved contractors based upon
satisfactory references on past work performed and on
satisfactory credit ratings.
(h) Determining whether the proposed work to be performed
meets the parameters of this article and whether the cost to
complete that work is reasonable. Said determination shall be
in writing and kept on file as part of the application.
(i) Conducting appropriate, periodic inspections of the work being
done and, when satisfactorily completed, issuing a certificate
of compliance bearing the date the certificate was issued. A
copy of this certificate shall be kept as part of the file on the
application.
(j) Preparing and periodic presentation (at least once a year) to
the Mayor of a report on the number and type of rehabilitation
applications received and the amount of technical assistance
provided by the Housing Administrator. The report shall
contain, at a minimum: [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
[1] The number of applications received and approved.
[2] The income levels of those approved.
[3] The number of rehabilitated dwelling units completed.
[4] The rehabilitation cost of each unit.
[5] A summary of the type of work completed.
[6] How many applications are currently being processed.
(k) Maintaining regular office hours to be available to meet with
interested homeowners.
(2) The Housing Administrator may call upon the following municipal
employees to aide in carrying out this article:
(a) Township Planner.
§ 133-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-7
1:181
(b) Zoning Officer.
(c) Health Officer.
(d) Construction Official.
(e) Township Engineer.
(f) Township Attorney.
(g) Township Treasurer.
(3) The Housing Administrator can obtain the services of professional
consultants, where necessary, in order to effectuate consistency
with the Fair Share Plan.
B. Funding.
(1) The Township shall include in its annual budget sufficient funds to
pay for the costs of administering this article. The money expended
for preparing and implementing the Fair Housing Ordinance shall,
in accordance with the Fair Housing Act, be considered a mandated
expenditure exempt from the limitations on final appropriations
imposed pursuant to P.L. 1976, c. 68 (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-45.1 et seq.).
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
(2) The source of funding to administer and implement this program
may include:
(a) State and federal programs.
(b) The Housing Trust Fund.
(c) Municipal budget appropriations.
(3) State and federal funds shall be disbursed according to the rules
and regulations of the agency administering the funds.
(4) Housing Trust Fund monies shall be available for housing
rehabilitation. The funds shall be disbursed as grants for
rehabilitating deficient dwelling units owned or occupied by lowincome
households. The funds shall be disbursed as loans bearing
2% simple interest for rehabilitation of deficient dwelling units
owned and occupied by low- and moderate-income households or
deficient dwelling units owned by an absentee landlord but
occupied by either a low- or moderate-income household.
(5) The above loans may be disbursed to a qualified resident
homeowner who agrees to a lien on the property for repayment of
the loan plus accrued interest. The loan and interest shall be repaid
as determined by the Township Housing Administrator and the
homeowner. Where the property is sold or transferred prior to the
loan being repaid, the entire remaining balance of the loan plus
§ 133-7 VERNON CODE § 133-7
1:182
§ 133-8. Procedures for making application; review and approval.
accrued interest shall be paid to the Housing Trust Fund at the
time of transfer.
A. Application. Applications and other required forms shall be made
available at the office of the Housing Administrator. Technical
assistance shall be available from that office to assist applicants in
completing and submitting an application. There shall be no fee for
filing an application.
B. Review.
(1) The Housing Administrator shall determine the completeness of the
application.
(2) Upon a determination of completeness, the Housing Administrator
shall determine whether the applicant meets the eligibility criteria.
(3) Upon a determination that the applicant is eligible under the
program, the Housing Administrator shall inspect the property to
determine whether it qualifies as deficient under this article.
(4) Upon a determination that the dwelling unit is deficient, the
Housing Administrator shall cause a written description of the
work required to be completed in order to meet the criteria of this
article and related health and safety codes and submit a copy to the
applicant and retain one copy to be kept as part of the applicant's
file. It shall be prepared by an individual qualified to make such
written description.
(5) Upon receipt of this description of the work required to be
completed, the applicant shall indicate any discrepancies or
omissions in writing to the Housing Administrator. The Housing
Administrator shall review the applicant's comments and provide a
written response, including any appropriate adjustments to the
original report. A copy of this response shall be submitted to the
applicant with a copy to be kept as part of the applicant's file.
(6) Following the final determination of the work to be performed and
acceptance by the homeowner, the Housing Administrator shall
seek written proposals, together with the cost to complete the
work, from appropriate qualified contractors. A list of these
contractors shall be kept in the office of the Housing Administrator.
The Housing Administrator shall recommend a contractor based
upon completeness of the proposal and the lowest overall cost
submitted. This recommendation shall be submitted to the
applicant for review and concurrency.
C. Action on the application.
§ 133-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-8
1:183
§ 133-9. Affordable marketing plan.
(1) Upon review of the contractor's written proposal and cost estimate,
the Housing Administrator shall approve, disapprove, or modify the
proposal as might be appropriate to meet the requirements of the
applicable ordinances and requirements of this program and the
judgment of both as to the reasonableness of the cost. If the
proposal is modified or disapproved, the applicant and the
contractor may meet with the Housing Administrator to make
appropriate modifications until the application is approved.
(2) Upon approval of the work to be performed and the related cost,
together with the eligibility of the applicant, all contracts shall be
executed.
(a) The contract between the applicant and the Township of
Vernon and/or other governmental agencies covering the
amount of the loan, the purpose of the loan, the deed
restrictions and affordability controls, payback requirements
for any loans, manner of payment to the contractor, including
retainage for full and acceptable construction, penalties for
noncompliance, and such other requirements of the program
as required by law.
(b) The contract between the contractor and the applicant
outlining the work to be performed, the cost, including an
amount for retainage to assure the acceptable completion of
the construction, and the time of performance. This contract
must be reviewed by and acceptable to the Township of Vernon
or the other governmental agency covering the amount of the
loan.
(3) All payments which require expenditures from the Township
Housing Trust Fund shall be made by the Township to the
contractor in accordance with the provisions of the contract
outlined in Subsection C(2)(b) above, subject to a guaranty that the
money will go toward completion of the work included in the
application and the contract. Any agreements with state and/or
federal agencies will be conditioned upon the criteria of those
agencies.
(4) Following completion of the work, the Housing Administrator shall
inspect the dwelling unit and certify whether or not the work has
been satisfactorily completed. If the work is sufficient, a certificate
of compliance shall be issued. If the work is insufficient, the
contractor shall be notified and given 90 days to remedy the
conditions cited. If the conditions are not corrected within 90 days,
the Housing Administrator shall be authorized to either use
remaining funds of the retainage under the construction contract
or such other remedies as appropriate to complete the work in a
satisfactory manner.
§ 133-8 VERNON CODE § 133-9
1:184
A. The Township of Vernon has a 1987-1999 COAH Fair Share Obligation
of 125 units of which 54 are new construction. These 54 units are part
of a regional contribution agreement (RCA) program with Ogdensburg
(20 rehab units), Ridgefield (20 rehab units) and Passaic (14 rental
units). The remaining 71 units will be for rehabilitation of housing units
within the Township. This article incorporates an affirmative marketing
plan, which shall apply to all future developments that will contain lowand
moderate-income units:
(1) The affordable marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of sex, age or number of children, to
housing units which are being marketed by a developer/sponsor,
municipality and/or designated administrative agency of affordable
housing. The plan will address the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.
In addition, the plan prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental,
financing or other services related to housing on the basis of race,
color, sex, religion, handicap, age, familial status/size or national
origin. Vernon Township is in the housing region consisting of
Sussex, Bergen, Passaic and Hudson Counties. The affirmative
marketing program is a continuing program and will meet the
following requirements.
(2) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income units will appear in the
New Jersey Herald, Star Ledger, and The Advertiser News North.
(3) The primary marketing will take the form of at least one press
release sent to the above-mentioned publications and a paid display
advertisement in each of the above newspapers.
(4) Additional advertising and publicity will be on an as-needed basis.
The advertisements will include a description of the:
(a) Unit street address.
(b) Directions to housing unit.
(c) Number of bedrooms per unit.
(d) Range of prices/rents.
(e) Income information.
(f) Location of applications, including business hours and where/
how applications may be obtained.
(5) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income housing will appear in
the Vernon Township municipal web site, Vernon Township
Newsletter, and any other religious and organizational
publications/newsletters which may exist within the region at that
time.
§ 133-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-9
1:185
(6) The following regional radio and/or cable television stations will be
used:
(a) WNNJ.
(b) New Jersey Network.
(c) Service Electric - Channel 8 Community Bulletin Board.
(7) The following is the designated location of applications, brochures,
signs and/or posters used as part of the affirmative marketing
program, including specific employment centers within the region:
(a) Municipal buildings.
(b) Major employers.
(c) County library branches.
(d) Realtor offices.
(e) Senior community center.
(f) Others as may be identified at the time of need.
(8) At the time of need, a listing of community contact persons and/or
organizations in Sussex, Bergen, Passaic and Hudson Counties who
will provide assistance in the affirmative marketing program.
Particular emphasis on contacts that will reach out to groups which
are least likely to apply for housing within the region.
(9) Periodic flyers/brochures and applications will be distributed to the
County Board of Realtors in the housing section for circulation in
their journal for distribution among their members.
(10) Applications will be mailed directly to prospective applicants upon
request.
(11) Additionally, periodic informational brochures and applications will
be sent to the administrative staff of each of the following agencies
in the Counties of Sussex, Bergen, Passaic and Hudson:
(a) Welfare/Social Service Board.
(b) Local Rental Assistance Office.
(c) Library (county and municipal).
(d) Area Community Action Agencies.
(e) Office on Aging.
(f) Local Housing Authority/Agency.
B. The following is a description of the random selection method that will
be used to select occupants of low- and moderate-income housing:
§ 133-9 VERNON CODE § 133-9
1:186
(1) Applicants will be qualified and provided opportunity on a firstcome-
first-served basis within each category (low-income and
moderate-income) as modified below.
(2) The Vernon Township Housing Program will be the agency to
contract with the Township of Vernon to administer the affirmative
marketing program. The Vernon Township Housing Program may
be a private organization, a county organization or a unit of the
Township (in which case there will be no contract). The Vernon
Township Housing Program will have the responsibility to income
qualify low- and moderate-income households; to place income
eligible households in low- and moderate-income units upon initial
occupancy; to provide for the initial occupancy of low- and
moderate-income units with income qualified households; to
continue to qualify households for reoccupancy of units as they
become vacant during the period of affordability controls; to assist
with advertising and outreach to low- and moderate-income
households; and to enforce the terms of the deed restriction and
mortgage loan as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1. The Housing Administrator
within Vernon Township is the designated housing officer to act as
administrator of the Vernon Township Housing Program if a unit of
the Township or to coordinate with same pursuant to the contract if
the agency is private or county. The Vernon Township Housing
Program will provide counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements and landlord/
tenant law.
(3) Households who live or work in the COAH-established housing
region may be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within that housing region. Applicants living outside
the housing region will have an equal opportunity for units after
regional applicants have been initially serviced. Vernon Township
intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
(4) All developers of low- and moderate-income housing units will be
required to assist in the marketing of the affordable units in their
respective developments.
(5) The marketing program will commence at least 120 days before the
issuance of either temporary or permanent certificates of
occupancy. The marketing program will continue until all low- and
moderate-income housing units are initially occupied and for as
long as affordable units are deed restricted and occupancy or
reoccupancy of units continues to be necessary.
(6) The Vernon Township Program will comply with monitoring and
reporting requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and 12.1.
C. Vernon Township currently operates a self-funded program to
rehabilitate substandard housing units occupied by low- and moderate-
§ 133-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-9
1:187
income households. The Township may in the future request funding
from other sources to supplement the program. Future rehabilitation
programs will also be administered by the Vernon Township Housing
Administrator. The Vernon Township Housing Administrator will
prepare a marketing plan for the rehabilitation program. The
rehabilitation program will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.2(b)
through 5.2(1).
§ 133-9 VERNON CODE § 133-9
1:188
ARTICLE II
Inclusionary Contributions
[Adopted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 05-12]
§ 133-10. Mandatory set aside for certain developments.
Any residential development in any zoning district of the Township which
proposes the development of more than three units of net density shall
set aside 20% of the developed units for affordable housing as said term
is defined under the Fair Housing Act and COAH Rules. For the purposes
of this article, the term "net density" shall be determined by dividing
the number of dwelling units by the gross area of land reduced by
environmentally sensitive areas as defined by Township ordinance.
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 133-11. Availability and disposition of units between low- and
moderate-income qualifiers.
The affordable units described in this article shall be available to a lowincome
qualifier should there be only one such unit available. If there is
more than one unit available, the disposition of units between low- and
moderate-income qualifiers shall be equal so long as there are low-income
applicants. An odd availability shall be resolved in favor of low-income
qualifiers, if there are low-income applicants.
§ 133-12. Notification of adoption.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to give notice at least 10 days
prior to the adoption of this article to the County Planning Board and
to all other persons entitled thereto pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15 and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-63 (if required). Upon the adoption of this article after
public hearing thereon, the Township Clerk is further directed to publish
notice of the passage thereof and to file a copy of the ordinance as finally
adopted with the Sussex County Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-16. The Clerk shall also forthwith transmit a copy of this article
after final passage to the Township Tax Assessor as required by N.J.S.A.
40:49-2.1.
§ 133-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-12
1:189

ARTICLE III
Affordable Housing Irrevocable Trust
[Adopted 6-30-2012 by Ord. No. 12-12]
§ 133-13. Preamble.
Pursuant to the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.,
the Township of Vernon has collected development fees from developers
of residential property so that the Township may advance and fund the
creation of affordable housing in the Township.
As of May 31, 2012, the available balance of the Township's affordable
housing trust is $236,788.09.
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2 provides that the development fees collected by the
Township shall be committed for expenditure within four years from the
date of collection.
The Township desires to irrevocably obligate, bind, pledge, and consign for
preservation the development fees it has collected so that it may further
advance and fund the creation of affordable housing in the Township.
§ 133-14. Irrevocable Trust created.
The Mayor and Council of the Township of Vernon hereby create the
"Vernon Township Affordable Housing Irrevocable Trust."
§ 133-15. Authorization to transfer fees.
The Mayor, Township Clerk, Township Attorney, and Chief Financial Officer
are hereby authorized and directed to take all steps and execute any
documents which are reasonably necessary to transfer all collected
development fees to the Vernon Township Affordable Housing Irrevocable
Trust established for the purpose of advancing and funding the creation of
affordable housing in the Township.
§ 133-16. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 133-17. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this article
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section,
paragraph, subsection, clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder
of the article shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 133-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-18
1:191
§ 133-18. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon final passage and publication as provided
by law. (This article was adopted on June 30, 2012, by Ord. No. 12-12)
§ 133-18 VERNON CODE § 133-18
1:192
Chapter 137
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250, Art. II. Noise — See Ch. 363.
§ 137-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and regulations
concerning the installation, operation and maintenance of certain alarm
systems within the Township of Vernon.
§ 137-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device employed to call attention to, or provide
warning of, intrusion by any person or by fire, smoke, flood or other peril
whether the same provides a visual or audio response, alarm or warning.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the term "alarm
system" shall not include self-concealed battery or electrically powered
smoke detector or carbon monoxide detector units located within singlefamily
residences and which give out an audible signal. The term "alarm
system" shall also not include automobile alarm systems.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — An alarm station that transmits the alarm to
an alarm processing center which then calls to dispatch the Police and/or
the Fire Department.
DIAL ALARM — An alarm device using telephone or other lines which
transmits an alarm signal of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril to the
Township Police Department or any other third party.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal activated or transmitted by
inadvertent, negligent, unintentional or intentional act or omission of a
person (caused or transmitted other than by an intruder or by fire, flood,
smoke or carbon monoxide), and shall also include alarms caused by
malfunctioning of the alarm device or other related equipment. False alarms
shall not include activation caused by power or phone line interruptions
when such interruptions have been reported to the Township Police or the
Township Clerk.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm device or local alarm located within the
Township of Vernon which when activated produces an audible or visual
signal (such as, but not limited to, fire and burglar alarm activating bell
devices). It shall not include motor vehicle antitheft alarms.[Amended
3-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-1]
§ 133-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-2
1:193
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association or
other entity.
REGISTRANT — Any person who owns, operates or leases an alarm system
within the scope of this chapter, who has been issued a registration permit
to operate and maintain such alarm system.
§ 137-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who owns, operates,
leases, or maintains any dial alarm system or alarm system utilizing a
central alarm station which requires a response by the Township Police, Fire
Department, First Aid Squad or any other Township agency. The provisions
of this chapter shall in no way prohibit service by a private source to
persons within or without the Township, so long as such operating, leasing
or maintaining a premises protected by an alarm system shall be
responsible for the registration in accordance with this chapter.
§ 137-4. Registration of systems; permits.
A. Registration shall be required for each home or business within the
Township utilizing a dial alarm system or an alarm system utilizing the
services of a central alarm on the effective date of this chapter. Users of
systems in place on that date shall complete the required registration
form within 60 days of notice by the Vernon Municipal Clerk.
[Amended 3-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-1]
B. A registration permit shall automatically terminate upon a change of
occupancy for the premises for which the alarm has been registered.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, no more than
one registration shall be required per home or business at any single
location. Information provided to the Township must be kept current,
and the registrant must notify the Township Clerk in writing of any
changes of information listed in the registration application no later
than 30 days following the applicable change(s).
C. Registration form. Person(s) required to register their alarm devices
shall complete and file with the Municipal Clerk a registration
application which may be obtained from the Municipal Clerk's office. A
copy of each registration form shall be filed with the Township Police by
the Township Clerk. The Township Clerk shall keep the records
confidential and not open to public inspection. The registrant shall
provide the following information: [Amended 3-22-1999 by Ord. No.
99-1]
(1) The full name and address of the registrant, including a complete
physical address and property description which will permit the
appropriate response to the alarm.
(2) Name and address and telephone number of the person installing,
maintaining and/or owning the system.
§ 137-2 VERNON CODE § 137-4
1:194
§ 137-5. Registration fee; time limit for registration.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
A registration fee as set forth in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article
II, shall be submitted with each registration form. Registration shall be
submitted within 30 days of system installation.
§ 137-6. False alarms; enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or activate a false alarm
as defined in this chapter. In case of a false alarm, any person and any
permittee who violates this chapter shall each be subject to the provisions of
§ 137-11. In case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge of the false
alarm shall immediately notify the Township police. The Township police
shall be responsible for enforcing this chapter.
§ 137-7. Connections of dial alarm devices.
Dial alarm devices may be connected to the Township police by telephone
or other lines as are permitted and designated by the Township police or
to other law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction or to third party
providers. Dial alarms shall be registered as specified in §§ 137-4 and 137-5
of this chapter.
§ 137-8. Applicability; silencing of audible outdoor alarms.
(3) The type of device, including what provisions have been made to
avoid false alarms and testing provisions.
(4) The name and address of the person(s), if any, responsible for
monitoring and initially responding to an activation of an alarm
device and a phone number for such entity and/or person(s).
(5) The name of a person, address and telephone number who may be
contacted in the event of an alarm, and at least one person who is
authorized to receive notification of an alarm call and who is
authorized to enter upon the premises in which the alarm system is
located.
(6) Any additional relevant information as may be reasonably required
by the Township Clerk.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any alarm system
installed on the property owned or occupied by any township, county,
state, or federal government agency or office, or to any alarm device
having only an indoor audible or visual/flashing system, and which are
not dial alarm devices.
B. Alarm devices having an audible alarm installed out of doors shall be
designed to limit the operation of a bell or sound-producing instrument
§ 137-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-8
1:195
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 137-9. Limitations of Township obligations. [Amended 6-28-1999
by Ord. No. 99-12]
The Township of Vernon shall be under no duty or obligation to any
permittee by reason of issuance of any registration permit.
§ 137-10. Rule-making authority. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
The Mayor may from time to time promulgate rules and regulations
supplementing this chapter in order to provide for recordkeeping and
efficient management of the system.
§ 137-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties; disconnection and
revocation of permit. [Amended 3-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-1]
to a maximum of 15 minutes after activation. If the duration of an
outside activated audible alarm exceeds 15 minutes, the warnings and
penalties provided by § 137-11 of this chapter shall apply as though a
false alarm has been activated.
A. A. The Vernon Township Police Department is charged with the
responsibility for enforcing this chapter. In the event the police
determine there is a sufficient basis to find a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, a complaint shall be filed with the Vernon
Township Municipal Court. The Municipal Court Judge shall hear the
complaints concerning violations of this chapter, and if the responsible
party is convicted, the Municipal Court Judge may impose fines as
provided for in this section.
Editor's Note: See also fines in Ch. 250, Fees and Escrows, Art. II.
(1) For the first false alarm in any single calendar year, a warning shall
be issued.
(2) For the second false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine of $50
shall be paid to the Township of Vernon.
(3) For the third and subsequent false alarms in the same calendar
year, a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each
occurrence shall be paid to the Township of Vernon, which shall be
accompanied by an advisory letter (dated within 30 days following
the date on which the complaint is issued) from a licensed alarm
company stating that the system is operating properly. If, however,
the person fails to provide such advisory letter as provided above, a
fine may be imposed by the court up to a maximum of $500 in the
court's discretion.
B. In the event the Township police determine the registrant has failed to
take reasonable steps to avoid false alarms, the Township police shall
§ 137-8 VERNON CODE § 137-11
1:196
Chapter 142
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public assemblies — See Ch. 153.
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
Food establishments licensing — See Ch. 281.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 413.
have the right to require the alarm to be disconnected for either a
limited amount of time or permanently. However, no such disconnection
and revocation of the permit shall take place without providing the
registrant an opportunity to show cause before the Municipal Court
why such action should not be taken. The occurrence of three or more
false alarms in any calendar month shall raise the presumption that
the registrant is disregarding their responsibility to take reasonable
remedial steps to avoid false alarms. In the event registrant's alarm
is disconnected as the result of an action under this section of this
chapter, and in the event the registrant is allowed to reconnect the
equipment in the future, the registrant shall be responsible for a
reregistration fee as set forth in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article
II.15
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 137-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-11
1:197

ARTICLE I
Licensing Restrictions; Hours of Sale
[Adopted 6-27-194116 (Ch. 33, Art. I of the 1974 Code)]
§ 142-1. Number of plenary retail consumption licenses. [Amended
9-17-1945; 6-21-1965; amended in entirety 6-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-21]
§ 142-2. Fee for plenary retail consumption licenses. [Amended
4-19-1971; 5-20-1974; 3-1-1976 by Ord. No. 76-5; 2-24-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-4; 3-16-1981 by Ord. No. 81-5; 4-23-2001 by Ord. No.
01-0717]
The annual license fee for a plenary retail consumption license is set forth
in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II.
§ 142-3. Hours and days of sale.
§ 142-4. Number of plenary retail distribution licenses.
Not more than two plenary retail distribution licenses shall be outstanding
in the Township of Vernon at the same time.
A. Not more than eight plenary retail consumption licenses shall be
outstanding in the Township of Vernon at the same time.
B. Notwithstanding the limitation as to the number of plenary retail
consumption licenses hereby established, the Township Council may, in
its discretion, issue such further plenary consumption licenses as may
be permitted by law to any bona fide hotel subject to the limitations
prescribed by any other law of the State of New Jersey.
A. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, or allow the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on New Year's Day
between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.; on all other days between
the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. During the hours sales of alcoholic
beverages are prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall also be
closed.
B. Sales of alcoholic beverages are permitted on election days during the
same hours the licensed premises would be open if the day were not an
election day. [Added 5-20-1974]
16.Editor's Note: Former Section 2 of this ordinance, added 2-15-1954, and regulating the
geographical distribution of plenary retail consumption licenses, was repealed 6-20-1966.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-5
1:199
§ 142-5. Restrictions on distribution licensees.
No plenary retail distribution licensee shall sell malt alcoholic beverages
except in quantities of 72 fluid ounces or more, and no plenary retail
distribution licensee shall display on the exterior of the licensed premises
any signs of any description relating to alcoholic beverages.
§ 142-6. Fee for plenary retail distribution license. [Amended
4-19-1971; 5-20-1974; 3-1-1976 by Ord. No. 76-5; 2-24-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-4; 3-16-1981 by Ord. No. 81-5; 4-23-2001 by Ord. No.
01-0718]
The annual license fee for a plenary retail distribution license is set forth in
Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II.
§ 142-7. Club licenses. [Added 4-15-197419]
§ 142-8. Limited retail distribution licenses. [Added 6-2-1952;
amended 4-15-197421]
One limited retail distribution license shall be issued by the Township of
Vernon, for which the annual license fee is set forth in Chapter 250, Fees
and Escrows, Article II.
§ 142-9. Hotels and motels.22
The annual license fee for hotels and motels is set forth in Chapter 250, Fees
and Escrows, Article II.
§ 142-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-20-197423; amended
2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01]
Any person violating, or failing to comply with, any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, and in addition to the penalties which
A. One club license only may be issued in the Township of Vernon only to
such corporations, associations and organizations as are operated for
benevolent, charitable, fraternal, social, religious, recreational, athletic
or similar purposes, and not for private gain, and which comply with all
conditions which may be imposed by the Commissioner of Alcoholic
Beverage Control by rules and regulations.
B. The annual license fee for club licenses is set forth in Chapter 250, Fees
and Escrows, Article II.20
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 33-7, Ban on certain licenses, added
6-2-1952, which was previously included in this article.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
22.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-5 VERNON CODE § 142-10
1:200
may be enforced pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-31, be subject to the penalties
set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, "Violations and penalties." The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense
§ 142-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-10
1:201

ARTICLE II
Consumption and Possession in Public
[Adopted 4-5-1976 by Ord. No. 76-8 (Ch. 33, Art. II of the 1974
Code)]
§ 142-11. Consumption in public.
§ 142-12. Consumption where public is invited.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or offer to another for
consumption any alcoholic beverage in, on or upon any place to which the
public at large is invited; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages within
the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption liquor licensee.
§ 142-13. Possession in public.
No person shall have in his possession or possess an alcoholic beverage
in, on or upon any land or building owned or occupied by any federal,
state, county or municipal government unless the same is contained within
a closed or sealed container.
§ 142-14. Possession where public is invited.
No person shall have in his possession or possess an alcoholic beverage in,
on or upon any place to which the public at large is invited unless the same
is contained within a closed or sealed container; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the possession of alcoholic
beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption
liquor licensee.
A. No person shall consume or offer to another for consumption alcoholic
beverages in, on or upon any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, park,
playground or in, on or upon any land or building owned or occupied by
any federal, state, county or municipal government.
B. Notwithstanding Paragraph A, the following entities shall be exempt
from the restriction set forth in Paragraph A for activities on and in
municipal properties pursuant to the requirements hereafter set forth.
(1) The Township of Vernon, without restriction.
(2) Any bona fide charitable or non-profit organization, subject to the
requirement that said organization shall submit a letter request on
the organizations letterhead to the Township Council for a waiver
of the restriction, which may either be granted by Resolution of the
Council or declined at the sole discretion of the Council. [Added
3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-10]
§ 142-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-15
1:203
§ 142-15. Violations and penalties.24
Any person violating, or failing to comply with, any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties. The continuation of
such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 142-16. Permit for possession and consumption in public.
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in §§ 142-11, 142-12, 142-13 and
142-14 of this article, a special permit may be issued by the Mayor and
Township Council for the possession and consumption of alcoholic
beverages at a picnic, in a park or glen, at a specific event or observance
or other activity sponsored by an individual, group, nonprofit corporation or
organization for profit.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-15 VERNON CODE § 142-16
1:204
ARTICLE III
Unlicensed Restaurants
[Adopted 12-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-26 (Ch. 33, Art. III of the 1974
Code)]
§ 142-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ORIGINAL CONTAINER — Any container in which an alcoholic beverage
has been delivered to a retail licensee.
RESTAURANT — An establishment regularly and principally used for the
purpose of providing meals for the public, having an adequate kitchen and
dining room equipped for the preparing, cooking and serving of foods for its
customers and in which no other business, except such as is incidental to
such establishment, is conducted.
§ 142-18. Possession and consumption permitted in certain
unlicensed restaurants; restrictions.
§ 142-19. Restaurant's option to establish policy.
Each restaurant that qualifies according to the above requirements shall
have the right to establish a policy permitting the bringing in and
consumption of wine and malt alcoholic beverages upon the restaurant
A. Any restaurant with a permanent, inside, seating capacity for 45 or
more patrons may permit its patrons to bring unopened, original
containers of wine and malt alcoholic beverages upon the premises for
consumption with their meal. This shall be permitted with the following
requirements:
(1) The patrons who bring in or consume the wine and malt alcoholic
beverages must be of the required statutory age to consume
alcoholic beverages; and
(2) No advertisements shall be placed either inside or outside the
restaurant premises indicating that patrons may bring in and
consume their own wine and malt alcoholic beverages; and
(3) All containers with anything remaining in them shall be taken from
the restaurant by the patrons who brought them in, unless said
containers are intended to be left for disposal by the restaurant;
and
(4) The restaurant shall not charge any admission fee or cover,
corkage, or service charge.
B. Sections 142-12 and 142-14 shall not apply to the activities permitted
by this section.
§ 142-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-19
1:205
premises. If a restaurant chooses not to permit this, such restaurant may
exclude any alcoholic beverages of any kind and nature whatsoever from
being brought upon the premises by patrons.
§ 142-20. Violations and penalties; barring restaurant's policy.25
Any person violating any provisions of this article is a disorderly person, and
the court, in addition to such sentence as may be imposed for the disorderly
person's violation, may, by its judgment, bar any owner or operator violating
this article from permitting or allowing consumption of wine or malt
alcoholic beverages in his premises as authorized by this provision in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 2C:33-27.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-19 VERNON CODE § 142-20
1:206
ARTICLE IV
Underage Possession or Consumption on Private Property
[Adopted 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 01-11]
§ 142-21. Possession or consumption. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 01-11; 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-23]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age who, without legal
authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes an alcoholic
beverage on private property.
§ 142-22. Exceptions; immunity. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-23]
A. Section 142-21 shall not prohibit an underaged person from consuming
or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages. The definitions in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2 shall
apply to this section.
B. Section 142-21 shall not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by
any such person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the N.J.S.A.,
or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational
school or post secondary educational institution; however, no ordinance
enacted pursuant to this section shall be construed to preclude the
imposition of a penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other
section of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic
beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
(1) An underage person and one or two other persons shall be immune
from prosecution under § 142-21 if:
(a) One of the underage persons called 9-1-1 and reported that
another underage person was in need of medical assistance
due to alcohol consumption;
(b) The underage person who called 9-1-1 and, if applicable, one
or two other persons acting in concert with the underage
person who called 9-1-1 provided each of their names to the
9-1-1 operator;
(c) the underage person was the first person to make the 9-1-1
report; and
(d) the underage person and, if applicable, one or two other
persons acting in concert with the underage person who made
§ 142-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-22
1:207
§ 142-23. Penalty. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-23]
A violation of § 142-21 shall be punishable by a fine of $ 250 for a first
offense and $ 350 for any subsequent offense. In addition to the fine, the
court may suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of
the defendant. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a
report to the Motor Vehicle Commission stating the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to
this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is
less than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including
a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run
for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17 years.
If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid driver's
license issued by this State, the court shall immediately collect the license
and forward it to the Commission along with the report. If for any reason
the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the report the
complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the person, as
well as the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by
the court. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the penalties
set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to acknowledge
receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive a written notice
or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall not
be a defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. If the
person convicted under such an ordinance is not a New Jersey resident, the
court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the non-resident driving
privilege of the person based on the age of the person and submit to the
division the required report. The court shall not collect the license of a
non-resident convicted under this section. Upon receipt of a report by the
court, the Commission shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
the 9-1-1 call remained on the scene with the person under the
legal age in need of medical assistance until assistance arrived
and cooperated with medical assistance and law enforcement
personnel on the scene.
(2) The underage person who received medical assistance as provided
in subsection a. of this section also shall be immune from
prosecution under § 142-21.
§ 142-22 VERNON CODE § 142-23
1:208
Chapter 148
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
Noise — See Ch. 363.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 413.
§ 142-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-23
1:209

ARTICLE I
Police Dogs
[Adopted 5-16-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4]
§ 148-1. Harming police dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torment, beat,
kick, strike, mutilate, injure, harm, disable or kill any dog used by the Police
Department of the Township of Vernon, or any other police or prosecutorial
agency using a police dog within Vernon Township, in the performance of
the functions or duties of the Vernon Police Department or any other such
law enforcement agency. It shall be unlawful for any person to take such
actions against a police dog regardless of whether the dog is on duty in the
actual course of its work or off duty not actually engaged in police work.
§ 148-2. Interference with police dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any police dog being
used by the Vernon Township Police Department, or any other law
enforcement agency performing work within Vernon Township, or any
member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of
the Vernon Township Police Department or other law enforcement agency
or of any officer or member of said Police Department or law enforcement
agency.
§ 148-3. Stealing police dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, carry away, steal, or exercise
dominion over any police dog owned or used by the Vernon Township Police
Department or any other law enforcement agency performing work within
the Township of Vernon.
§ 148-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be liable to a penalty not exceeding $500, or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 60 days, or both.
§ 148-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-4
1:211

ARTICLE II
Feeding of Bears
[Adopted 11-23-1992 by Ord. No. 92-23]
§ 148-5. Feeding or baiting bears.
It shall be unlawful to feed or bait bears in the Township of Vernon in any
manner.
§ 148-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be fined not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000, and be subject to imprisonment in the Sussex County Jail or
community service for not more than 90 days.
§ 148-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-6
1:213

ARTICLE III
Animal Control; Dog Licensing26
[Adopted 4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3]
§ 148-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A person 18 years of age or
older who has satisfactorily completed the course of study approved by
the Commissioner of Health and Senior Services and the Police Training
Commission as prescribed by Paragraphs (1) through (3) of Subsection a of
§ 3 of P.L. 1983, c. 525 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a); or who has been employed in
the State of New Jersey in the capacity of, and with similar responsibilities
to those required of, a certified animal control officer pursuant to the
provisions of P.L. 1983, c. 525, for a period of three years before January 17,
1987.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall mean and
include every person having a right of property in such dog and every
person who has such dog in his keeping.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this article or otherwise.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — A potentially dangerous dog is one
that has been adjudicated to be a potentially dangerous in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 4:19-23.[Added 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-02]
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed.
§ 148-8. License required; compliance; lost license tag; rabies
inoculation required.
A. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog within the Township
without first obtaining a license thereof, to be issued by the Bureau of
Animal Control upon application by the owner and payment of the
prescribed fee, and no person shall keep or harbor any dog except in
26.Editor's Note: For fines related to offenses of certain sections of this article, see § 250-10.
§ 148-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-8
1:215
§ 148-9. Annual license and registration tag required; placing tag
on dog. [Added 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall,
in the month of January of each year, and annually thereafter, apply for
and procure from the Bureau of Animal Control a license and official metal
registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall
place upon each dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely
fastened.
§ 148-10. Fees; expiration date of license and tag.
The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee as
provided for in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II, for the licensing
of each dog and the additional sum in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows,
Article II, for the registration tag for each dog; and for each annual renewal,
the fee for the license and for the registration tag shall be the same, or
as amended by the Council, as for the original license and tag. Owners of
unspayed/unneutered dogs shall pay an additional fee as provided for in
Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II. The licenses, registration tags
and renewals thereof shall expire on the last day of January in each year.
§ 148-11. Exemption from fee for disability assistance dogs.
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs, as well as dogs used to assist handicapped persons, commonly
known as "service" dogs or dogs used to assist deaf persons, commonly
known as "hearing/ear" dogs, shall be licensed and registered as other dogs
as provided for in this article, except that the owner or keeper of such dog
shall not be required to pay any fee.
compliance with the provisions of this article. [Amended 11-13-2008
by Ord. No. 08-21]
B. The owner of any dog may, if the license tag is mislaid, stolen or lost,
procure a placement tag upon the payment of the prescribed fee. The
owner must provide adequate proof that the dog is currently licensed
for the year in which the replacement tag is desired.
C. No license shall be issued without the owner of the dog providing proof
that the dog has its rabies inoculation. The rabies inoculation must not
expire prior to November 1 of the current licensing year. The rabies
inoculation and the expiration of the inoculation shall be determined
using the Compendium of Animal Rabies Control of 1997, issued by the
National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc., and
later editions, or such other procedures as recommended by the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Health, Education and Welfare.
§ 148-8 VERNON CODE § 148-12
1:216
§ 148-12. Delinquent fees.
Any dog owner or person harboring a dog, found to have an unlicensed
dog by the Township Animal Control Officer, dog canvassers or any other
municipal official after March 1, shall be required to pay an additional
delinquent fee as provided in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II,
plus the required license and registration tag fees as provided in said
Chapter 250, in addition to any fine imposed for failure to obtain a dog
license before February 1. The aforementioned delinquent fee shall not
apply to dogs which have been acquired by the owner after March 1, on
which the license fee shall be the same as required in Chapter 250, Fees
and Escrows, Article II. The owner, however, shall present sufficient proof
to establish that the dog was acquired after March 1.
§ 148-13. License and tag issued in one municipality to be accepted
in another.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued by
any other municipality of this state shall be accepted by the Township as
evidence of compliance with §§ 148-9 and 148-10.
§ 148-14. Newly acquired dogs; dogs attaining licensing age.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration
tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 148-15. Contents of application; preservation of application;
issuance of registration numbers.
§ 148-16. Time for applying for license and tag for dogs brought
into Township.
A. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog for which license and registration are sought; whether it is of a
long- or shorthaired variety; and the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
B. The information on the application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Bureau
of Animal Control. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of
the applications. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
C. The Bureau of Animal Control shall forward to the State Department of
Health and Senior Services each month, on forms furnished by the
Department, an accurate account of registration numbers issued or
otherwise disposed of. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any dog licensed in another state for the current year, and bearing a
§ 148-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-16
1:217
§ 148-17. Removal or wrongful attachment of tag; tag to be worn
when off owner's premises.
§ 148-18. Kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds; licensing
requirements.
registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than 90 days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog,
unless a license for such dog is not required under this article.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog,
unless a license for such dog is not required under this article.
A. No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall
remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent
of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for
which it was not issued.
B. No licensed dog shall be allowed off the premises of the person
harboring or keeping the dog without the metal registration tag
attached to its harness or collar.
A. License required; exemption for individual dog licenses.
(1) Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a
kennel, a pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Bureau of
Animal Control; for a license to keep or operate such
establishment. All licenses issued for such establishments shall
state the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, shall
expire annually on June 30 and shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
(2) Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at
such establishments.
B. Application. The application shall describe the premises where the
establishment for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound is located or is
proposed to be located, the purpose for which it is to be maintained,
and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the Township
Bureau of Animal Control showing compliance with the local and state
rules and regulations governing the location of and sanitation at such
establishments. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
C. Revocation of license to operate establishment for dogs. All licenses
issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be subject to
revocation by the Mayor on recommendation of the State Department
§ 148-16 VERNON CODE § 148-18
1:218
§ 148-19. Disposition of fees.
§ 148-20. Annual canvass; report. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
The Animal Control Officer or such other person designated by the Mayor
shall promptly after February 1 of each year cause a canvass to be made
of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Township. He
shall report on or before September 1 of each year to the Mayor, to the
Township Bureau of Animal Control, and to the State Department of Health
of Health and Senior Services or the Township Bureau of Animal
Control for failure to comply with the applicable provisions of this
section, or the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health
and Senior Services, or of the Township Bureau of Animal Control
governing the same, after the licensee has been afforded a hearing
by either the State Department of Health and Senior Services or the
Mayor. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21; 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-08]
D. License fees for dog establishments; exemption for shelter or pound.
(1) The annual license fee for a kennel or pet shop shall be the fee
established in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II. No fee
shall be charged for a shelter or pound, per Chapter 250, Fees and
Escrows, Article II.
(2) License fees for dog establishments shall be paid with the
application.
E. Permitting dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off such premises, except on leash or in a
crate, or under other safe control.
F. List of licensed dog establishments to be forwarded to State
Department of Health and Senior Services. The Bureau of Animal
Control shall forward to the State Department of Health and Senior
Services a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed,
within 30 days after the licenses are issued, which list shall include the
name and address of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
A. License or other fees collected under the provisions hereof, except
those paid to the state, shall be turned over to the Treasurer within 30
days of collection. The fees collected shall be accounted for and spent in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.11, as amended.
B. The registration tag fee as established in Chapter 250, Fees and
Escrows, Article II, for each dog shall be forwarded within 30 days after
collection by the Bureau of Animal Control to the State Department of
Health and Senior Services. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
§ 148-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-20
1:219
and Senior Services the result thereof, setting forth in separate columns
the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring such
dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person,
together with the registration numbers of each dog, and the number of
unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together with a
complete description of each unlicensed dog.
§ 148-21. Certified Animal Control Officer. [Amended 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-08]
The Mayor may appoint, at such times and for such terms as may seem
expedient, one or more persons, to be known as "Certified Animal Control
Officer(s)." The Certified Animal Control Officer shall hold and maintain the
required certification, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq., as amended.
The Certified Animal Control Officer shall have all powers provided for by
law, including, but not limited to, powers to investigate and sign complaints,
arrest violators, or otherwise act as an officer for detection, apprehension
and arrest of offenders, hence the animal control, animal welfare or any
animal cruelty laws of the state and ordinances in the Township, provided
the officer has completed the training required by law.
§ 148-22. Impounding of dogs.
The Certified Animal Control Officer or other persons designated by the
Council shall take into custody or impound, or cause to be taken into
custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed or disposed of dogs as
provided for pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 et seq. and 4:19-18 et seq., as
amended.
§ 148-23. Impounding and disposal fees.
There shall be charged to the owner of each dog which is impounded,
pursuant to § 148-22, the boarding fee listed in Chapter 250, Fees and
Escrows, Article II, per day maintenance fee for each day or part thereof
that the dog has been impounded, for picking up each dog; and the pickup/
redemption fee listed in said Chapter 250, for each dog which is redeemed
by its owner; which fees shall be paid when the dog is released.
§ 148-24. Seizure of dogs; entry upon premises for such purpose.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, except upon the
premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is present and forbids the
same. In such case, the Animal Control Officer or agent may obtain the
requisite search warrant or court order to seize the dog if a reasonable basis
for seizure exists.
§ 148-20 VERNON CODE § 148-25
1:220
§ 148-25. Interference forbidden; violations and penalties.27
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article. Violators shall be subject
to a mandatory minimum penalty of $100 and the maximum penalty set
forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties.
§ 148-26. Regulation of dogs.
A. Barking or crying dogs. No person shall allow any dog in his keeping,
custody, control or ownership to bark, howl or cry, continuously for any
period longer than 1/2 hour between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. or otherwise repeatedly at intervals of more than 1/2 hour at any
time of the day or night, in such volume or manner as to disturb the
comfort, peace or repose of persons in the vicinity. In addition to the
Animal Control Officer, the Township police are empowered to enforce
this section.
B. Running at large.
(1) No person owning, keeping, or harboring any dog shall suffer or
permit such animal to run at large in, upon, or through any public,
quasi-public, or private street, public park or recreation area,
public building, or any other public place or place to which the
public is invited, and no person owning, keeping, or harboring any
dog shall suffer or permit such animal to run at large in, upon, or
through any private property without the authority of the owner of
the private property.
(2) When a dog has been impounded for running at large, the Certified
Animal Control Officer may file a complaint in the Municipal Court.
C. Dog to be accompanied by person over 12 years old; leash. No person
owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to be
upon the public or private streets or in any public place of the Township
unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years
and is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more
than six feet long.
D. Vicious dogs. The Animal Control Officer or the Township police are
empowered to enforce the vicious or potentially dangerous dog statute,
N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
E. Quarantine. The Animal Control Officer may require that a dog that has
bitten any person be quarantined for a ten-day period, as provided for
by N.J.S.A. 26:4-82. Furthermore, the Animal Control Officer may
require the dog owner have the animal examined by a veterinarian.28
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
28.Editor's Note: For state law relating to rabies, see N.J.S.A. 26:4-78 et seq.
§ 148-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-26
1:221
§ 148-27. Custody, impounding and disposal of animals. [Amended
7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 06-23]
§ 148-28. Controlling spread of rabies; violations and penalties.
F. Dogs attacking other animals. When a dog attacks other dogs or
domestic animals, a complaint may be made against the owner thereof
for keeping or harboring such a dog. Violators shall be subject to a
mandatory minimum penalty of $100 and the maximum penalty set
forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties. The
Animal Control Officer may require that the attacking dog be
quarantined for a period of at least 10 days after the attack, similar to
an attack on a person, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:4-82.29
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog may be impounded and disposed of in accordance
with and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 4:19-18 et
seq.
B. Any cat or other domestic animal which the Animal Control Officer or
other authorized person has reason to believe is a stray or unowned
animal may be impounded and disposed of in accordance with and
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 4:19-18 et seq.
C. Any cat or other domestic animal off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring the cat or other domestic animal which the
Animal Control Officer or other authorized person has reason to believe
is the owner and which is suspected to be rabid, ill, injured, a threat to
public health or safety or damaging public or private property may be
impounded and disposed of in accordance with and pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.16 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 4:19-18 et seq.
D. If the owner of an animal transfers ownership of the animal to Vernon
Township and pays all fees required under Township ordinance, the
Animal Control Officer may take the animal into custody from the
owner's property and impound and dispose of the animal in accordance
with and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 4:19-18 et
seq.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANIMAL — Dog or cat, or other domestic animal.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The Certified Animal Control Officers
employed by Vernon Township.
BITE — A bite, scratch or contact with an animal's saliva in which
the saliva may have entered an open wound or come in contact with
mucous membranes.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 148-26 VERNON CODE § 148-28
1:222
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female or
altered.
CAT OF VACCINATION AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of
three months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CONFINEMENT — The maintenance of the animal on a leash, attached
to a cable run, held in an enclosed pen or within a building at all times.
CONFINEMENT PERIOD — The time period the animal must remain
confined.
CURRENTLY VACCINATED — An animal which has obtained at least
the minimum age for vaccination and has received the said vaccination
from a licensed veterinarian. An animal shall be considered immunized
30 days after having been vaccinated and the vaccination has not
expired, as per the recommendations contained in Subsection B(2) by a
period not to exceed 30 days.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Dog, cat, ferret, and livestock.
ENFORCING OFFICER — The Animal Control Officer, Health Officer,
or Sanitary Inspector with such respective duties provided for in this
article.[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a domestic animal,
shall include every person having a right of property (or custody) in
such domestic animal and every person who has such domestic animal
in his/her keeping, or who harbors or maintains a domestic animal
or knowingly permits a domestic animal to remain on or about any
premises occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
STRICT ISOLATION — The confinement of the animal in a cage or pen
which allows feeding and cleaning of the cage or pen but prevents any
physical contact between any persons or other animals and the isolated
animal.
STRICT ISOLATION PERIOD — The time period the animal must
remain in strict isolation.
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal which is not a domestic animal, including
high bred wolves, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated.
B. Rabies vaccinations of cats.
(1) Vaccination against rabies required. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over three months of age within the
Township of Vernon, unless such cat is vaccinated.
(2) Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium
of Animal Rabies Vaccine and Recommendations for Immunization"
published by the National Association of State Public Health
§ 148-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-28
1:223
Veterinarians, except as provided for in Subsection B(4) and/or any
policy formulated by the NJ State Department of Health and Senior
Services.
(3) Vaccination certificate. A certification of vaccination shall be issued
to the owner of each animal vaccinated by the veterinarian on a
form recommended by the state.
(4) Exemptions. Any cat may be exempt from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Bureau of Animal
Control, upon presentation of a veterinarian's certification stating
that, because of an infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen
of therapy, the inoculation of the cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(5) Proof of vaccination. Proof of vaccination shall be produced by any
person owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the
request of the enforcing officer or any police officer.
(6) It is recommended but not required that dogs or cats receiving a
three-year vaccination in accordance with the guidelines in
Subsection B(2) above be revaccinated in two years to prevent the
lapse of immunization.
(7) It shall be a violation of this article for any person to own a cat
which is not currently vaccinated unless the cat is less than four
months old or the person has owned the cat less than 30 days.
C. Confinement or strict isolation required.
(1) Human bitten.
(a) Any currently vaccinated dog, cat or ferret which bites or
scratches a human shall be confined for 10 days at the owner's
expense, either at the owner's premises or at a veterinarian's
office.
(b) Any dog, cat or ferret not currently vaccinated which bites a
human shall be confined for 10 days at a veterinarian's office,
at the owner's expense.
(c) Any currently vaccinated domestic animal, other than dogs and
cats, which bites a person shall be confined for 14 days, at the
owner's expense.
(d) Any domestic animal other than dogs and cats, not currently
vaccinated, which bites a person shall be confined for 14 days
and shall be isolated from contact with other animals for the
confinement period, at the owner's expense.
(e) Any wild animal which bites a person shall be killed, if
captured, and submitted for rabies examination. There is no
§ 148-28 VERNON CODE § 148-28
1:224
acceptable confinement period for any wild animal, even if
raised in captivity.
(2) Animals bitten by known or suspected rabid animal.
(a) Currently vaccinated dogs, cats, or other domestic animals
shall be confined for 90 days at the owner's expense, either at
the owner's premises or at a veterinarian's office.
(b) Dogs, cats or other domestic animals not currently vaccinated
shall either be killed or placed in strict isolation for six months,
at the owner's expense. If the owner does not kill the animal
and the owner cannot construct the isolation pen or cage, then
that animal shall be kept at a veterinarian's office at the
owner's expense until an isolation cage or pen can be built by
the owner. If the owner elects to kill the animal, then the owner
shall be required to pay for preparation and transport of the
specimen to the rabies laboratory, if required by the enforcing
officer.
(c) If a domestic animal is bitten by another domestic animal, the
biting animal shall be confined as specified in Subsection
C(1)(a) through (d).
(d) If a domestic animal is bitten by a wild animal, then a specimen
of the wild animal, if available, shall be prepared and examined
for rabies, as specified in Subsection C(1)(e).
(e) If the biting animal is shown to be free from rabies at the time
of the bite, based on Subsection C(2)(c) and (d) above, the
bitten animal shall be released from confinement or isolation
by the Animal Control Officer. The confinement or isolation
period as specified in Subsection C(2)(a) and (b) above does
not apply once the biting animal is shown to be free from
rabies.
(3) The Animal Control Officer shall release the animal from
confinement or isolation by issuing a written notice at the end of
the confinement or isolation period, if after an inspection of the
animal by the Animal Control Officer no evidence of rabies in the
animal is observed.
(4) The Animal Control Officer shall make periodic inspections,
approximately every three to five weeks, in order to ensure that an
animal placed under confinement or isolation remains so during the
confinement or isolation period.
(5) If at any time during the confinement or isolation period the animal
shows any neurological signs consistent with rabies, the Animal
Control Officer shall order the animal destroyed by a veterinarian
and the specimen prepared and transported to the Rabies
§ 148-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-28
1:225
§ 148-29. Defecation on public or private lands.
Laboratory. The owner is responsible for the payment of the
preparation and transport.
(6) The owner of the animal ordered confined or placed in strict
isolation shall be responsible to maintain the animal under the
ordered confinement or strict isolation for the entire confinement
or isolation period and shall not allow the animal to escape or be
removed until given the written release notice from the Animal
Control Officer.
(7) The Mayor in consultation with the Health Officer shall have the
authority to order the confinement of any domestic animal not
involved in a bite incident as described above, if this confinement is
required to control the spread of rabies in Vernon Township.
[Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
D. Respective duties of the enforcing officers.
(1) Ordered quarantine of an animal shall be made by the Animal
Control Officer, Health Director or Sanitary Inspector.
(2) The Animal Control Officer shall enforce the confinement of the
quarantined animal.
(3) The Animal Control Officer shall issue the release of the
quarantined animal.
(4) The Animal Control Officer shall be empowered to issue
summonses for unvaccinated cats.
E. Interfering with persons performing duties under this section. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this section.
F. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with any
subsection of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
of not less than $50, nor more than $1,000.
(2) The continuation of any violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of all those frequenting this Township, by preventing the
needless health hazards and nuisances caused by dog feces upon public
and private property located within the Township.
B. Defecation of private property. No person owning or in charge of any
dog shall cause or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate upon or
commit any nuisance upon any private property, without the permission
§ 148-28 VERNON CODE § 148-29
1:226
§ 148-30. Damage to property by animals; complaints.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat or any other domestic
animal shall permit it to do any injury or to do any damage to any lawn,
shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property or a complaint may be made
against the owner or keeper of such animal.
§ 148-31. Cats defined as public nuisance; impounding. [Amended
7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 06-23]
of the owner of the property. Any person owning or in charge of a
dog which soils, defiles, defecates or commits any such nuisance shall
immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog in a sanitary
manner.
C. Defecation on public property. No person owning or in charge of any
dog shall cause or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate upon or
commit any nuisance on any place where people congregate or walk, or
upon any public property. Any person owning or in charge of a dog
which soils, defiles, defecates or commits any such nuisance shall
immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog in a sanitary
manner.
D. Defecation on owner's property. No person shall permit the
accumulation of dog feces upon his/her property, or property occupied
by him/her, to the extent that the odor may be noticeable to any
adjoining property owners.
E. Disposal of defecation. The feces removed from the aforementioned
designated areas shall be disposed of by the person owning or in charge
of any such dog in a sealed, nonabsorbent, leakproof container.
Disposition in a sanitary manner shall include taking the feces home for
deposit, or wrapping the feces and placing same in a trash can. It shall
not include burial, disposal by placement in a storm sewer, or placing
unwrapped feces in a trash can.
F. Defense to violation. It shall be a complete defense to violations of
Subsections B, C and D if a person shall have immediately removed
such defecation and disposed of it in a sanitary manner.
G. Disability assistance dogs. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to disabled persons who may use their dogs as guides.
H. Complaints of violations. In the event of a violation on private property,
a complaint is only to be filed by the owner of such property. In the
event of such a violation occurring on public property, thoroughfare,
walkways or parks, a complaint may be filed by any witness to such an
act.
I. Enforcement. The Animal Control Officer, a police officer or Sanitary
Inspector may enforce the provisions of this section. A property owner
may enforce this section by filing a complaint in Municipal Court.
§ 148-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-31
1:227
§ 148-32. Violations and penalties.30
Any person who violates any provision of §§ 148-29 through 148-31 may,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter
1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation of §§ 148-29
through 148-31 occurs of continues.
§ 148-33. Fees and costs authorized.31
Fees and costs charged by the Township and authorized by the Code of
the Township of Vernon, as amended, are hereby established and shall be
imposed in such amounts as provided by Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows,
Article II.
A. Any cat with no known owner or custodian shall be considered a public
nuisance and shall be subject to Section 148-27B, custody, impounding
and disposal of animals if it has no known place of care or shelter; or if
it trespasses upon and damages either private or public property; or if it
bites, scratches or harms persons within the Township.
B. Any cat off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring the cat and constituting a public nuisance as defined in
section 148-31A shall be impounded according the Section 148-27C,
Custody, impounding and disposal of animals.
C. Any cat with a known owner or custodian shall be considered a public
nuisance and shall be subject to section 148-27C Custody, impounding
and disposal of animals if it trespasses upon and damages either private
or public property; or if it bites, scratches or harms persons within the
Township
D. Any cat with no known owner constituting a public nuisance as defined
in Section 148-31A shall be impounded according to Section 148-27B,
Custody, impounding and disposal of animals.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 148-31 VERNON CODE § 148-33
1:228
Chapter 153
ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Delinquent taxes and assessments — See Ch.
341, Art. I.
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 396.
§ 153-1. Permit required; exceptions; time requirements for filing.
[Amended 2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 82-1; 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-30]
§ 153-2. License fee; maximum number of attendees; waiver from
fee.
A. When permit is required; exception.
(1) No person, partnership, association, corporation or any
combination thereof shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, act
as entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, sell or give tickets
to an outdoor assembly of 2,000 or more people, whether the
assembly be on public or private property, unless a permit to hold
such assembly has first been issued by the Zoning Officer of the
Township of Vernon, application for which must be made at least 45
days in advance of the assembly. No permit, however, shall be
required for any regularly operated outdoor recreational facility for
the conduct of its usual business, as long as such activity takes
place during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. All activities
outside the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. fall within the permit
required provision.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection A(1), a license shall
always be required for assemblies for the purpose of mass musical
or public entertainment of various designations, or participation
therein, including but not limited to pop festivals, rock music
festivals, folk or ethnic festivals, rock and roll festivals, country and
western festivals, jazz festivals, concerts or any combination
thereof.
B. The prohibitions hereinabove expressed shall not include or pertain to
such assemblies, even though enumerated above, which take place in
established indoor theatres, lounges, resorts, auditoriums, convention
centers, or other indoor places licensed for public occupancy, unless
otherwise limited by applicable law.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the filing of an application for
more than one assembly over a period of one year.
§ 148-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-2
1:229
§ 153-3. Application for permit. [Amended 11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
18-30]
The Zoning Officer may issue a permit upon written application made by any
person, partnership, association, corporation or any combination thereof,
who propose to maintain, conduct, promote or operate an assembly as set
forth herein. No assembly for which a permit is issued shall begin prior to
8:00 a.m. or continued after 12:00 midnight.
A. A separate license shall be required for each day and for each location
in which 2,000 or more people assemble or can reasonably be
anticipated to assemble. The fee for each license is set forth in Chapter
250, Fees and Escrows, Article II.32
B. The license shall permit the assembly of only the maximum number of
people as stated in the license. The licensee shall not sell nor permit to
assemble at the licensed premises more than the maximum number of
people permitted by the license.
C. The Mayor and Township Council may waive the fee authorized by
Subsection A upon the written request of any civic association,
charitable association or nonprofit corporations.
A. Application procedure; filing.
(1) The applicant shall file a verified application with the Zoning
Officer of Vernon Township at least 45 days prior to the date or
dates upon which the assembly is to take place. Corporate
applications shall be duly signed, attested and verified by the
appropriate corporate officers.
B. Application procedure; contents. The application shall contain the
following:
(1) Name, age, residence and mailing address of the applicant.
Corporate applications shall show the name, residence and mailing
address of each person or other corporation holding 10% or more
of the stock in said corporation.
(2) The address, block and lot number, and legal description of all
property upon which the assembly is to be held, together with the
name and address of the record owner of such property.
(3) Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be
held or a statement under oath by the record owner or owners of all
such property for an outdoor assembly of 2,000 people or more for
the purpose set forth on the application.
(4) The specific nature and purpose of the assembly, together with a
schedule of all events or acts, and examples of the proposed
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 153-2 VERNON CODE § 153-3
1:230
§ 153-4. Application procedure; additional requirements.
advertising of the event, if any, together with the names of all
performers who will be performing at the assembly.
(5) The dates upon which the assembly will take place and the time the
assembly will open and finish each day.
(6) The application shall be accompanied by a diagrammatic sketch or
plan of the proposed site, showing the area where the assembly will
be situated, the location and capacity of all parking areas,
driveways and roads as they relate to traffic flow, traffic control and
safety. Fire access lanes and lanes for other emergency vehicles
shall be shown on the sketch or plan.
(7) Past experience of the applicant in promoting, operating, or
conducting similar outdoor events. The applicant shall state
whether any permits or licenses for assemblies issued by this or
any other governmental agency have ever been revoked, or
whether the applicant has ever received a notice of violation from
any governmental agency arising out of the conduct of an assembly.
Any lawsuits commenced against the applicant to enjoin an
assembly or to compel the applicant to provide financial
responsibility or reimbursement shall be disclosed.
A. The application shall further state in specific detail the provisions
proposed for the accommodations of persons attending the assembly in
the following particulars:
(1) Food and drink.
(2) Toilet and other sanitary facilities. At least one toilet per each 350
persons in attendance shall be provided or such other number as
may be required by the Department of Health and Human Services.
(3) Medical and ambulance care, including the names of first aid and
ambulance services or squads which will be available.
(4) Facilities for the parking of cars off the traveled highways of the
Township of Vernon. The details shall indicate parking areas, the
capacity of the parking areas, means of ingress and egress, and the
measures intended by the applicant to insure that cars waiting to
park will not congest the public highways.
(5) Public safety, indicating the kind and number of guards or special
police to assist the applicant in the control of traffic and
supervision of those attending the event. The applicant shall
indicate the number of guards, their deployment, their names,
addresses, credentials, and the hours of their employment on the
premises of the assembly.
§ 153-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-4
1:231
§ 153-5. Financial responsibility; insurance. [Amended 11-26-2018
by Ord. No. 18-30]
The application shall also contain the following proof of financial
responsibility and adequate insurance coverage:
(6) The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly and the
pedestrian walkway areas, including the source, amount of power,
and the location of the illumination.
(7) The plans for holding, collecting and disposing of solid waste
material.
(8) The plans for supplying potable water, including the source,
amount available and location of all outlets.
(9) The plans for sound control and sound amplification, if any,
including the number, location and power of the amplifiers and
speakers, together with the applicant's proposal to confine the
sound to the area of the assembly.
B. Upon receipt of each application, the Zoning Officer shall immediately
transmit copies of the same to each of the following individuals, and
each such individual shall respond to the Zoning Officer within 15 days
of the date of the filing of such application with a written report of their
recommendations, if any, within their respective fields of expertise and
considering pertinent requirements of this chapter: [Amended
11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-30]
(1) The Chief of Police of the Township of Vernon or his designee.
(2) The Fire Chief of the Fire Department, in which the designated
assembly is to take place, as well as the Fire Inspector of Vernon
Township.
(3) The Township Department of Health and Human Services or its
designee.
(4) The Township Construction Official.
A. The applicant shall submit to the Business Administrator, with his
application, a written commitment from an insurance company licensed
to do business in New Jersey, to insure the applicant, and the Township
of Vernon as a named co-insured, during such event, on account of
liability for accidental injury to one person in the amount of $300,000;
for accidental injury to two or more persons in the amount of
$1,000,000; for property damage in the amount of $1,000,000. Where it
appears that the nature or size of the event, or existence of other
applicable insurance, will not reasonably require the limits hereinabove
provided, the Township Council may fix such lesser amounts of limits or
accept such evidence of other insurance of financial responsibility as
will reasonably afford protection to the participants and to the public.
§ 153-4 VERNON CODE § 153-5
1:232
§ 153-6. (Reserved)33
§ 153-7. Revocation of permit.
B. In addition to the insurance obligation provided for hereinabove, the
Township Council may require of the applicant, prior to the issuance of
a permit, a cash deposit in an amount sufficient to insure full payment
of its permit fees, and/or to insure prompt repair of physical damage
and collection of refuse, if same is not adequately provided for by the
applicant. Such a cash deposit may include sums sufficient to pay for
such special police officers and like personnel as may reasonably by
required by the event and for which the Township shall bill the
applicant.
C. If required, the applicant shall file a bond with the Clerk of the
Township of Vernon, either in cash or underwritten by a surety company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, in the amount of
$50,000, which bond will indemnify and hold harmless the Township of
Vernon, or any of its agents, officers, servants, and/or employees, from
any liability, or any causes of action of whatever nature which may arise
by reason of the granting of the permit, and from any damage incurred
by trespass, vandalism or materials produced or left by the assembly. At
the discretion of the Mayor and Township Council the above bond may
be waived and the Mayor and Township Council may accept a letter of
indemnification from the applicant when the applicant demonstrates
assets in excess of $5,000,000 by a certified financial statement.
A. A permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police or their designee, Fire
Marshal or their designee or Zoning Officer upon 12 hours' notice to the
applicant where it appears that: [Amended 11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
18-30]
(1) The application is materially false or purposely misleading.
(2) The number of persons attending the assembly is unexpectedly
greater by 50% than the number initially projected and the
applicant is unable to deposit sufficient monies to insure adequate
police protection, or is unable, by reason of such increase, to
provide proportionally greater sanitary, water, food, and other
health facilities.
(3) New or substantially changed conditions have arisen so as to
imperil or materially endanger the public health, morals, safety or
welfare.
B. Notwithstanding the above, a permit may be revoked at any time after
24 hours prior to the event, and at any time during such event, where it
appears that the public health, morals, safety, or welfare are being
33.Editor's Note: Former § 153-6, Hearing, as amended, was repealed 11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
18-30.
§ 153-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-7
1:233
Chapter 160
BICYCLES, SCOOTERS, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES
§ 160-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the definitions
provided for herein:
BICYCLE — A vehicle with two (2) wheels propelled solely by human power
and having pedals, handlebars and a saddle-like seat. The term shall include
a bicycle for two (2) or more persons having seats and corresponding sets
of pedals arranged in tandem.
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT — Any and all parking lots owned or controlled
by the Township of Vernon or any agency thereof.
PUBLIC ACCESS WAY — All sidewalks and parking lots for any private
business establishment, including but not limited to, shopping centers,
stores, offices or any other places of business.
ROLLER SKATES — A device or devices worn on the feet with a set of
wheels attached, regardless of the number or placement of those wheels
and used to glide or propel the user over the ground.
SCOOTER — A vehicle with wheels propelled solely by human power
without pedals and having handlebars or other steering component.
SKATEBOARD — A platform or board with roller-skate wheels or other
similar wheels affixed to the underside, designed to be ridden by a person
or persons, which has no steering device or mechanism to steer or control
the direction thereof while being used or ridden, even though the direction
may be controlled to some degree by shifting the feet or weight of the rider
during such use.
endangered, where it appears that numerous acts of criminality,
disorderly conduct, juvenile delinquency, violations of the controlled
dangerous substance act of the State of New Jersey are occurring, or
where nuisances substantially impairing the comfort or welfare of the
Township of Vernon are occurring.
C. Where such circumstances appear, a permit shall be revoked in the
following manner: [Amended 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-30]
(1) By the Zoning Officer; or
(2) By the Chief of Police or his designee, Fire Marshal or his designee
or Zoning Officer.
D. In the event of revocation under this section, the permit fee and the
cash deposit, to the extent the latter is billed, used or required, shall not
be returned to the applicant.
§ 153-7 VERNON CODE § 160-2
1:234
§ 160-2. Operation prohibited.
No person shall use, operate or ride any skateboard, scooter, roller skate or
bicycle in any municipal parking lot or in any public access way as defined
herein. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of
bicycles as a means of transportation to or from any municipal parking lot or
any public access way, as defined herein, nor shall this chapter be construed
to prohibit the walking or parking of bicycles by the operator thereof within
any municipal parking lot or in any public access way, as defined herein.
§ 160-3. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any Township Police
Officer and by any owner or tenant of any business establishment with
a parking lot or sidewalk or municipal parking lot to which the public is
invited; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not be
enforceable on any private or municipal property until such time as the
owner or tenant thereof conspicuously posts a sign stating that the use
of skateboards, roller skates or bicycles on this property is prohibited by
Ordinance #10-15.
Chapter 165
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Delinquent taxes and assessments — See Ch.
341, Art. I.
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
§ 165-1. Applicability of state standards.
The New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services has promulgated
certain regulations known as the "New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter
8, Body Art Procedures," New Jersey Administrative Code 8:27-1.1 through
8:27-11.4, which establishes standards for sterilization, sanitation and
safety for persons engaged in the business of tattooing, permanent
cosmetics, and ear and body piercing, and same is hereby adopted in its
entirety, with the exception of N.J.A.C. 8:27-10.1 through 8:27-10-3, and
shall be controlling unless high standards are prescribed herein by the
Vernon Township Council.
§ 165-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises, whether public
or private, where the practices of body art, body piercing or permanent
cosmetics, whether or not for profit, are performed.
§ 160-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-2
1:235
HEALTH OFFICER — The appointed licensed municipal Health Officer or
authorized representative.
§ 165-3. License required; transferability; renewal.
§ 165-4. Requirements to obtain license; operational regulations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a body art establishment
without a current license to operate from the Vernon Township Health
Officer to operate such establishment, in accordance with the
provisions hereof. An establishment operating with an expired license
shall be considered as operating without a license. [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
B. The application for an initial license shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee. The license is not transferable. Any change of
ownership shall require a new application and license with payment of
fees therefor. All licenses shall expire on the last day of March annually
and must be renewed annually for continuing operation of the
establishment.
C. An application for renewal and the appropriate license fee shall be
submitted prior to the expiration of the current license as further set
forth herein.
A. The operation of the body art establishment shall take place within a
permanent, nonmobile building. The location of the building shall be
indicated in the initial license application. The license shall not be
transferable to any other building, place, location or person.
B. Prior to the issuance or renewal of a license, the Health Officer or
authorized representative shall inspect the body art establishment. A
license may not be issued if the establishment is found to be in violation
of any of the requirements of this chapter, including the state
regulations (N.J.A.C. 8:27 et seq.) as referenced in § 165-1.
C. A body art establishment license may be renewed if said establishment
has been inspected by the Health Officer or authorized representative
and found to comply with all the requirements of this chapter and the
state regulations, provided the inspection is performed and compliance
is determined within 90 days prior to the expiration of the license.
D. A license shall not be issued for operation of a temporary body art
establishment or to perform body art procedures outside of the physical
site of a licensed establishment.
E. A license shall not be issued to any temporary establishment for the
purposes of product demonstrations, industry trade shows, educational
reasons or any other purpose.
F. Any establishment not served by an NJDEP approved public community
water supply shall be required to sample for total coliform bacteria on a
§ 165-2 VERNON CODE § 165-4
1:236
§ 165-5. Fees.34
Fees for initial license application and renewal thereof are included in
Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II.
§ 165-6. Violations and penalties.35
Violators of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250 and a
maximum penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and
penalties, for each violation of this chapter. Each day that a violation exists
shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 170
CABLE TELEVISION AND COMMUNICATIONS
§ 170-1. Introductory provisions/purpose of the chapter.
The Municipality hereby grants to the Company its non-exclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the highway, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the Municipality, poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
in the Municipality of a cable television system and cable communications
system. Construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon prior
approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ 170-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions given by the Federal
Communications Commission (F.C.C.) Rules and Regulations, 47 C.F.R.
subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with federal or state definitions:
quarterly basis. The sample must be collected from the sampling point
by personnel employed by a NJ licensed laboratory and tested by a
NJ licensed laboratory. The results must be provided to the Township
Health Officer upon receipt. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
G. An establishment shall employ the services of a Vernon Township
licensed pesticide operator to inspect the premises on a monthly basis
and to treat, as needed, for insects and rodents.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 165-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2
1:237
MUNICIPALITY or TOWNSHIP — The Township of Vernon, County of
Sussex, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this chapter and is known as
Service Electric Cable T.V. of New Jersey, Inc.
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendment thereto, section 48:5A-1 et seq.
§ 170-3. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the Company
was held, after proper public notice, on December 17, 2012 pursuant to
the terms and conditions of the Act. Said hearing, having been held and
fully open to the public, and the Municipality having received all comments
regarding the qualifications of the Company to receive this consent, the
Municipality hereby finds that the Company possesses the necessary legal,
technical, character, financial, and other qualifications, and that the
Company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate and
feasible.
§ 170-4. Grant of municipal consent.
The Township hereby grants to the Company a non-exclusive consent to
the issuance of a franchise by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities
to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain, in, upon, along, across,
above, over, and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways
and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and
additions thereto, in the Township of Vernon, such poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the Township of a
cable television system and cable communications system for the purpose
of distributing television and radio signals, and other electronic impulses in
order to furnish television and radio programs, and various communications
and other electronic services to the public. The rights so granted include
the right to use and occupy said highways, streets, alleys, public ways and
public places, and all manner of easements for the purposes herein set forth
and as provided by federal and state law, and are subject to the terms and
conditions herein.
§ 170-5. Duration of franchise and extension of service.
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the date of expiration
of the new Certificate of Approval as issued by the Board of Public Utilities
(BPU). The Company shall be required to proffer service to any persons,
residents or businesses in conformance with its tariff on file with the Office
of Cable Television including any policies for line extension and/or nonstandard
installations.
§ 170-2 VERNON CODE § 170-6
1:238
§ 170-6. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality 2 percent of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in
the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers to its cable television
reception service in the Municipality, or any amount permitted by the Cable
Television Act or otherwise allowable by law.
§ 170-7. Rates.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11, the Board of Public Utilities, through
the Office of Cable Television, shall, consistent with federal law, prescribe
just and reasonable rates, charges and classifications for the services
rendered by a cable television provider.
§ 170-8. Territory.
The consent granted herein to the Company shall apply to the entirety of
the Municipality, and any property hereafter annexed.
§ 170-9. Construction requirements.
A. Restoration. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, streets, surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed to as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, re-lay and relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
The Company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate parts of
its facilities to allow for the moving of buildings, and machinery, or in
other similar circumstances. The expense shall be borne by the party
requesting such action, except when required by the Municipality, in
which case the Company shall bear the cost.
C. Removal or Trimming of Trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Municipality, so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the Company's facilities.
§ 170-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-10
1:239
§ 170-10. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a local business office in Sussex County for the purpose of
receiving, investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality
of service, equipment, malfunctions, and similar matters. Said local
business office shall be open during normal business hours, and in no event
less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
§ 170-11. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5a-26(b).
All complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ 170-12. Performance bond.
During the life of the franchise, the Company shall give bond to the
Municipality, which bond shall be in the amount of $25,000.
Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all undertakings of
the Company as represented in its Application and incorporated herein.
§ 170-13. Local programming and public, educational and
governmental access.
The Company shall provide public, educational, and governmental (PEG)
access channels and facilities in accordance with its Application for
Renewal of Municipal Consent.
§ 170-14. Free Services.
The Company shall provide services in accordance with its tariff for cable
television service approved by the Board of Public Utilities on January 1,
2012. In addition, the Company shall provide the following services to the
Township of Vernon free of charge:
A. One (1) cable connection for the Cedar Mountain Primary School
located at 17 Sammis Road, Vernon, New Jersey.
B. Thirty-nine (39) cable connections for the Walnut Ridge Elementary
School located at 625 Route 517, Vernon, New Jersey.
C. Seven (7) cable connections for the Glen Meadows Middle School
located at 7 Sammis Road, Vernon, New Jersey.
D. Three (3) cable connections for the Lounsberry Hollow School located
at 30 Sammis Road, Vernon, New Jersey.
E. Two (2) cable connections for the Rolling Hills Primary School located
at 60 Sammis Road, Vernon, New Jersey.
§ 170-10 VERNON CODE § 170-14
1:240
§ 170-15. Programming.
Although nothing herein shall require the Company to carry or transmit
any particular television stations or programming source, the Company
shall provide the subscribers in the Township with at least the same broad
categories of programming, in approximately the same quantity, as are now
provided, and which appear in the Application for Municipal Consent.
In addition, the Company shall broadcast the meetings of various
governmental bodies for the Township, including but not limited to Council
meetings, upon reasonable written request of the Township, and shall
provide one (1) copy of each videotaped Council meeting to the Township
Clerk within one (1) week of the recording of such meeting for the
Township's records.
F. Three (3) cable connections for the Vernon Township High School
located at 1834 County Road 565, Vernon New Jersey.
G. One (1) cable connection for the Pochuck Valley Fire Department
located at 13 Lake Wallkill Road, Sussex, New Jersey.
H. One (1) cable connection for the Vernon Township Police Department
located at 21 Church Street, Vernon, New Jersey.
I. One (1) cable connection for the Vernon Township Senior Citizen's
Center located at 21 Church Street, Vernon, New Jersey.
J. One (1) cable connection for the Vernon PAL located at 21 Church
Street, Vernon, New Jersey.
K. Two (2) cable connections for the Vernon Township Road Department
located at 21 Church Street, Vernon, New Jersey.
L. One (1) cable connection for the Vernon Municipal Building located at
21 Church Street, Vernon, New Jersey.
M. One (1) cable connection for the Vernon Township Fire Department
located at 535 Route 515, Vernon, New Jersey.
N. One (1) cable connection for the Highland Lakes Fire Department
located at 813 Canistear Road, Highland Lakes, New Jersey.
O. One (1) cable connection for the McAfee Fire Department located at 88
Route 94, McAfee, New Jersey.
In addition, although nothing herein shall require the Company to
offer or extend a discount on services to the senior citizens of any
given municipality, the Company agrees that should such a discount be
provided within any section of the Company's service area, same will be
provided to the Township.
§ 170-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-16
1:241
§ 170-16. Liability insurance.
The Company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect, at its
sole expense, at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability
insurance naming the Municipality as an insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand, in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000. combined single limit for bodily injury or death to
one person, $500,000. for property damage resulting from any one accident,
and an excess liability (or umbrella) policy in the amount of $10,000,000.
The contractor building the cable television lines shall file a worker's
compensation certificate of insurance with the Township Clerk prior to
commencing any work.
§ 170-17. Filing with Township Engineer.
The Company shall cause all construction plans relating to work on any
extensions of its plant, or work which could have significant impact on
public works within the Township, to be filed with the Township Engineer's
Office.
§ 170-18. Activities prohibited.
The Company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with
television reception or persons not served by the Company, nor shall the
system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the operation of
the various utilities serving the residents of the Township.
§ 170-19. Incorporation of the Application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted in writing to the Municipality by the
Company, except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as
terms and conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant
writings submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a
part hereof by reference, as long as it does not conflict with state or federal
law.
§ 170-20. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court,
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 170-21. Consistency with future federal and state statutes,
regulations, rules and orders.
Should any of the federal or state acts, regulations, or pronouncements
applicable to the regulation of cable television service be modified in any
§ 170-16 VERNON CODE § 170-21
1:242
way, such modification, to the extent it embodies required terms and
conditions, and meaningfully can be incorporated into this chapter, shall
be so incorporated, consistent with any applicable effective dates specified
in such modification. To the extent that any such modification(s) place(s)
limits on permissible terms and conditions, and any provision of this chapter
becomes invalid by virtue of such modification(s), the preceding section,
Section 170-20, shall apply.
§ 170-22. Effective date of consent.
This chapter shall take effect upon its final passage and publication
according to law.
Chapter 179
CAMPGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250. Land development — See Ch. 330.
§ 179-1. Controlling standards.36
The Public Health Council under its power granted to it under N.J.S.A.
26:1A-7 has promulgated certain rules and regulations which were
published in Executive Order 66 (1978) as Chapter 22, entitled
"Campgrounds," which establishes standards for the design, operation,
maintenance of campgrounds (hereinafter referred to as "Chapter 22") are
hereby acknowledged as controlling unless higher standards are prescribed
herein by the Mayor and Township Council.
§ 179-2. Campsite occupancy. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
11-03]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-3.6 entitled "Campsite Occupancy," is amended to provide that
each campsite shall accommodate one camping unit occupied by persons
within the same party, but in no case shall the total number of overnight
occupants exceed a maximum of 10 persons per campsite.
§ 179-3. Occupancy limit. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-3.6(b) is amended to provide that no campground or campsite
shall be used as a year-round residence.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-4
1:243
§ 179-4. Hand pumps. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-4.2(d) and (e) entitled "Potable Water Supply and Distribution"
is amended to provide that no hand pumps shall be allowed on any
campground.
§ 179-5. Water supply for individual camping units. [Amended
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-4.2(f), entitled "Potable Water Supply and Distribution" is
amended to provide that there will be no direct connection of any potable
water supply to any individual camping units without the existence of
central sewage disposal system.
§ 179-6. Privies, pit toilets and compost toilets. [Amended
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-6.8, entitled "Existing Privies and Pit-Toilets" is amended to
provide as follows:
§ 179-7. Individual sewer connections for camping vehicles.
[Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03; amended 8-8-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-16]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-6.5 entitled "Individual Sewer Connections for Recreational
Vehicles" is amended to provide that any individual sewer connection shall
be permitted only where there is a central sewage disposal system. All
connections shall comply with the provisions of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code and applicable subcodes (N.J.A.C. 5:23).
§ 179-8. Holding tank emptying station for camping vehicles.
[Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-6.6 entitled "Holding Tank Emptying Station for Recreational
Vehicles" is amended to provide that each station shall be conveniently
located, but shall not be less than 100 feet from any campsite or property
line and shall have an appropriate windbreak against prevailing winds to
reduce the migration of odors. Such windbreak shall be subject to the
approval of the Vernon Township Health Officer.
A. No pit toilets shall be allowed.
B. Compost toilets shall be allowed only after review and approval by the
Health Officer.
C. No waste from compost toilets shall be stockpiled or stored or
composted on site. Such waste must be collected by a hauler licensed
by New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection ("NJDEP") and
transported to an NJDEP approved facility for processing.
D. Compost toilet areas must be maintained and measures implemented to
ensure they are free from infestation of insects and vermin.
§ 179-4 VERNON CODE § 179-9
1:244
§ 179-9. Storage of solid waste and recyclable materials. [Amended
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-7.1 entitled "Storage, Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste"
is amended to provide that this section shall also include the storage,
collection and disposal of recyclable materials.
§ 179-10. Collection and transportation of solid waste and
recyclable materials. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-7.1 entitled "Storage, Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste"
is amended to provide that the waste be collected by an NJDEP licensed
hauler and transporter to the Sussex County Municipal Utility Authority
Sanitary Land Fill, an NJDEP approved facility, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:26-6.5. Recyclable materials shall be transported to an NJDEP approved
recycling facility and be in compliance with Chapter 452, Recycling, and the
Sussex County District Solid Waste Management Plan.
§ 179-11. Swimming and bathing. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
11-03]
N.J.A.C. 8:22-10.6 entitled "Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Bathing
Beaches" is amended to provide that all swimming beaches shall comply
with the recreational bathing code (N.J.A.C. 8:26-1, et seq.).
§ 179-12. Fees.37
The owner of each campground shall pay an annual fee as set forth in
Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II; provided, however, if the
campground is organized as a condominium association, the annual fee
shall be paid by the condominium association and shall be calculated on the
number of campsites in the condominium association.
§ 179-13. Compliance.
All new campgrounds approved or constructed which are subject to this
chapter must comply with this chapter. All existing campgrounds subject to
this chapter shall provide to the Vernon Township Health Officer a schedule
for achieving compliance with this chapter no later than September 1, 1994,
and the campground shall achieve total compliance no later than April 1,
1995.
§ 179-14. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating any provision of,
or any order issued under, this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19,
Violations and penalties.38
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 179-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-14
1:245
Chapter 186
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS
§ 186-1. Exemption from certain ordinances for retail sales on
private property.
Subject to the ordinances of the Board of Health of the Township of Vernon,
any corporation or other organization which qualifies as a charitable
organization pursuant to I.R.S. Section 501(c)(3) shall be permitted to
engage in retail sales of merchandise regardless of the restrictions imposed
by any other ordinances of the Township of Vernon, provided that the
principal activities of such organization are conducted within the Township
of Vernon, and provided further that any such sales shall be conducted only
on private property.
Chapter 190
CLOTHING BINS
§ 190-1. Clothing bin permit requirements.
§ 190-2. Clothing bin permit application, duration and fee.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. No person shall place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin, for
solicitation purposes, within the Township of Vernon, unless they have
obtained a permit from the Township of Vernon.
B. No permit shall be issued for a clothing bin until:
(1) The applicant has complied with all of the requirements set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61;
(2) The applicant demonstrates that the proposed location is
commercial property with an active principal use;
(3) The Zoning Officer certifies that the placement of the clothing bins
does not violate the property's site plan and will not create a safety
hazard;
(4) The applicant certifies that the clothing bin will be marked with the
owner's name, physical address, and phone number; and
(5) The applicant agrees to provide the Township with a quarterly
report on the amount of textiles collected to be included in the
Township's recycling report. Failure to provide the report shall be a
basis for suspending the license.
§ 179-14 VERNON CODE § 190-2
1:246
§ 190-3. Penalty for violations.
Any person or entity violating this chapter or any provision of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq. shall be subject to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.63.
Chapter 205
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned property and unfit
buildings — See Ch. 130.
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 263.
Land development — See Ch. 330.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 380.
§ 205-1. Enforcing agency.
There is hereby established in the Township of Vernon a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as "Building Department,"
consisting of a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Fire
Protection and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes
as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of
New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
§ 205-2. Filling of positions.
Each official position created in § 205-1 hereof shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended,39 and
N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an
on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23. More than one official position may be held by the same person,
provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and
N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
A. The Zoning Official shall be the municipal agency as referenced in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 to accept applications, process them and issue
clothing bin permits.
B. The permit fee shall be $25. for the first bin and $10. for each additional
bin owned by the same applicant for the initial application as well as
any renewals.
C. Permits issued by the Zoning Official shall be valid for 1 year.
39.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:247
§ 205-3. Business office.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at
one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
§ 205-4. Appeals procedure. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
11-04]
Appeals from the decisions by the enforcing agency shall be made to the
Sussex County Board of Appeals pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23A-2.1.
§ 205-5. Fees.40
Fees for building permits, certificates, inspections, etc., related to the
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code are
included in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II.
§ 205-6. Biannual report.
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Township Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency, and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 205-7. State surcharge.
Chapter 212
A. In order to provide for the training, certification, and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
Regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19.
Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing
Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for
the fiscal quarter ending September 30, December 31, March 31, and
June 30, and not later than one month next succeeding the end of the
quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the Regulations
first become effective, said fee shall be collected and remitted for the
third and fourth quarters only.41
B. The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year
to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the
total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-3 VERNON CODE § 205-7
1:248
(RESERVED)
[HISTORY: Chapter 212, Curfew, adopted 9-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20, was
reserved 11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-25.]
Chapter 227
DUMPING; LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 531.
Pesticides — See Ch. 440.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 447.
Recycling — See Ch. 452.
Right to farm — See Ch. 240.
Used oil — See Ch. 524.
§ 227-1. Declaration of intent.
It is hereby declared that the careless, improper, uncontrolled and
unauthorized discarding, disposal, or dumping of solid waste, bulky waste,
garbage, liquid waste, litter and refuse upon public or private lands,
roadways, buildings or in receptacles not owned, leased or occupied by
the person doing so is a public nuisance, cause of civic disgrace, a health,
fire and safety hazard and pollutant of the environment of and within the
Township of Vernon which should be banned, controlled and regulated for
the advancement and protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
Currently the Township has two ordinances of record each addressing
portions of the problem, Ordinance Nos. 85-14 and 93-5. It is determined by
the Mayor and Township Council that consolidation of these two separate
ordinances into one comprehensive ordinance will result in more efficient
advancement of the policy goals encompassed by both and clarify for the
agency enforcing same and the public regulated thereby the conduct
intended to be addressed and prescribed.
§ 227-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms
and their derivations shall have the meanings as defined herein:
BULKY WASTE — Any nonputrescible waste from a residential or
commercial establishment, including but not limited to furniture, junk,
appliances, bedding, drums, containers, pallets, lawn mowers, bikes,
tires, rugs, equipment, vehicle parts, junk vehicles, canisters, grilles,
construction materials, metals, etc.
§ 205-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-2
1:249
CATCH BASIN — Any area created whereby surface water collects or
drains into; this shall include drainage swales and sewer drains.
CONTAINER — Any device, from a bag to a tractor trailer, that waste
materials are placed in or loaded into or onto, including but not limited
to any size paper or plastic bag, garbage can, trailer, litter baskets,
recycling bin, roll-off, box car, compactor, flat bed, dumpster, hopper,
etc.
COUNTY — County of Sussex and State of New Jersey.
DUMPING — The loading, discarding, placing, throwing-down, pouring,
releasing, or emptying out of any solid or liquid waste, refuse or
garbage upon lands, buildings, roadways (either public or private),
parking lot, park, playground, rail bed, gutters, catch basins, refuse
cans and containers neither owned, leased or occupied by the person
doing so, nor expressly authorized by the owner, lessee or occupant
of same. It shall be presumed that a person is engaged in dumping if
objects are involuntarily permitted to come upon the aforementioned
places when the person last in possession of said objects does not
immediately remove said objects. "Dumping" as defined herein also
expressly includes the throwing or discharge of such waste from a
moving or standing motor vehicle.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, as well as
household waste other than septic waste.
GUTTER — Any roadside, whether it is curbed or uncurbed, shall be
considered a gutter.
LIQUID WASTE — Waste which is in a liquid form, whether it be
toxic, hazardous or not, from residential, commercial, institutional or
industrial locations. "Liquid waste" includes but is not limited to used
motor oil, antifreeze, brake fluid, transmission fluid, paints, solvents,
thinners, sludge, septic sewage, leachate, washdown waters, gasoline,
roofing tar, driveway sealant, pesticides, herbicides, insecticides, etc.
LITTER — Any used or consumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, metal, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including but not limited to any bottle, jar, can or any top, lid,
cap or detachable tab, any lighters or unlighted cigarette, cigar, match
or any bagged or unbagged garbage, refuse, debris, rubbish, lawn or
garden waste, newspaper, magazines, handbills, advertisements, metal,
plastic or paper containers, or any packaging, construction material,
but does not include the waste from primary processes of mining or
other extraction processes, logging, saw milling, composting, farming
or manufacturing.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Vernon, sometimes called "Vernon
Township."
§ 227-2 VERNON CODE § 227-2
1:250
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
organization or company of any kind.
PRIVATE PLACE — Any house, dwelling, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential or
business purposes, whether inhabitated or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, lobby, parking area, mailbox
belonging or pertinent to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any building, street, walkway, grounds, park,
playground, recreation center, squares, sidewalks, alley, rail bed or
other public right-of-way or public area owned by the Township of
Vernon, County of Sussex, State of New Jersey, or other political
subdivision organized under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any service company regulated by the Board of
Public Utilities, including but not limited to telephone companies,
electric companies, solid waste collection companies, gas companies,
water companies, etc. The term "public utility" shall also include
nonregulated private or municipal utility companies providing such
services.
PUBLIC WATERS — Any body of water situated within the municipal
boundary lines of the Township of Vernon which is upon or runs through
lands owned by the Township of Vernon, County of Sussex, State of New
Jersey, or any other political subdivision organized pursuant to the laws
of the State of New Jersey or which may otherwise be defined, classified
and considered public waters under statutes and laws of the State of
New Jersey, including but not limited to lakes, streams, rivers, ponds,
fountains, reservoirs, groundwaters and the like.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste but which can be collected, separated or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of materials or
products. Materials designated as recyclable under the Sussex County
District Solid Waste Management Plan include newsprint, corrugated
cardboard, glass, plastic (PET and HDPE) containers, aluminum
beverage cans, and high-grade paper (stationery and computer,
inclusive of magazine).
REFUSE — All putrescible solid waste (except body waste), including
but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street sweepings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles or parts thereof, any scrap metal,
junk or machinery, furniture, household appliances, including but not
limited to washing machines, dryers, refrigerators, air conditioners,
televisions, ovens/stoves, and all other items of personal property
usually found or used in a house, apartment, office, store, business
or other type of residential, commercial, industrial or agricultural
structure. "Refuse" is also specifically meant to include all items and
materials coming under the definitions of garbage, rubbish, solid waste,
bulky waste and liquid waste as contained in this section.
§ 227-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-2
1:251
§ 227-3. Dumping prohibitions.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible waste, such as paper wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, glass, bedding, crockery, newspapers to be
discarded, building materials, landscaping wastes and similar
materials.
SOLID WASTE — Waste which is a nonliquid form, including but not
limited to garbage, refuse, rubbish, bulky waste and other discarded
materials resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural
operations, and from domestic and community activities and shall
include all other waste materials, including liquids, except for solid
animal and vegetable waste collected by swine producers licensed by
the State Department of Agricultural to collect, prepare and feed such
waste to swine on their own farms.
VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, tractor, bus, cab, motorcycle, boat,
train, used to transport people, materials and containers as well as
whole trailers along roadways, tracks or upon water.
YARD WASTE — Includes but is not limited to leaves, grass clippings,
brush, soil, gravel, rock, mulch, etc.
A. No person shall dump any solid or liquid waste, as herein defined, on, at
or upon a public or private place or property within the Township of
Vernon other than a location that has been properly licensed for the
acceptance of such material by the Township of Vernon and any state
agency having licensing jurisdiction for same, including but not limited
to a public and private roadway, right-of-way, parking lot, park,
playground, recreational center, rail bed, public or private building,
sidewalk, public or private land, public waters, gutter, catch basin, or
any other public or private place, structure, container or instrumentally
located within the Township of Vernon. Activities prescribed by this
section include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Burying, placing or causing to be placed any household trash in
such a manner or location as to constitute illegal dumping as
defined above.
(2) Burying, placing or causing to be placed any bulky waste in such a
manner or location as to constitute illegal dumping as defined
above.
(3) Transporting of solid waste or bulky waste by a vehicle in such a
manner that the materials being transported can escape from the
vehicle during transportation.
(4) Burying, placing, pouring, releasing or dumping of any liquid waste
at any time and on or upon any located as defined above with the
exception of approved agricultural practices.
§ 227-2 VERNON CODE § 227-3
1:252
§ 227-4. Dumping on lands owned by others; duty to remove; failure
to remove; costs.
(5) Transporting of liquid waste or materials by vehicle in such a
manner as to cause any of the contents to leach, leak, flow or drip
from the vehicle or any of the hoses or attachments of said vehicle
while standing or moving on roadways.
(6) Discarding, throwing, dumping, pouring, releasing, placing or
causing to be placed any material in and around the Municipal
Recycling Depot of the Township of Vernon other than accepted
recyclable materials or improperly disposing of accepted
recyclable materials at the Municipal Recycling Depot of the
Township of Vernon in such a manner as to cause contamination of
separated recyclable materials.
B. This section shall be defined as specifically not prohibiting the disposal
of refuse in containers that are to be picked up by state-regulated
garbage collectors on a regular basis.
A. The owner or person in control of any public or private property or
vacant or improved land shall at all times maintain the premises so as
not to attract people who will dump their solid or liquid waste upon said
premises. In the event that persons do dump on lands within the
Township, the owner or person in control of that property shall have the
obligation to take immediate steps to remove said solid waste, liquid
waste, garbage, refuse or rubbish from the premises.
B. If it is determined by those authorized to enforce this chapter that any
lands, whether public or private, and whether vacant or improved, are
being used by anyone for the dumping of solid waste, or liquid waste,
the enforcement official shall notify the owner of record of said property
or the person in control of same by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and advise said person that the solid waste, liquid waste,
bulky waste, garbage, refuse and rubbish must be removed within 15
days from the date said letter is mailed; provided, however, that said
notice may require the removal of said solid waste, or liquid waste,
within a stated, shorter period of time in the case of a second or
subsequent instance of dumping on the property in question or where,
in the opinion of the enforcement official, speedy removal is warranted
for the protection of the public health and safety. The notice shall also
advice the recipient that all costs and expenses related to the removal
of said solid waste or liquid waste shall be paid by the owner or person
controlling said lands. If the certified mail return receipt request card
indicating proof of service upon said owner is received back by the
enforcement official and the material that was dumped upon said
premises has not been removed within the aforesaid fifteen-day period,
then said owner of record and/or the person in control shall be deemed
to be in violation of this section of this chapter and shall be liable to loss
and punishment set forth further in this chapter.
§ 227-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-4
1:253
§ 227-5. Littering prohibited; containerization of litter and
recyclables.
C. If the owner or person in control of any public or private property
refuses or fails to remove the solid waste or liquid waste, within the
fifteen-day period provided for in Subsection B above, then the
Township of Vernon may remove or provide for the removal of such
material. All costs and expenses related to the removal of such solid
waste or liquid waste shall be charged against such lands. The amounts
so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon said lands and shall be
added to and become and form part of the real property tax next to be
assessed and levied upon said lands, and the same to bear interest at
the same rate as other taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the
same officer responsible for collecting taxes and in the same manner as
taxes are collected.
A. No person shall discard, place, throw, dump, rake or sweep litter in, on
or upon any public or private place within the Township of Vernon,
including but not limited to any public or private roadway, right-of-way,
parking lot, park, playground, recreational center, rail bed, public or
private building, sidewalk, grounds, public or private lands, public
waters, gutters, catch basins or any other public or private premises
within the municipal boundaries of the Township of Vernon. This
includes but is not limited to the following:
(1) Placing or causing to be placed any handbill or other printed
matter, advertisements, newspapers, etc., in such a manner as to
become litter.
(2) Operating any vehicle in such a manner so as to allow any of its
freight to remain uncovered while moving or standing so as to
allow any of the contents to escape and/or become litter.
(3) Placing or loading any waste materials into any container in such a
manner as to cause overflowing resulting in litter.
(4) Sweeping litter, by either manual or mechanical means, from any
sidewalk, driveway, parking area, storefront, etc., into a gutter or
catch basin.
(5) Placing or causing to be placed any materials which shall become
litter in the public waters of the Township of Vernon.
(6) Placing or causing to be placed any poster, handbill, advertisement,
sign, public notice, etc., in such a manner whereby, due to natural
elements, it may become litter.
(7) Operating a vehicle in such a manner as to allow or cause to allow
to be carried onto any roadway debris from said vehicle's
undercarriage or on its tires, including excessive mud or sticky
substances.
§ 227-4 VERNON CODE § 227-5
1:254
§ 227-6. Use of refuse receptacles.
§ 227-7. Storage of refuse.
(8) Allowing or causing to allow litter to collect on any private or public
place whereby it can be carried off by natural elements onto other
public or private places or roadways. This shall include but not be
limited to porches, yards, storefronts, loading areas, construction
sites, parking lots, driveways, collection depots, dumpster areas,
windshields, etc.
(9) Allowing or causing to allow material to escape from the site of any
construction, landscaping, grading, land clearing, composting, etc.,
operation.
(10)Raking, either by manual or mechanical means, any yard waste into
the gutter or catch basin areas. The only exception shall be in
municipalities whereby leaf collection programs using a vacuum
truck (or other collection method) collected on specific days. Then
and only then may a person place leaves in the gutter in accordance
with the municipality's directions.
(11) Allowing or causing to allow cut branches or wood chips to be
placed in such a manner as to slide, blow or otherwise be carried by
natural elements onto a public or private roadway.
B. All litter-type material as defined herein shall be placed in proper
containers in such a manner that it cannot become litter. All designated
recyclable-type litter material shall be separated from the
nonrecyclable materials and placed in proper containers. Where no
containers are available, persons shall take their litter-type materials,
both recyclable and nonrecyclable, with them for proper disposal.
A. No person shall dump his own or any acquired solid waste or liquid
waste into refuse receptacles owned by others or leased by others
without the expressed permission of the owner or lessees of such refuse
receptacles.
B. No person shall dump, place or throw any of his own or acquired solid
waste or liquid waste, in any refuse receptacle owned by or leased to
the Township of Vernon, the County of Sussex, or the State of New
Jersey or any other public governmental agency or entity unless
specifically authorized to do so in writing by way of letter, regulation,
authorization, resolution or ordinance.
C. No person shall dump, throw, deposit, mix or cause accepted recyclable
material to be placed in with solid waste or liquid waste.
A. The owner or person in control of any public or private property,
whether vacant or improved land, shall at all times maintain the
premises free of solid waste or liquid waste.
§ 227-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-7
1:255
§ 227-8. Enforcement; prosecution.42
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Vernon Township
Police Department, Vernon Township Department of Health and Human
Services, Sussex County Health Department, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the Vernon Township Zoning Enforcement
Officer as the case may be. Violations shall be prosecuted in the Municipal
Court having jurisdiction over the location where the offense occurred.
§ 227-9. Violations and penalties.
B. The owner or person in control of any public or private property,
whether vacant or improved lands, shall at all times prohibit anyone
from dumping solid waste or liquid waste upon said lands for the
purpose of landfilling or disposing of or storing said solid waste or
liquid waste upon said lands.
C. Only those persons who are actually engaged in the operation of a solid
waste or liquid waste collection service within the Township of Vernon,
and who have been properly licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners of the State of New Jersey to do so, may store solid
waste or liquid waste in a proper and appropriate container while filling
same so that a filled container may be transported to a state-licensed
disposal facility.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction of same, be subject to a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for a first offense or imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days (which may, in the discretion of the
Judge, include hours dedicated to community service), or both. Each
day such a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as such.
B. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon a second conviction thereof within five years
from a first conviction for violation of this chapter, be subject to a fine of
not less than $200 nor more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 120 days (which may include hours dedicated to
community service in the discretion of the Judge), or both.
C. Upon a third or subsequent conviction, the violator shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $300 nor more than $3,500 or imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 180 days (which may include hours dedicated to
community service in the discretion of the Judge), or both.
D. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as such.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 227-7 VERNON CODE § 227-10
1:256
§ 227-10. Responsibility for compliance.
Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, or the existence of any
instrument transferring or implying that transfer of compliance with this
chapter to any occupant, operator or agent or other party, the owner and/
or owners of all premises within the Township of Vernon shall be under the
duty and responsibility to ensure compliance with the terms and provisions
of this chapter and shall be liable for the penalties imposed hereunder in
the event of any noncompliance by any occupant, tenant, operator or agent
or other party. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to excuse or absolve
noncompliance by any such occupant, tenant, operator or agent or other
party and such occupants, tenants, operator, agents or other parties shall
also be subject to prosecution for any violations of the terms and provisions
of this chapter committed by them.
§ 227-11. Exemption for farming practices.
Specifically, this chapter shall not be interpreted or enforced so as to
interfere with or attempt to impose any restriction or penalty upon any farm
operator, procedure, practice or owner. Vernon Township has specifically
adopted a Right to Farm Ordinance43 and recognizes the existence of
standard farming practices, and this chapter shall not be interpreted so as
to overrule or interfere with said practices.
Chapter 231
EMERGENCY HOUSING
§ 231-1. Temporary trailers or similar structures permitted during
reconstruction; resolution required; conditions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance of the Township
of Vernon, whenever the Mayor and Township Council shall by resolution
determine that any occupied dwelling shall have become uninhabitable
by virtue of fire or other casualty, temporary housing upon the premises
may be permitted subject to such terms and provisions as the Mayor and
Township Council shall deem appropriate. Such housing shall ordinarily
consist of a trailer or other similar structure, and occupancy thereof shall be
conditioned upon the reconstruction of the damaged dwelling within such
period of time as shall be limited by such resolution.
§ 231-2. Failure to comply with terms of resolution; costs.
The terms of such resolution before occupancy thereof, and in the event of
a failure to abide by such terms and in particular to vacate such temporary
housing upon expiration of the term of occupancy limited by such
resolution, all costs of enforcement of the terms of such resolution,
including actual attorney's fees incurred by the Mayor and Township
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Farm, Right to.
§ 227-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-2
1:257
Council shall, upon certification thereof by the Mayor and Township Council
to the Tax Collector, become immediately due and payable and shall
constitute a lien on the premises to be collected in the same manner as
unpaid taxes.
Chapter 240
FARM, RIGHT TO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping and littering — See Ch. 227.
Farmland and open space preservation — See
Ch. 244.
Land development — See Ch. 330.
Noise — See Ch. 363.
Pesticides — See Ch. 440.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 447.
§ 240-1. Recognition of right to farm.
The pursuit of horticultural, agricultural and animal husbandry are farming
activities which are hereby recognized as a natural right which is entitled to
be protected and entitled to be conducted and/or established as permitted
by the terms of Chapter 330, Land Development, and these pursuits also
include the following activities under the general heading of "Right to
Farm."
§ 240-2. Farming activities.
The right to farm includes:
A. The producing, from the land, agricultural products such as, but not
limited to, vegetables, greens, hay, fruit, fibers, wood, plants, shrubs,
flowers and seeds.
B. The use of land for grazing by animals.
C. The use of irrigation pumps and equipment. A priority water use for
agricultural, second only to human consumption and household needs,
is hereby recognized.
D. The clearing of woodlands to expand production, the alteration of
vegetation and terrain, the installation of physical facilities for soil and
water conservation and the harvesting of timber.
E. The right and ability to market a particular farm's output on site,
including the construction of buildings and parking areas for farm
markets and U-pick marketing and sales.
F. The on-site handling and disposal of organic wastes and materials in
accordance with acceptable management practices and the ability to
§ 231-2 VERNON CODE § 240-2
1:258
§ 240-3. Restrictions imposed by other regulations and agencies.
The foregoing rights are subject to restrictions and regulations of state and
Township health and sanitary codes and, in addition thereto, the restrictions
and regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection and
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
Chapter 244
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 244, Farmland and Open Space Preservation, adopted
8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 00-16, was repealed 9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 21-11.]
Chapter 250
FEES AND ESCROWS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees for outside police services — See Ch. 98,
Art. I.
Payment of delinquent taxes and assessments
prior to issuance of license or permit — See
Ch. 341, Art. I.
replenish soil nutrients as recommended by the New Jersey
Agricultural Experimental Station.
G. The ability to use federally approved products, in accordance with the
labeled instructions, as recommended by the New Jersey Agricultural
Experimental Station, the US Environmental Protection Agency, for the
control of pests and diseases affecting plants and livestock and for the
control of weed infestation and the aerial and ground seeding and
spraying on farms in accordance with generally accepted agricultural
practices.
H. The right and ability to conduct farming activities on holidays, Sundays
and weekdays, in the evening and during the day, notwithstanding the
production thereby of normal noise, dust, odors and fumes that are
caused by such necessary activities when conducted in accordance with
generally accepted agricultural practices.
§ 240-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:259

ARTICLE I
Failure to Make Payments; Resolution of Disputes
[Adopted 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-20]
§ 250-1. No permit, license, approval or application for overdue
fees, escrow funds or cash in lieu of bond.
Whenever there shall be, or shall have been, due and owing to the Township
of Vernon any fees, escrow funds, or cash in lieu of bonding, as provided
by ordinance of the Township of Vernon, or by virtue of any statute or
regulation, respecting any parcel of land and premises within the Township
of Vernon, or the use thereof, no permit, license or approval shall be
granted, nor shall any application be filed or acted upon or hearing held
as to such parcel of land or any portion thereof, until such fees, escrow
funds, or cash in lieu of bond shall have been paid in full. The provisions
of this article shall run with the land and be applicable to the owner of
the premises as of the date such sums shall be due, and to any subsequent
owner or other party having an interest therein.
§ 250-2. Information to be included on tax searches.
Whenever there shall be, or shall have been, due and owing to the Township
of Vernon any fees, escrow funds or cash in lieu of bonding, as provided
by ordinance of the Township of Vernon, or by virtue of any statute or
regulation, respecting any parcel of land and premises within the Township
of Vernon, or the use thereof, the Township Treasurer, or the board or
official to whom such sums are due on behalf of the Township of Vernon,
shall so inform the Tax Collector, who shall cause to be set forth the
information concerning the same on any tax search issued with respect to
the parcel or any portion thereof affected thereby.
§ 250-3. Disputes.
Whenever a dispute shall arise regarding the applicability or amount of any
fee, escrow fund, or cash in lieu of bond claimed to be due by the Township
of Vernon or any board or official thereof, the same shall nevertheless be
paid as required by such board or official, together with a written statement
setting forth the basis of such dispute, and shall be used as directed by
such board or official from and after 30 days after the payment thereof,
unless the party disputing the applicability or amount thereof shall have
commenced an action in the Superior Court of New Jersey to contest the
same. Under such circumstances, no permit, license or approval shall be
granted, nor shall any application be filed or acted upon or hearing held as
to such parcel of land or any portion thereof, until the termination of such
litigation, except as otherwise provided by order of such court.
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-3
1:261

ARTICLE II
Fees and Escrows Enumerated
[Adopted 6-24-2002 by Ord. No. 02-12]
§ 250-4. General fees and escrows.
The fees and escrows of the Township shall be as set forth hereafter.
§ 250-5. Business Administrator. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
§ 250-6. Tax Assessor.
§ 250-7. Tax Collector.
A. COBRA: 2% added to premium.
A. Certified Assessors list: $10.
B. Additional charge for six or more pages (per page): $2.
C. Copy of map-size map: $7. [Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
D. Copy of fourteen-inch by seventeen-inch map: $2. [Added 8-13-2018
by Ord. No. 18-22]
A. Tax search: $10.
B. Accu-search, per sheet: $2.
C. Duplicate or lost tax sale certificate: $100. [Added 7-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-23]
D. Replacement tax sale certificate of redemption: $25. [Added
3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 05-06]
E. Duplicate tax bills. In accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1990,
Chapter 69,44 the Tax Collector of the Township of Vernon shall charge
the following fees for the preparation of duplicate tax bills: [Added
2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
(1) For a first duplicate copy: $5.
(2) For each additional duplicate copy which may be requested in the
same tax year: $25.
F. Fees for copies. [Added 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
(1) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-54 the Tax Collector shall provide
to any party entitled to redeem a certificate pursuant to this section
(N.J.S.A. 54:5-54) two calculations of the amount required for
44.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-64d.
§ 250-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:263
§ 250-8. Fire Bureau. [Amended 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-37]
Fees shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9.
§ 250-9. Receptionists and Township miscellaneous.
redemption within a calendar year at no cost. For each subsequent
calculation requested from the tax collector there shall be a $50.
fee. A request for redemption calculation shall be made in writing
to the Tax Collector.
(2) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1 the Tax Collector may charge
a lienholder of a tax lien $50. for the calculation of the amount due
to redeem the tax lien as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1.
Any request for a redemption calculation shall specify the date to
be used for the calculation, which shall be the date of the notice.
Neither the Tax Collector nor the municipality shall be liable for an
incorrect calculation. The fee paid to the municipality shall not
become part of the lien and shall not be passed on to any party
entitled to redeem pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54.
G. Tax sale notice mailing cost. [Added 11-8-2018 by Ord. No. 18-28]
(1) The Township of Vernon shall establish a fee of $25 per tax sale
notice.
(2) Said fee is hereby authorized and directed to be charged for each
notice of tax sale that is sent in conjunction with the electronic tax
sale.
A. Street maps: $6.
B. Notary service: $2.
C. Receptionist and Township miscellaneous; copies.
A copy or copies of a government record may be purchased by any
person upon payment of the fee prescribed by law or regulation. Except
as otherwise provided by law or regulation, the fee assessed for the
duplication of a government record embodied in the form of printed
matter shall be $0.05 per letter size page or smaller, and $0.07 per
legal size page or larger. A special service charge shall be imposed, in
addition to the actual cost of duplicating the record, with the nature,
format matter, collation, or volume of printed matter is such that it
cannot be produced by ordinary document copying equipment in
ordinary business size or where such record involves an extraordinary
expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the request. The
requester shall have the opportunity to review and object to this special
service charge prior to it being incurred. [Amended 12-16-2011 by
Ord. No. 10-26]
D. Reserved. [Repealed 11-16-10 by Ord. No. 10-26]
§ 250-7 VERNON CODE § 250-9
1:264
§ 250-10. Court Administrator. [Amended in entirety 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-09]
E. Sound recording tapes—Actual cost of materials and supplies.
[Amended 11-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-44]
F. Facsimile:
(1) First page: $5.
(2) Each additional page: $2.
G. Recreation Department fees. [Added 3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 7-12]
(1) Use of athletic fields.
(a) $100 per hour for all users who are not nonprofit users.
[Amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
(b) $75 per hour for nonprofit users except as set forth below.
[Amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
(c) $25 per hour for Vernon nonprofit users.
(d) $25 per hour for Vernon residents.
(2) Lights.
(a) $25 per hour in addition to field use charges for all nonprofit
users and Vernon residents.
(b) $75 per hour in addition to field use charges for all users who
are not nonprofit users or Vernon residents. [Amended
9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
(3) Users seeking nonprofit rates must provide a copy of 501 (c) (3)
status.
(4) Program fees are covered by the advertised program and vary
depending on anticipated or actual expense and the level of
participation. Nonresidents may participate in programs at the cost
of the program fee plus 20%.
(5) Sports groups sanctioned by the Vernon Recreation Department
and Vernon school athletics shall be exempt from field usage and
lighting charges during their sanctioned season as determined by
the Vernon Recreation Department. Activities run by the Township
are exempt.
(6) The field deposit will be $1,000 for all outside groups and
nonprofits. Any damage to the field or cleanup that is necessary,
which the Township has to perform, would be deducted from this
fee and the organization would then have to supplement the
amount deducted. [Added 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
§ 250-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10
1:265
A. Traffic offenses.
(1) Vehicles and traffic.
(a) § 99-7, Parking prohibited at all times: $51.
(b) § 99-8, Parking prohibited during certain hours: $51.
(c) § 99-9, Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours:
$51.
(d) § 99-10, Parking time limited: $51.
(e) § 99-11, Off-street parking: $51.
(f) § 99-12A, Parking prohibited during snow and other
emergencies: $51.
(g) § 99-12E, Parking prohibited upon declaration of emergency:
$51.
B. Nontraffic offenses.
(1) Alarms.
(a) § 137-6, False alarms.
1st offense in any single calendar year: warning.
2nd offense in same calendar year: $50.
3rd or subsequent offense in same calendar year: court
appearance required plus a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $250 for each occurrence which shall be accompanied by
an advisory letter from a licensed alarm company pursuant to
§ 137-11A(3). In the event an advisory letter is not provided,
said fine may be increased up to a maximum of $500 in the
court's discretion.
(2) Animals.
(a) § 148-8A, Dog license required.
1st offense: $50 with proof of license.
2nd offense: $75 with proof of license.
3rd offense: $100 with proof of license.
4th or subsequent offense: court appearance required.
(b) § 148-8B, Procure replacement dog license tag: $50.
(c) § 148-8C, Proof of dog rabies inoculation: $50.
§ 250-10 VERNON CODE § 250-10
1:266
§ 250-11. Police. [Amended 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
(d) § 148-9, Annual license and metal registration tag required:
$50.
(e) § 148-14, Newly acquired dog attaining licensing age: $50.
(f) § 148-17A, Removal or wrongful attachment of dog tag: $50.
(g) § 148-17B, Dog tag to be worn when off the owner's premises:
$50.
(h) § 148-26A, Barking or crying dogs.
1st offense: $50.
2nd offense: $75.
3rd offense: $100.
4th offense or subsequent offense: court appearance required.
(i) § 148-26B, Dog running at large.
1st offense: $50.
2nd offense: $75.
3rd offense: $100.
4th offense or subsequent offense: court appearance required.
(j) § 148-26C. Dog to be accompanied and leashed by person more
than 12 years of age: $50
(k) § 148-28B(1). Rabies vaccination required for all cats: $50
(l) § 148-28B(5). Proof of vaccination required for all cats: $50
(m) § 148-29B. Dog defecation on private property: $50
(n) § 148-29C. Dog defecation on public property: $50
(o) § 148-29D. Dog defecation on owner's property: $50
(p) § 148-29E. Disposal of dog defecation: $50
(q) § 148-30. Damage to property by animals: $50
(r) § 148-31B. Cat off owner's premises: $50
A. The following fees and charges are hereby fixed and established for
certain services extended and materials distributed by the Division of
Police: [Amended 11-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-44]
(1) Search time for audiotape (per hour): $30.
§ 250-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-11
1:267
§ 250-12. Building. [Amended 3-24-2003 by Ord. No. 03-06;
11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-37; 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-33;
10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-34; 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
(2) Copy of audiotape - Actual cost of materials and supplies.
(3) Copy of videotape - Actual cost of materials and supplies.
(4) [Amended 12-16-10 by Ord. No. 10-26]
(a) Except in the case of a request for a motor vehicle accident
report not made in person, the fee assessed for the duplication
of government record embodied in the form of printed matter
shall be $0.05 per letter size page or smaller, and $0.07 per
legal size page or larger.
(b) In the event a citizen of this State requests a copy of a motor
vehicle accident report in any manner other than in person, an
additional fee of up to $5. may be added to cover the
administrative costs of the report in addition to the cost of
copying the report as set forth in subsection (a).
(5) through (9) Reserved. [Repealed 12-16-10 by Ord. No. 10-26]
(10) Photographs photocopied - Actual cost of materials and supplies.
(11) Fingerprints (all noncriminal except firearms): $3 per card.
(12) Firearms identification card: $5.
(13) Pistol purchase permit: $2.
(14) Register house alarm: $10.
(15) Reregister house alarm after disconnection: $50.
(16) Vacant house registration/blue star registration: $1.
B. No search fee shall be charged in the event that a report or photograph
is not on file with the Division of Police.
C. There shall be no charge for any report for which a formal request is
made by any local, county, state or federal law enforcement agency or
by the federal postal authorities.
A. The fee for plan review shall be 25% of the construction permit fee.
B. The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed on
the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the number of plumbing
fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of electrical fixtures and
devices and the number of sprinklers, standpipes and detectors at the
unit rates provided herein plus any special fees.
C. Building subcode.
§ 250-11 VERNON CODE § 250-12
1:268
(1) New construction.
(a) Per cubic foot for all use groups: $0.05.
(b) Per cubic foot for structures on farms, including commercial
farm buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), used exclusively for
the storage of food or grain, or the sheltering of livestock, for
such structures on farms with a minimum fee of $100: $0.015.
[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(2) Renovations, alterations and repairs. Per $1,000 of estimated cost
of work: $33. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(3) Additions. Fee per cubic foot for the added portion shall be
computed on the same basis as for new construction.
(4) Fee for combination renovations and additions shall be computed
as the sum of the fees computed separately in accordance with
Subsection C(2) and (3) above.
(5) 45Minimum: $75.
D. Electric subcode.
(1) Receptacles and fixtures:
(a) First to 25: $60.
(b) Each additional 25: $25.
(2) Motors, electrical devices and motor control center:
(a) One hp up to 10 hp: $30.
(b) 11 hp up to 50 hp: $82. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
(c) Up to 100 hp: $220. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
(d) Larger than above: $660. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
(3) Transformers and generators and Solar photovoltaic systems:
(a) Over one kW up to 45.0 kW: $70.
(b) Up to 112.5 kW: $187. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
(c) Larger than above: $660. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(5), regarding re-shingling or re-siding, was repealed
6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-21. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C(6) as
Subsection C(5).
§ 250-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-12
1:269
(4) Services panels, entrances, and subpanels:
(a) Up to 200 amps: $75.
(b) Up to 1,000 amps: $187. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
(c) Larger than above: $660. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
(5) Private swimming pool, hot tub or fountain shall be a flat fee of
$137 (includes the inspection of Equipotential Bonding Grid).
[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(6) Water heaters R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5: $50. [Added 8-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-2246]
(a) R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, each additional appliance on same permit:
$75.
(7) Minimum: $60.
E. Plumbing subcode.
(1) Per fixture, appliance, condensate, backflow preventer, or stack
connected to the plumbing system and for each appliance
connected to the gas or oil piping system except as indicated in
Subsection (2): $30.
(2) Per special device listed below: $100. [Amended 8-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-22]
(a) Active solar system.
(b) Backflow preventers (equipped with test ports).
(c) Condensate line (commercial).
(d) Interceptors (grease, oil, sand, etc.).
(e) Refrigeration units.
(f) Sewer pump.
(g) Sewer connection.
(h) Water service connection.
(i) Water heater.
(j) Water conditioner.
(k) Swimming pool drains.
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection D(6) as Subsection
D(7).
§ 250-12 VERNON CODE § 250-12
1:270
(l) Hydronic piping.
(m) Underground storm water piping.
(3) Water boilers, stream boiler, water heaters, gas, oil or indirect:
$100. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(a) R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, each additional appliance on same permit:
$75.
(4) Minimum: $60.
(5) Propane tanks. [Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(a) Zero to 500 gallons: $100.
(b) Five hundred one to 2,000 gallons: $200.
F. Fire protection subcode.
(1) Suppression system.
(a) Sprinkler heads. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
[1] One to 6 sprinkler heads: $110.
[2] 7 to 100 sprinkler heads: $192.
[3] 101 to 200 sprinkler heads: $330.
[4] 201 to 400 sprinkler heads: $885.
[5] 401 to 1,000 sprinkler heads: $1,100.
[6] Over 1,000 sprinkler heads: $1,540.
(b) Fire pump: $220.
(c) Alarm valves: $55.
(d) Pre-action valves: $55.
(e) Standpipes: $330.
(2) Alarm system.
(a) One to 12 devices: $70.
(b) Each additional 10 devices: $25.
(3) Gas or oil storage tanks. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
(a) Up to 1,000 gallons: $110.
(b) Over 1,000 gallons: $220.
§ 250-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-12
1:271
(4) Each independent pre-engineered system: $165. [Amended
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(5) Each gas or oil fired appliance not connected to the plumbing
system: $100.
(a) R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, each additional appliance on same permit:
$75. [Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(6) Each commercial kitchen exhaust system: $165. [Amended
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(7) Each incinerator or crematorium: in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20.
(8) Minimum: $70.
G. Elevators or escalators. Each elevator fee shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.
H. Certificates and other permits.
(1) Certificate of occupancy.
(a) The fee for R-3, R-4 and R-5, U and commercial farm structures
shall be 10% of the new construction permit fee with a
minimum of $40.
(b) All other structures shall be 10% of the new construction
permit fee with a minimum of $100. [Amended 8-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-22]
(c) Change of use: $150.
(d) Continued certificate of occupancy: $200. [Amended
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(e) Letter stating that no certificate of continued occupancy is
required: $20.
(f) The fee for the first issuance and the renewal of a temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be $45.
[1] Exceptions:
[a] There shall be no fee for the first issuance of the
temporary certificate of occupancy if occupancy fee
was paid at the time.
[b] Where a written request for a temporary certificate of
occupancy is made for reasons other than
uncompleted work covered by the permit (i.e., prior
approval), no renewal fee shall be charged.
(2) Other permits.
§ 250-12 VERNON CODE § 250-12
1:272
(a) Demolition or removal permit.
[1] Each building or structure: $150.
[2] R-3, R-4 and R-5 less than 5,000 square feet: $100.
[3] Oil tank demolition Class III residential structures: $75.
(b) Swimming pool.
[1] All R-3, R-4 and R-5 aboveground pools: $150. [Amended
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
[2] All R-3, R-4 and R-5 in-ground pools: $200. [Amended
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
[3] All other use groups: $350.
(c) Sign permit.
[1] Fees for pylon signs shall be $5.00 per square foot for the
first 100 square feet, $3.75 per square foot for the next
400 square feet and $2.50 per square foot thereafter;
[2] Fees for ground signs or wall signs shall be $3.00 per
square foot for the first 100 square feet, $2.50 per square
foot for the next 400 square feet and $1.25 per square foot
thereafter;
[3] The minimum fee shall be $ 75.
(d) Fence (over six feet in height): $50.
(e) Tents in excess of 16,800 square feet or more than 140 feet in
any direction: $300.
(f) Asbestos abatement in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-8.9.
(g) Lead hazard abatement in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20.
(h) Retaining walls.
[1] 550 square feet or less associated with a Class III
residential structure: $200.
[2] 551 square feet and over associated with a Class III
residential structure: $300.
[3] Other than Class III residential structures shall be based
on cost of construction.
(i) Reinstatement of lapsed permit per open subcode of original
permit: $50.
(j) Change of contractor fee per subcode: $25.
§ 250-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-12
1:273
(k) Installation of Park Model Trailers, flat fee: $200.
I. Application for variation.
(1) Class II and III structure: $150; resubmission: $65.
(2) Class I structure: $700; resubmission: $250.
J. Periodic inspections. Fees for periodic reinspection of equipment and
facilities granted a certificate of compliance for a specified duration as
required by N.J.A.C. 5:23 and shall be:
(1) Yearly public pool bonding inspection and certificate: $75.
(2) Yearly testing of backflow preventers, equipped with test ports:
$60.
K. Mechanical inspections (replacement).
(1) Fees for replacement or new installation of:
(a) Wood or gas-fired stove or fireplace, water heater, boiler,
furnace, air-conditioning unit, pool heater, oil and propane
tanks, oil or gas lines in existing R-3, R-4 and R-5 structures
shall be $100.
(b) For each additional appliance on same permit: $75.
(No additional fee for gas, fuel oil, or water piping connection
to appliance.)
(c) Water heaters. [Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
[1] Electric: $50.
[2] Gas, oil and indirect: $100.
(d) Propane tanks. [Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
[1] Zero to 500 gallons: $100.
[2] Five hundred one to 2,000 gallons: $200.
L. There shall be a fee of $50 per hour for review of any amendment or
change to a plan that has already been released. (rounded up to the
hour)
M. Hourly charges and fees for development-wide inspections of homes
after issuance of a certificate of occupancy to ascertain whether a
violation exists or to verify that any work performed has abated the
violation, shall be the twice the hourly cost of operations as certified by
the Chief Financial Officer using a formula of total expenditures plus
12% for indirect costs divided by employees weekly hours, as per
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.17(d).
§ 250-12 VERNON CODE § 250-12
1:274
§ 250-13. Department of Public Works.
N. Annual permits. Fees shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20.
O. Township surcharge for inspections done by private on-site agency:
15%.
P. DCA training fee. Fees shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19.
Q. All fees can be rounded off to the nearest dollar.
A. Driveway.
(1) New opening: $100.
(a) Each inspection after failure: $25.
(2) Reconstruction: $50. [Amended 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
(a) Each inspection after failure: $25.
B. Roadway excavation (requires a bond of $2,500 for restoration).
(1) Bituminous concrete per square foot: $10.
(2) Concrete per square foot: $12.
(3) Bituminous concrete over concrete per square foot: $10.
(4) Brick pavers per square foot: $6.
C. Public utility.
(1) Fifty square feet or less: $25.
(2) Fifty-one to 300 square feet: $50.
(3) Three hundred one to 600 square feet: $100.
(4) Six hundred one square feet and over: $200.
D. Bulky waste cleanup. [Added 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-11]
(1) Vernon Township residential vehicle load: $20.
E. Shredding of residential documents. [Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No.
13-18]
(1) Vernon Township residential documents: $5.00 per grocery paper
bag full or grocery plastic bag full.
F. Freon disposal fee.
A $10. fee shall be charged for each appliance item requiring the
removal of Freon prior to disposal including refrigerators, freezers,
air conditioners and dehumidifiers. [Added 3-28-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-05]
§ 250-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-14
1:275
§ 250-14. Environmental and Public Health. [Amended 9-8-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-31; 8-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-23; 3-26-2007 by Ord. No.
07-15; 2-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-05]
A. Foods.
(1) Annual fee for license due before February 1 of each year:
(a) 5,000 — 10,000 square feet: $300.
(b) 2,000 — 5,000 square feet: $150.
(c) 0 — 2,000 square feet: $100.
(2) Prepackaged foods: $50.
(3) Mobile food and beverage license: $30.
(4) Temporary (less than one week): $20.
(5) School cafeteria: $30.
B. Sewage disposal system.
(1) New application: $265.
(2) Alteration application fee: $120.
(3) Repair application fee: $100.
(4) Issuance of permit: no fee.
(5) Renewals, new (per year): $125.
(6) Renewals, alteration and repairs (per year): $60.
(7) Revisions, new: $60.
(8) Revisions, alteration: $35.
(9) Revisions, repairs: $10.
(10) Reinspection fee: no fee.
C. Soil logs, per lot.
(1) New: $125.
(2) Alteration: $85.
D. Wells.
(1) New: $170.
(2) Alteration: $100.
E. Public non-community and nonpublic water systems. [Added
2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
§ 250-14 VERNON CODE § 250-14
1:276
§ 250-15. Animal control. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 08-23;
Amended 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-21]
(1) Monitoring well: $25.
(2) Geothermal well: $75.
(3) Issuance of permit: no fee.
(4) Permit renewal: $25.
F. Campground annual fee.
(1) Under 50 sites: $100.
(2) Fifty-one to 100 sites: $200.
(3) One hundred one sites and above: $1.25 per site plus $250.
G. Commercial pools, commercial hot tubs and bathing beaches, annual
licensing due June 30 of each year.
(1) Pools: $160.
(2) Wading pools: $35.
(3) Hot tubs: $110.
(4) Private lake communities: no fee.
H. Body art facility license: $200. [Added 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
A. Dog license, local $12.80.
B. Dog license, state $1.20.
C. Nonneutered or spayed, state fee: $3.
D. After March 1 additional late fee required for issuance of dog license:
$5.
E. Dog adoption: $30.
F. Cat adoption: $10.
G. Euthanasia:
(1) Dog: $25.
(2) Cat: $15.
H. Disposal of remains:
(1) Dog: $25.
(2) Cat: $15.
§ 250-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-15
1:277
§ 250-16. Zoning and land use.
I. Pickup/redemption:
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $35.
(3) Third offense: $45.
(4) Maintenance: $4. per day
(5) Overnight Stays: $4. per day
J. Kennel license. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
(1) 10 or fewer dogs: $10.
(2) More than 10 dogs: $25.
K. (Reserved)47
L. Pet shop, initial: $10.
M. (Reserved)48
N. Kennel or pet shop construction plans review: $150.
O. Animal shelter or pound, annual license: no fee.
P. Surrender Fee:
(1) Dog: $50.
(2) Cat: $20.
Q. Potentially dangerous dog license: $700. [Added 1-22-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-02]
A. Land development. [Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-02]
47.Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, Kennel license, annual renewal, was repealed
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22.
48.Editor's Note: Former Subsection M, Pet shop, annual renewal, was repealed 8-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-22.
§ 250-15 VERNON CODE § 250-16
1:278
Type of Application Application fee Escrow Fee
All $50 geographic
information system
(GIS)
—
Major site plan,
preliminary and final
(All zones except AET,
P and C)
$500 plus $50 per
acre or fraction
thereof plus $0.15 per
square foot of
impervious coverage
of the footprint of
building plus the
impervious coverage
of accessory
structures and
amenities
Same as application
fee
Major site plan,
preliminary and final
(AET, P and C zones)
$1,000 plus $0.15 per
square foot of
impervious coverage
of the footprint of
building plus the
impervious coverage
of accessory
structures and
amenities
Same as application
fee
Minor site plan (all
zones)
$350 $1,200
Minor subdivision - all
zones (up to 3 lots
including remainder)
$350 $1,500
Preliminary major
subdivision (all zones)
$350 plus $25 per lot $1,500 plus $500 per
lot
Final major
subdivision (all zones)
$350 plus $25 per lot $750 plus $250 per lot
Technical major
subdivision (all zones)
$350 plus $25 per lot $1,500 plus $250 per
lot
Concept plan 50% of regular
application fee
$500
Resubmission fee $75
B. Variance applications. [Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-02]
§ 250-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-16
1:279
Type of Application Application fee Escrow Fee
Zoning appeal;
40:55D-70a
$110 $1,200
Zoning interpretation
40:55D-70b
$350 $600
Bulk variance,
residential zones
40:55D-70c, deck,
shed, pool, steps
$100 $1,100
Bulk variance,
residential zones
40:55D-70c, addition
$200 $1,100
Bulk variance,
residential zones
40:55D-70c, new
home
$300 $1,100
Variance, residential
zones 40:55D-70c, all
other 'C' variances
$200 $1,100
Bulk variance, all
other zones
40:55D-70c
$220 $1,100
Use variance,
residential zones
40:55D-70d
$350 $1,200
Use variance, all
other zones
40:55D-70d
$700 $1,200
Miscellaneous
variances; 40:55D-34,
35 or 36 residential
zones
$350 $1,200
Miscellaneous
variances; 40:55D-34,
35 or 36 all other
zones
$660 $1,200
C. Special meeting: $1,000. [Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-02]
D. Zoning permit: $25.
E. Release of bond: $25.
F. Certificate of nonconformance (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68): $50.
G. Land Use Ordinance (copy): $50 plus postage.
§ 250-16 VERNON CODE § 250-16
1:280
H. Master plan (copy): $50 plus postage.
I. Zoning Map and Tax Map, 11 by 17: $2.
J. All other size maps and plans: $7.
K. Concept plans. If the application for development is filed within six
months of the concept plan, full credit for the concept fees will be
applied. After six months, the full application and escrow fees apply.
L. Amended plans. If filed within six months of the application for
development: 1/2 of the application and escrow fees. After six months,
full application and escrow fees apply.
M. Lot development plan review. Vernon Township shall provide for soil
erosion inspections and enforcement, which as previously handled by
Sussex County Soil Conservation Office. The fee for such services shall
be $250, which shall be added to the current fee of $450 for a total of
$700. This fee shall apply to new single-family residential development
only. [Added 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-13; amended 3-11-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-08]
N. Soil removal. [Added 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
(1) Upon application for a permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
483, Soil Removal, the applicant shall pay a fee to cover the costs of
the initial review of the proposed soil removal operation in the
amounts as follows:
(a) Where the permit applied for is for the removal of less than
2,000 cubic yards during the first year: the sum of $600.
(b) Where the permit applied for is for the removal of more than
2,000 cubic yards during the first year: the sum of $900.
(c) In addition to the application fees provided herein, the
applicant shall pay a review fee escrow deposit in an amount
equal to 1/2 of the application fee, to be used to pay actual
expenses of the Township for review of the application by the
Planning Board's attorney, engineer and planner.
(2) Annual permit fees. Rate per cubic yard of soil removal: $0.15.
O. Soil fill placement. [Added 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-15]
(1) Minor soil fill permit (100 to 500 cubic yards).
(a) Fee: $100.
(b) Escrow: $500.
(2) Major soil fill permit (500 cubic yards or greater): [Amended
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-23]
(a) Fee: $500.
§ 250-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-16
1:281
§ 250-17. Township Clerk. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-37;
3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-11; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17]
(b) Escrow: $2,000.
A. Alarm Registration: $10.
B. Raffle and bingo licenses: $10 to the municipality for every $20
collected on behalf of the state (Raffle and bingo license applications
are liable for the fees payable to the Legalized Games of Chance
Control Commission, N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.1 et seq.). [Amended 1-22-2018
by Ord. No. 18-02]
C. Peddlers License: $125. plus an additional $50. for each vehicle used in
connection therewith. (See Chapter 428, Peddling and Soliciting, for
license fees for solicitors and canvassers.)
D. Taxi or limousine license: $35. [Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord. No.
18-02]
E. Assessment search: $10.
F. Alcohol Beverage Licenses: [Amended 7-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-13;
8-27-2012 by Ord. No. 12-14]
(1) Plenary retail consumption:
Effective January 1, 2010 $712.80
Effective January 1, 2011 $855.36
Effective January 1, 2012 $1,026.43
(2) Club license: $188.00
(3) Plenary retail distribution: [Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord. No.
18-03]
Effective January 1, 2010 $296.40
Effective January 1, 2011 $355.68
Effective January 1, 2012 $426.81
Effective May 1, 2018 $512.17
Effective May 1, 2019 $614.60
Effective May 1, 2020 $737.52
Effective May 1, 2021 $885.02
Effective May 1, 2022 $1,026.43
(4) Limited retail distribution: $ 63.00
(5) Hotel/motel: [Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-03]
§ 250-16 VERNON CODE § 250-17
1:282
Effective January 1, 2010 $594.00
Effective January 1, 2011 $712.80
Effective January 1, 2012 $855.36
Effective May 1, 2018 $1,026.43
G. Public assembly license: $1,000. per day.
H. Marriage and Civil Union Fees, Reimbursements and Procedures.
(1) A person who is married or joined in a civil union by an authorized
official of the Township, as established by N.J.S.A. 37:1-13 et seq.,
shall pay a fee according to the following schedule. An
administrative fee of $25. shall be paid in addition to the fee. All
fees shall be paid to the Township of Vernon prior to the ceremony
and shall be deposited in the current fund of the Township.
(a) Ceremonies Performed in Vernon: $75.
(b) Ceremonies Performed outside of Vernon: $100.
(2) Fees for service may be reimbursed to the authorized official
through the appropriate budget line item and with authorization as
established herein and according to law. Alternatively, at the
election of the Township, fees for service may be disbursed to the
authorized official as additional salary and as referenced in the
salary ordinance authorizing the payment of salary to the
authorized official.
(3) The authorized official shall not be reimbursed for any fees,
expenses or expenditures in connection with the performance of a
wedding or civil union ceremony unless such expenditures are
approved in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph H.
(4) The Township shall reimburse only those expenses which are
determined by the Township to be reasonable and related to the
officiating of the wedding or civil union ceremony. Such expenses
shall include auto expenses, limited to the mileage to and from the
ceremony and to be reimbursed at the rate then currently
established by the Internal Revenue Service regulations or
Township policy, at the election of the Township, if the authorized
official uses a personal vehicle to attend the ceremony. The
Township shall not reimburse expenses or expenditures on behalf
of or as a result of any spouse, child, guest or other person
attending with the authorized official.
(5) The authorized official shall submit and have approved a
requisition form or voucher, with supporting receipts, to be
provided by the Township and as required by the Mayor or Chief
Financial Officer, setting forth the fees (if not paid pursuant to the
salary alternative), expenses and expenditures to be reimbursed by
§ 250-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-17
1:283
§ 250-18. Geographic Information System. [Added 1-27-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-02; amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-13]
The Township of Vernon hereby establishes the following fees for the
purpose of instituting a Geographic Information System (GIS), which shall
provide parcel-based mapping, locational data, information resources, and
property information for use by the Township and the general public:
§ 250-19. Road vacation application form. [Added 4-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-11]
The Township of Vernon hereby establishes a fee of $350 for the review of a
road vacation application form.
§ 250-20. Returned checks. [Added 1-26-2004 by Ord. No. 04-06;
amended 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
The Township of Vernon hereby establishes a return check fee in the amount
of $20. If an entity presents more than two returned checks to the Township,
all future payments must be made by cashier's check or money order.
§ 250-21. Reoccupancy review and inspection; violations and
penalties. [Added 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13; amended 5-23-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-12]
the Township associated with the performance of a wedding or civil
union ceremony. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
A. At the time of application for a septic permit: $10.
B. At the time of issuance of a zoning permit: $25.
C. At the time of application for a variance, site plan and subdivision: $50.
A. A fee of $25 per application is hereby established for the purpose of
reoccupancy checklist review and inspection by Township personnel for
all real property reoccupancy transactions in the Township of Vernon by
sale, lease or otherwise. Said review and inspection shall include
consistency of structure with Tax Assessor records and a review of
Building Department records. Commercial premises shall comply
within 30 days of reoccupancy for the purpose of registering new
businesses with the Vernon Police Department and Fire Prevention
Office.
B. An additional fee in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(d) shall be
collected for the purpose of inspecting single- and two-family
residential structures for smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
compliance prior to reoccupancy as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3(a).
§ 250-17 VERNON CODE § 250-21
1:284
C. A penalty of $100 is hereby established for all premises other than oneand
two-family residential homes that fail to comply with this section.
Said penalty shall be levied upon discovery of the violation.
§ 250-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-21
1:285

ARTICLE III
Escrow for Professional Fees
[Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
§ 250-22. Escrow deposits.
In addition to the initial fees or charges as elsewhere set forth, the
municipal agency shall require escrow deposits in accordance with the
Administrative Code of the Township. The Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
shall make all of the payments to professionals for services rendered to the
Township or approving authority for review of applications for development,
review and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other
purposes under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The application
review and inspection charges shall be limited only to professional charges
for review of applications for development, review and preparation of
documents and for inspection of improvements for developments under
construction and for review by outside consultants when an application is
of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the professionals of the
Township. The only cost to be added to any such charge shall be actual outof-
pocket expenses of such professionals or consultants, including typical
and normal expenses incurred in processing applications and inspecting
improvements. No applicant shall be charged for any municipal, clerical
or administrative functions, overhead expenses, meeting room charges or
any of the municipal costs and expenses except as specifically provided
by statute, nor shall any municipal professional add such charge to the
bill. Charges for professionals employed by the Township shall be billed
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
§ 250-23. Scope of reimbursed services.
The Township shall be entitled to reimbursement for the review of
applications, both as to completeness and content; for review and
preparation of documents; for review of compliance with approval
conditions; for correspondence relating to the foregoing; and for other
related purposes.
§ 250-24. Deposit of escrow funds; refunds.
Deposits in excess of $5,000 shall be held by the CFO in a special interestbearing
account. Upon receipt of and approval of authorized bills, the CFO
may pay same from the account. The Township shall not be required to
refund interest which does not exceed $100 for the year. If the interest
exceeds $100, the entire amount of interest shall be refunded annually to
the applicant or applied for the purposes of the escrow. The Township may
retain one-third of the interest for administrative and custodial expenses.
All sums not actually expended shall be returned within 90 days after
the final action of the municipal agency or the Township relating to an
application or approval upon certification of the Board Secretary that the
application and all contingencies are complete.
§ 250-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-25
1:287
§ 250-25. Payments.
§ 250-26. Payments before permits.
No permits or certificates of occupancy may be issued with respect to any
approved application until all bills for reimbursable services have been
received by the Township from professionals rendering services in
connection with the application and payment has been made.
§ 250-27. Close-out procedures.
§ 250-28. Scope of charges.
All professional charges for review of an application for development,
review and preparation of documents and/or inspection of improvements
A. Each payment charged to the escrow shall be pursuant to a voucher
from the professional or consultant, which voucher shall identify the
personnel performing the service, the date services were performed,
the hours spent in one-quarter-hour increments, the hourly rate and the
expenses incurred. Each payment for services by a Township-employed
professional shall be accompanied by a statement containing the above
information. Vouchers and statements shall be submitted to the CFO on
a monthly basis in accordance with the procedures of the CFO. A copy
of each voucher or statement shall be provided to the applicant and the
municipal agency.
B. The CFO shall prepare and send a statement to the applicant which
shall include an accounting of escrow funds with cumulative balance on
a quarterly basis if monthly charges are $1,000 or less and on a monthly
basis if the charges are more. If the escrow is insufficient to pay
authorized payments, the CFO shall notify the applicant of the
insufficient escrow balance. In order for work to continue, the applicant
shall replenish the escrow within a reasonable time. Required health
and safety inspections may be completed in such cases and shall be
charged back against replenished funds.
A. Close-out procedures shall comply with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and
shall commence after the grant of final approval and the execution of a
subdivision plat or site plan, if applicable, or after review and approval
of improvements, if applicable, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
B. The applicant shall send written notice to the CFO by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and to the approving authority and the
relevant professional or consultant that the application or
improvements, as applicable, are complete. The professional shall
provide a final bill to the CFO and the applicant within 30 days of
receipt of notice. The CFO shall provide a written final accounting to
the applicant of the escrow account use within 45 days of receipt of the
final bill. Any balances remaining in the escrow account including
interest in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1 shall be refunded.
§ 250-25 VERNON CODE § 250-28
1:288
shall be reasonable and necessary, given the status and progress of the
application pending or the improvement being constructed. Review charges
shall only be charged with respect to a pending application, request by
an applicant for modification or amendment or review of approval or
improvements and/or conditions of approval. A professional shall not charge
for review of items which are subject to approval by any state agency and
not under Township jurisdiction except to the extent necessary to consult
with the state.
§ 250-29. Limitations on inspection fees.
Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on the
approved plan, amendment or modification or for inspection of
improvements and/or conditions of approval. Inspections must be
reasonable and necessary to check progress and quality of work.
§ 250-30. Substitution of professionals.
The Township shall be responsible for the payment of fees to any substituted
professional necessary to familiarize the substitute with the application,
improvements or conditions of approval. The escrow shall not be billed for
such time and fees.
§ 250-31. Estimate of cost of improvements.
The cost of the installation of improvements for N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall
be estimated by the Township Engineer based on documented construction
costs for public improvements prevailing in the general area of the
Township. The developer may appeal the estimate to the County
Construction Board of Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127.
§ 250-32. Appeals.
A. An applicant shall notify the Township Council, the CFO, the approving
authority and the professional, in writing, of any dispute of professional
charges under this section. The Township Council or designee shall
attempt to remediate any dispute within a reasonable time. If the
applicant is not satisfied, appeal may be taken to the County
Construction Board of Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127. Such
an appeal shall be on notice to the Township Council, the CFO, the
approving authority and the professional, in writing, and the applicant
shall comply with the rules, regulations and requirements of the County
Construction Board of Appeals. Appeal shall be filed within 45 days of
receipt of the copy of the professional's voucher by the applicant except
in such case where the professional has not supplied the voucher. In
such cases, the appeal shall be filed within 60 days of receipt of the
Township statement of activity in the escrow account. An applicant may
file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges for a period not to exceed
6 months to demonstrate a pattern of excessive or inaccurate charges
§ 250-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-32
1:289
by one professional. An applicant need not appeal each and every
charge individually in such case.
B. During the pendency of an appeal, the Township or approving authority
shall continue to process the application or inspections in the normal
course without delay. The CFO may pay charges from escrow for which
an appeal has been filed. If a charge is disallowed, the CFO shall
reimburse the escrow account. If payment of a disallowed charge has
been made to a professional, the professional shall reimburse the
Township.
§ 250-32 VERNON CODE § 250-32
1:290
ARTICLE IV
Waiver of Township Fees for Local Volunteer Ambulance Squads and
Local Volunteer Fire Departments
[Adopted 12-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-26]
§ 250-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit a waiver of any fees created and
imposed by the Township of Vernon for local volunteer ambulance squads
and local volunteer fire departments.
§ 250-34. Definitions.
LOCAL VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE SQUAD — Any duly incorporated
volunteer ambulance or rescue squad located within Vernon Township, New
Jersey, which provides service generally throughout the Township.
LOCAL VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT — Any duly incorporated
volunteer fire department or volunteer fire company located with Vernon
Township, New Jersey, which provides service generally throughout the
Township.
TOWNSHIP FEES — Any administrative charge associated with any
permitting process or licensing requirement, which charge is created and
imposed solely by the Township of Vernon. Fees shall not mean: (1) an
administrative charge created and imposed by any governmental authority
other than the Township of Vernon, regardless of whether such
administrative charges are collected by the Township; (2) an administrative
charge required to be created and imposed by the Township pursuant
to a federal, state or county law, rule or regulation; or (3) actual costs
associated with any permitting process or licensing requirement, exclusive
of administrative charges.
§ 250-35. Exemption from fees.
The Township may by resolution exempt any local volunteer ambulance
squad and/or any local volunteer fire department from the payment of any
Township fees.
§ 250-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-35
1:291
Chapter 258
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 258-1. Payment of fire insurance proceeds.
No insurance company shall pay any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire
damage on any real property located within the Township of Vernon
pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption
of this chapter and after its filing with the State Commissioner of Insurance,
except as follows:
§ 258-2. Request for official certificate of search.
Any request for an official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant
to this chapter shall specify that the search concerns fire-damaged property.
§ 258-3. Priority of municipal claim. [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-24]
The Township's claim made in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the
fire insurance policy, except as provided in N.J.S.A. 17:36-12, as it may be
amended from time to time.
§ 258-4. Appeals. [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-24]
In the event that an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge,
other than an appeal based upon the assessed valuation of real property
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall comply with the
procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 17:36-10 as it may be amended from time to
time.
A. The insured individual or entity submits an official certificate of search
for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens or charges, levied and assessed
and due and payable against said property have been paid; and
B. The insured person or entity has submitted a certification
acknowledged by a notary public commissioned in the State of New
Jersey that all demolition costs have been paid or that demolition is not
required; or
C. The Township provides the insurer with a certified resolution pursuant
to which the Township has entered into an agreement with the owner of
the fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 for the redemption of any tax sale lien by installment
payments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-65 et seq., or the payment by
installment of any anticipated costs of demolition.
§ 250-35 VERNON CODE § 258-4
1:292
Chapter 263
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned property and unfit
buildings — See Ch. 130.
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
Fire Department — See Ch. 52.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 258.
Fire safety — See Ch. 269.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 447.
Public assemblies — See Ch. 153.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 205.
§ 258-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-4
1:293

ARTICLE I
Enforcement of Fire Prevention Code of the Code of the Township of
Vernon
§ 263-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section II of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c.383) the
International Fire Code New Jersey Edition shall be locally enforced in the
Township of Vernon.
§ 263-2. Agency designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Vernon Township Department of
Fire Prevention.
§ 263-3. Duties.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Township of Vernon,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, used exclusively
for dwelling purposes and building structures, and premises owned by the
federal government, interstate agencies or the state, and shall faithfully
comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the
International Fire Code, New Jersey Edition.
§ 263-4. Life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by Section 263-2 shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 263-5. Organization.
The local enforcing agency established by Section 263-2 shall be under the
direct supervision of the Fire Marshal, who shall report to the Township
Mayor/Business Administrator.
§ 263-6. Appointments, term of office, or removal.
A. Appointment and qualifications of the Fire Marshal. The local enforcing
agency shall be under the direct supervision of a Fire Marshal.
(1) Certified Fire Official/Fire Inspector with the State of New Jersey,
Division of Fire Safety.
(2) Current Fire Fighter 2, ICS Level 3, NIMS Certifications with the
State of New Jersey, Division of Fire Safety.
(3) Minimum of 5 years experience as a certified Fire Inspector/Fire
Official, further education may substitute for years of experience in
this paragraph.
§ 263-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-6
1:295
§ 263-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Section 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Sussex County.
§ 263-8. Establishment and duties of Department of Fire
Prevention.
B. Term of office. The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council and serve for the term of the
Mayor. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. Inspectors and employees. Fire inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the
Mayor. Inspectors shall be appointed for a period of one year. All life
hazard use inspectors will be certified by the state.
D. Removal from office. The Fire Marshal, fire inspectors and other
employees of the enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by the
Mayor; pursuant to State of New Jersey Statutes.
E. Appointment of legal counsel. The governing body shall be responsible
for legal counsel to assist the agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire
Code.
A. The New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced by the Department
of Fire Prevention which shall be operated under the supervision of the
Fire Marshal.
B. The Department of Fire Prevention shall consist of the following:
(1) The Fire Marshal who shall be in charge of Department of Fire
Prevention.
(2) A maximum of 5 fire inspectors.
(3) One part-time clerical staff.
The above officials shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council, as per their appropriate terms. Any
vacancy in the above positions shall be filled for the unexpired
term.
C. The duties of the Department of Fire Prevention shall consist of:
(1) Enforcing the International Fire Code New Jersey Edition.
(2) Making any and all inspections as required by law or deemed
necessary.
(3) Making accurate reports of any and all inspections and activities of
the Department of Fire Prevention.
§ 263-6 VERNON CODE § 263-8
1:296
§ 263-9. Duties of the Fire Marshal of the Department of Fire
Prevention.
(4) Making recommendations to the appropriate Township officials in
furtherance of enforcing or amending the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code.
(5) Performing any additional duty which the Mayor and Common
Council may assign.
(6) Conduct the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
(7) Make a quarterly report of the Department of Fire Prevention and
transmit to the Mayor.
(8) Investigate any/all calls of alarm or fire within the Township of
Vernon.
(9) Make an annual report of the Department of Fire Prevention and
transmit to the Mayor. It shall contain all proceedings under the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, with such statistics as the
Department may wish to include therein. The report is to be
transmitted no later than the fourth Monday of January in the next
succeeding years following the year for which the report is made.
A. The duties of the Fire Marshal of the Department of Fire Prevention
shall consist of the following:
(1) Designating regularly scheduled hours for routine fire inspections.
(2) Convening and presiding over meetings of the Department of Fire
Prevention.
(3) Promulgating and administering a budget for the Department of
Fire Prevention.
(4) Formulating and implementing a schedule of routine inspections
and reinspections as shall be required.
(5) Maintaining accurate records of the inspection reports and
activities of the Department of Fire Prevention.
(6) Performing any additional duty which the Mayor may assign
pursuant to this chapter.
(7) Formulating and implementing a schedule of inspection and
implementing a system that will effectively enforce the provisions
of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
(8) Perform fire prevention education within the Township of Vernon
Community.
§ 263-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-9
1:297
§ 263-10. Non-life hazard inspection required.
Before a certificate is issued, the Fire Marshal or the Fire Marshal's
designated representative, shall make or cause to be made an inspection
to assure that the buildings, premises, structures, or uses comply with the
provisions of the Fire Code. These shall be a two-year inspection cycle.
§ 263-11. Life hazard annual inspection required.
Before a certificate is issued, the Fire Marshal or the Fire Marshal's
designated representative, shall make or cause to be made an inspection
to assure that the buildings, premises, structures, or uses comply with the
provisions of the Fire Code.
§ 263-12. Change of use permits.
A permit shall constitute permission to occupy and use such buildings,
premises, structures or, uses. Such permission shall not be construed as
authority to violate, cancel, or set aside any of the provisions of the Fire
Code. Said permit shall remain in effect until revoked or one year, unless
otherwise specified. Permits are not transferable and any change in use,
operation or tenancy shall require a new permit.
§ 263-13. Revocation of permit.
The Fire Marshal may revoke the permit issued hereunder if upon
inspection any violation of the Fire Code exists or conditions of a permit
have been violated.
§ 263-14. Fee required.
A certificate or permit shall not be issued until the designated fees have
been paid. The owners and/or occupiers of all properties and businesses
subject to this article shall be responsible for the payment of the certificate/
permit fees.
§ 263-15. Amount of fee.
(9) Respond to calls of alarm within the Township of Vernon and assist
the chief officers with incident command and/or interior fire
attacks/investigations.
(10) Coordination of fire pre-plans with the Vernon Township Fire
Chiefs.
(11) Perform all the duties of Fire Marshal as set forth in N.J.S.A.
5:70-3.3.
A. The fee schedule for registrations for non-life hazard use inspections
shall be an annual registration fee of:
(1) $50.00 for 1 sq. ft. to 4,500 sq. ft.
§ 263-9 VERNON CODE § 263-15
1:298
§ 263-16. Inspections and application for permit.
Application for a permit required by this chapter shall be made in such form
and detail as the Fire Marshal shall require. Fee schedule shall be given to
the applicant at time of application depending on type of permit required.
The fee schedule shall be as follows:
Type 1 Permit: $ 42.00
Type 2 Permit: $166.00
Type 3 Permit: $ 331.00
Type 4 Permit: $ 497.00
§ 263-17. Unlawful to fail to obtain a permit.
It shall be unlawful to fail to obtain the permit or pay the inspection fees
required by this chapter. This shall also and/or constitute the issuance of
penalties set forth by the Fire Marshal.
§ 263-18. Penalties for violations.
The violation of any provision of Sections 263-10 through 263-17 shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail
for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day any violation of this ordinance
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense and be punishable as
such.
(2) $75.00 for 4,501 sq. ft. to 8,500 sq. ft.
(3) $100.00 for 8,501 sq. ft. to 11,999 sq. ft.
B. All life hazard use, permits, non-life hazard use, and smoke and CO
inspection fees collected as per N.J.A.C 5:71-2.6(d) shall be
appropriated to the local enforcing agency for the enforcement of the
Code and yearly operations of the Department of Fire Prevention.
C. Fire lane fees.
(1) Penalty for noncompliance with Section 263-23 parking in a fire
lane: $50.00
(2) Be it further ordained that this chapter shall take effect after
adoption and publication according to law.
(3) All fines shall be made payable to: Vernon Township Department of
Fire Prevention or designated agency writing said summons.
The fee for permits and inspections of life hazard uses shall be as
set forth in Uniform Safety Act.
§ 263-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-18
1:299

ARTICLE II
Smoke Detectors
§ 263-19. Existing structures.
No owner of an existing single-family, two-family or multifamily dwelling,
on or after the effective date of this article, shall sell a single-family, twofamily
or multifamily dwelling or any residential unit contained therein,
unless and until one or more smoke detectors (or other approved fire alarm
system) is installed for each dwelling unit being so sold in accordance with
all the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code and the
Uniform Fire Code.
§ 263-20. Enforcement.
A. The Fire Marshal of the Township of Vernon, or in his absence or
unavailability, an inspector of the Department, shall be responsible for
the enforcement of the requirements of this ordinance. Said Fire
Marshal or fire inspector, as the case may be, shall inspect and approve
all smoke detectors and other fire alarm systems installed in
accordance with the provisions of this article and the New Jersey
Construction Code and Uniform Fire Code, including the approval of
the location or locations selected for such installation.
B. In order to inform prospective purchasers of residential properties
within the Township of Vernon that no residential dwelling unit may be
sold without first installing (a) smoke detector(s) or such other
approved fire alarm system in accordance with the requirements of this
article and the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code and Uniform
Fire Code, each and every tax search issued by the Township of Vernon
shall contain a statement calling attention to the requirements of this
article and shall include a certification for the seller to execute and
deliver to the purchaser at the closing of title, attesting to compliance
with the provisions of this article. Such certification form shall be
forwarded with each tax search ordered.
(1) The fee to be paid to the Vernon Township Department of Fire
Prevention for the initial or reinspection and certificate of approval
shall be $45 prior to 15 days of closing. $75 14 days to 5 days prior
to closing and $125 4 days or less to closing. There will be a $500
noncompliance penalty issued to anyone not applying for or getting
said certification with sale of house.
C. Whenever a smoke detector or other approved fire alarm system is
required to be installed by this article, such requirement shall not be
considered to have been complied with unless such smoke detector(s)
or other type of fire alarm system is installed in accordance with all the
technical requirements and specifications of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code (and the Building Code and Uniformed Fire Code
adopted therein by reference) and has been inspected and approved by
§ 263-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-20
1:301
§ 263-21. False alarms.
the Fire Marshal (or in his absence or unavailability, by the
Construction Official).
D. The owner(s) of the real estate upon which the structure in question is
located shall be the party responsible for installation of smoke
detectors or other fire alarm system in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
E. Any owner of the property upon which is constructed or located a
structure required to have installed therein a fire detector or other fire
alarm system, and who falls to do so in accordance with the
requirements of this article, shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$500 or to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or to both such fine
and imprisonment.
F. The Fire Marshal, and in his absence or unavailability, the Construction
Official, is hereby empowered, upon reasonable advance notice to the
owner and/or the tenant or other party in possession, to come upon any
premises and enter any structure which is required to comply with the
requirements of this article in order to verify compliance with this
article and the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code and Uniform
Fire Code and to otherwise carry out the objectives and enforcement of
this article.
G. The Fire Marshal shall maintain a list of all properties in the Township
of Vernon which have had smoke detectors or other fire alarm systems
installed in accordance with the requirements of this article and the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code and the Uniform Fire Code.
This list shall be kept current as additional buildings within the
Township are equipped with smoke detectors and other fire alarm
systems in accordance with this article.
A. Investigations. In the case of false alarms which summon the Police or
Fire Department to investigate, the Fire Marshal and Fire Chief shall
cause an investigation to be made and shall keep a record of such false
alarms on file.
B. Penalties for false alarms. In any calendar year period the following
penalties shall apply:
(1) For the first to third false alarm a written warning shall be issued.
(2) For the fourth to twelfth false alarm a fine of $250 shall be imposed
for each such false alarm.
(3) For any violation in excess of the 12 alarms a fine of $500 shall be
imposed for each such violation.
C. Penalties for intentional false alarms. Any individual intentionally,
willfully, or maliciously destroying or injuring any of the posts, alarm
§ 263-20 VERNON CODE § 263-21
1:302
§ 263-22. Violations and penalties.
boxes or other alarm apparatus owned by the Township of Vernon
or intentionally, willfully or maliciously interfering with the operation
of same or any part thereof or who hinders or impedes any of the
operations intended to be accomplished thereby or who intentionally
causes or assists in causing a false alarm or fire or other emergency to
be given in any manner shall, upon conviction thereof, be imprisoned in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or shall forfeit and pay
a fine not less than $500 and not more than $1,000.
D. All fines and fees collected for the above are to be set in a separate
dedicated penalty account to serve for training and education for the
Vernon Township Primary Response Fire Department and the Vernon
Township Department of Fire Prevention.
A. Any person convicted of a violation of this article, shall, in addition to
the revocation of the license or permit of any person, or any person
found guilty of failure to comply with any rules or regulations duly
promulgated pursuant thereto, such person may, after being found
guilty of such violation, to be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.
B. Said maximum fine of $1,000 shall not apply in those instances in which
the amount of the maximum penalty has hereinbefore been limited to a
lesser amount by this chapter. In the case of a continuing violation, the
violator may be found guilty of as many separate offenses or counts as
the number of days as he is proved to have continued in violation of this
chapter.
§ 263-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-22
1:303

ARTICLE III
Fire Zone Established
§ 263-23. Fire lanes and drafting sites.
§ 263-24. Compliance with orders.
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any fire official or interfere with the compliance attempts of the
Fire Official or his designee.
§ 263-25. Blocking of fire hydrants, Fire Department connections
and draft sites.
It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obscure, or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or Fire Department connection for
the pressurization of fire suppression systems. Included in this provision are
fire hydrants, Fire Department connections, drafting sites that are located
on public or private streets, access lanes or on private property.
Snow removal from all fire hydrants, Fire Department connections and
stand pipe systems that are located on public or private streets and access
lanes or on private property within 24 hours of the end of the said snow
storm are also included in this section.
§ 263-26. Parking regulations.
Except in compliance with the directions of a police officer or posted traffic
signal, no operator of a motor vehicle, moped, motorized bicycle or bicycle
shall stop or stand or park in any of the following places:
§ 263-27. Delineation and marking.
Any of the below or a combination of such shall constitute compliance
within this article.
A. Designation. The Fire Official may require and designate public or
private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective use
of fire apparatus.
B. Obstruction. Designated fire lanes shall be maintained and free of
obstructions and vehicles at all times. They shall also be marked in a
manner prescribed by the Fire Official, who shall coincide with the most
recent edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways."
A. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant or Fire Department connection or stand
pipe system
B. In any area marked by yellow or white lines or signs indicating the
location of a fire zone or fire lane.
§ 263-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-27
1:305
§ 263-28. Maintenance of fire lane.
The owner of the property where the fire lane is located shall properly
maintain any such markings, striping, curbing, and signage in the
designated areas at all times. Defacing, tampering with, or damaging any
such markings, striping, curbing, or signage or allowing them to deteriorate
so as to reduce their effectiveness shall constitute violation of the chapter.
§ 263-29. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who fails
to comply herewith shall for each and every violation and noncompliance
respectively upon conviction, be subject to a fine not in excess of $500 and
is subject to removal by the Vernon Township Police Department at the sole
expense of the owner or operator therefor.
A. Each fire lane shall be striped along the perimeter with a yellow or
white stripe not less than four (4) inches wide
B. Each fire lane shall be clearly marked on the surface of the pavement
"FIRE LANE NO PARKING" in yellow letters no less than 24 inches
high. This wording shall be located horizontally and between the
perimeter lines and shall be repeated throughout the fire lane or fire
zone.
C. Each fire lane shall be clearly marked with a metal sign every 50 feet
with a minimum of two (2) signs. The metal signs shall be no less than
18 inches by 24 inches with 3 inch red letters, shall contain a white
reflective background and shall read as follows:
FIRE LANE
NO PARKING
§ 263-27 VERNON CODE § 263-29
1:306
ARTICLE IV
Knox-Boxes®
§ 263-30. Installation.
When a property is protected by an automatic alarm system, and access to
or within a structure or an area on that property is impeded by secured
openings, and where immediate access might become necessary for
lifesaving or firefighting purposes, the Fire Marshal may require a key box
to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be a type approved
by the Fire Marshal and shall be installed at the expense of the property
owner.
§ 263-31. Contents.
§ 263-32. Application.
This article applies to both existing and future structures, but shall not
apply to any residential units.
§ 263-33. Approvals.
A. The key box shall contain:
(1) Keys to locked points of ingress whether on the interior or exterior
of such buildings.
(2) Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.
(3) Keys to locked electrical rooms.
(4) Keys to elevator controls.
(5) Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Marshal.
(6) Other material as directed by the Fire Marshal.
B. All keys shall be clearly labeled or marked to identify the doors they
open or the devices they operate.
A. The Fire Marshal shall, within 90 days of the effective date of this
article, develop and submit to the Mayor a list of specifications for key
boxes. Following approval of the specifications by resolution of the
Township Council, any box complying with those specifications shall be
deemed to be approved. Until such specifications are developed and at
any time thereafter, any property owner may request the Fire Marshal
to render a determination as to whether a particular key box, which
does not comply with the specifications, can be approved for
installation.
B. Prior to installing any key box required by this article, the property
owner shall make written request to the Fire Marshal to designate or
approve the proposed location.
§ 263-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-34
1:307
§ 263-34. Fees.
The Vernon Township Department of Fire Prevention may determine
appropriate fees for processing an application to determine whether a key
box which does not comply with the specifications can be approved for
installation and a request for designation or approval of proposed locations
for key boxes. Such fees shall become effective upon adoption by resolution
of the Township Council.
§ 263-35. Enforcement.
The Vernon Township Department of Fire Prevention shall be the enforcing
agency of this article. Any person who owns or operates a structure subject
to this article shall be subject to penalties set forth in this Code for any
violation of this article, and the minimum fine for a conviction or a violation
of this section shall be $100 for the first offense, $200 for the second
offense, and $300 for failure to comply.
§ 263-34 VERNON CODE § 263-35
1:308
ARTICLE V
Fire Watch and Fire Safety Standby
§ 263-36. Intent and purpose.
Fire safety compliance has always been and continues to be a high priority
for the Township of Vernon. Township officials frequently assess what can
be done to assure the safety of all Township residents, and to that end, the
Township of Vernon deems it necessary to implement fire watch procedures
when there exist substantial risks to life, safety and property, including
when all or part of the required fire protection systems in Township
structures are intentionally interrupted for repairs and maintenance, not
functioning properly, not functioning at all, or when they are damaged or
destroyed by fire or other disaster. In certain circumstances detailed herein,
the Fire Official/Marshal, Fire Chief or his designee, is hereby authorized to
order a fire watch for the affected structure in order to ensure continued
safety of residents during this period.
§ 263-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE WATCH — A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and
systematic surveillance of a building or portion(s) thereof by one or more
qualified individuals for the purpose of identifying and controlling fire
hazards, detecting early signs of an unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire
to the occupants and notifying the Fire Department. (202 definitions)
§ 263-38. Fire watch; when required.
A. A fire watch may be ordered by the Fire Marshal, Fire Chief or his
assigned designee in public and privately owned buildings and or
properties within the Township of Vernon under the following
circumstances:
(1) Where required fire protection systems are out of service due to
system failure, repair, scheduled maintenance, vandalism, etc.; the
Fire Marshal and Fire Chief shall be notified immediately and
where the Fire Marshal determines that an imminent hazard exists
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.17 or an approved fire watch shall be
provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until
the fire protection system has been returned to service. Upon
restoration of the Fire Protection System and proper
documentation is supplied, the Fire Marshal and Fire Chief shall
then sign off on the ability to remove such fire watch. (901.7)
(2) When in the opinion of the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief, it is essential
for public safety in a place of assembly or any other place where
people congregate, because of the number of persons, or the
nature of the performance, exhibition, display, contest or activity,
§ 263-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-38
1:309
§ 263-39. Fees and payments.
the owner, agent or lessee shall provide one or more fire watch
personnel, as required and approved, to remain on duty during the
times such places are open to the public, or when such activity is
being conducted. (403.1)
(3) When required by the Fire Marshal for building demolition that is
hazardous in nature, qualified personnel shall be provided to serve
as an on-site fire watch. Fire watch personnel shall be provided
with at least one approved means of notification of the Fire
Department and their sole duty shall be to perform constant patrols
and watch for the occurrence of fire. (1404.5)
(4) A fire watch shall be posted by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief or his
designee at the following type of events: hot work welding or
cutting (2604.2), fire works displays (3308.2.2.1), fumigation in gas
tight tank or vault (1703.3.3), tent, canopy or membrane structures
used as places of assembly (2404.20)
B. A fire watch may include the maintaining of posted fire lanes, means of
egress, posted occupancy loads, building surveillance for signs of
smoke or fire, checking for proper permits, inspecting for proper safety
precautions of cooking equipment, and other functions as required by
the Fire Official/Marshal, Fire Chief or his assigned designee.
C. Should a fire watch be posted by the Fire Marshal, Fire Chief or his
designee, that party is then responsible to contact and maintain open
communications with such on the status of the fire watch and
conditions of the property in question. Proper fire watch procedure
forms will be supplied to the Fire Chief in the command or support
vehicles. The Fire Marshal's Office shall take responsibility of all posted
fire watches and report back to the Fire Chief on the status of the
property and fire protection systems.
D. Should the building owner, agent, lessee be unable to post their own
fire watch, a fire watch shall be performed by the Vernon Township
Department of Fire Prevention. In the event no one of the above agency
is available, other qualified individuals may be utilized at the discretion
of the Fire Marshal, Fire Chief or his assigned designee. Any qualified
individuals used for the purposes of a fire watch shall report directly to
the Fire Official/Marshal, Fire Chief or his assigned designee, who will
report to the Business Administrator of the Township of Vernon.
A. A fire watch shall be paid for by the building owner, tenant, lessee, or
organization for which the fire watch is requested or required, as
appropriate.
B. All fire watch services not incurred and paid by the Township of Vernon
shall be at the rate of $35 per hour per person with a minimum of 3
hours per person. Individuals conducting said fire watch shall receive
§ 263-38 VERNON CODE § 263-39
1:310
§ 263-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity that violates the
provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in the
Uniform Fire Code.
hourly payment after payment is made by owner on the next available
pay roll date.
C. There shall be a $25/per hour fee for the use of each Township vehicle
utilized, plus a 15 percent administration fee.
D. All payments shall be made within 10 days after service is provided.
E. Payments shall be made payable to the Township of Vernon.
§ 263-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-40
1:311
Chapter 269
FIRE SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 137.
Fire Department — See Ch. 52.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 263.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 205.
§ 269-1. Interference with Fire Department operations.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel
of any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with,
attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any
Fire Department operation.
§ 269-2. Compliance with orders.
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any fire official or to interfere with the compliance attempts of
another individual.
§ 269-3. Vehicles crossing fire hose.
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the Fire Department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive
or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire official in
command of said operation.
§ 269-4. Vehicles following fire apparatus; vehicles in vicinity of
emergency area.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow closer than 300 feet from any fire apparatus traveling
in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the block or
immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
§ 269-5. Unlawful boarding or tampering with emergency
equipment.
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire official in
charge of said Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to, attach
himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any Fire Department
emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the
siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or to manipulate
or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves,
switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective
clothing on, or a part of, any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
§ 263-40 VERNON CODE § 269-6
1:312
§ 269-6. Damage or injury to equipment and personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or
conspire to damage or deface any Fire Department emergency vehicle
at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure Fire
Department personnel while performing departmental duties.
§ 269-7. Blocking fire hydrants and Fire Department connections.
It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection
for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants,
Fire Department connections, and standpipes that are located on public or
private streets and access lanes, or on private property.
§ 269-8. Hydrant use approval.
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of
the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first
secures a permit for such use from the fire official and the water company
having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants
by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water
company having jurisdiction.
§ 269-9. Parking regulations; fire zones and fire lanes. [Amended in
entirety 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-09]
§ 269-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended in entirety 4-27-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-09]
Unless otherwise expressly provided for in the Township Code,
enforcement, violations and penalties of this Chapter shall be assessed,
levied and collected as set forth in the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the Uniform
Fire Code (more particularly N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12, Penalties, and N.J.A.C.
A. Parking in fire zones and lanes prohibited. Parking of a vehicle or
vehicles in any area demarcated by yellow or white lines or signs
designating the location of a fire zone or fire lane is prohibited.
B. Enforcement. The Fire Marshal and the Police Department shall have
concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Section.
C. Violations and penalties. Every person violating this Section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $75 nor more than $200
and/or community service for up to 30 days.
D. Removal of vehicle as additional penalty. In the event that any vehicle is
parked in violation of a designated fire zone or lane, and, in the opinion
of the Police Department or Fire Marshal, the vehicle would
substantially impair the ability of emergency services to respond in the
event of an emergency, the vehicle may be towed at the owner's
expense.
§ 269-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-10
1:313
5:70-2.13) and all other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey, as same
may be amended.
Chapter 275
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 275-1. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and
objectives.
§ 275-1.1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Township Council of the Township
of Vernon in the County of Sussex, State of New Jersey does ordain as
follows:
§ 275-1.2. Findings of fact.
§ 275-1.3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of Township of Vernon are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
§ 269-10 VERNON CODE § 275-1.3
1:314
§ 275-1.4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 275-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 275-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2
1:315
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built in the case of a
building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an Area of Special Flood
Hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 275-2 VERNON CODE § 275-2
1:316
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area [including
basement]. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis 400 square foot or greater in
area and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not
include a "recreational vehicle" or "park model."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 275-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2
1:317
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PARK MODEL — A structure built on a single chassis which is over 320
square feet but less than 400 square feet or is over 8 feet in width.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is [i] built on a single chassis;
[ii] 320 square feet or less and less than 8 feet in width when measured
at the longest horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds 50
percent of the (market value) tax assessed value of the structure before the
§ 275-2 VERNON CODE § 275-2
1:318
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
TRAINING — Approved training programs recognized by FEMA for
Certification.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 275-3. General provisions.
§ 275-3.1. Lands to which this ordinance applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Vernon, Sussex County, New Jersey.
§ 275-3.2. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Vernon, Community
No. 340561, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 275-3.3. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
B.
A. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Sussex
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September 29, 2011.
B. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Sussex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 34037C0066E,
34037C0067E, 34037C0068E, 34037C0069E, 34037C0090E,
34037C0177E, 34037C0179E, 34037C0181E, 34037C0183E,
34037C0185E, 34037C0187E, 34037C0195E, 34037C0205E,
34037C0210E, 34037C0215E, 34037C0220E, 34037C0228E,
34037C0335E, 34037C0355E; whose effective date is September 29,
2011.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 21
Church St., Vernon, New Jersey.
§ 275-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-3.3
1:319
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Vernon
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 275-3.4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other chapter, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 275-3.5. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 275-3.6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Vernon,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 275-4. Administration.
§ 275-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit.
A Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within
any area of special flood hazard established in Section 275-3.2. Application
for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and,
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 275-3.3 VERNON CODE § 275-4.1
1:320
Construction Official and may include, but not be limited to; plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 275-4.2. Designation of the local administrator.
The Construction Official or a qualified Subcode Official appointed by the
Construction Official, and who has been trained is hereby appointed to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 275-4.3. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 275-4.3-1. Permit review.
§ 275-4.3-2. Use of other base flood and floodway data.
When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with Section 275-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special
Flood Hazard, the Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, in order to administer Sections 275-5.2-1, Specific
Standards, Residential Construction, and 275-5.2-2, Specific Standards,
Nonresidential Construction.
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in Section 275-5.2-2; and,
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
B. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
C. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment
provisions of Section 275-5.3A. are met.
§ 275-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4.3-3
1:321
§ 275-4.3-3. Information to be obtained and maintained.
§ 275-4.3-4. Alteration of watercourses.
§ 275-4.3-5. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
Section 275-4.4.
§ 275-4.4. Variance procedure.
§ 275-4.4-1. Appeal board.
A. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
B. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section
275-4.1C.
C. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section and
the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
B. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
A. The Land Use Board as established by the Township Council shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
B. The Land Use Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Construction Official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
§ 275-4.3-3 VERNON CODE § 275-4.4-1
1:322
§ 275-4.4-2. Conditions for variances.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Land Use Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New Jersey.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Land Use Board, shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and,
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Section 275-4.4-1D. and the
purposes of this chapter, the Land Use board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
F. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
§ 275-4.4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4.4-2
1:323
§ 275-5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
§ 275-5.1. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
§ 275-5.1-1. Anchoring.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items (1) through (11)
in Section 275-4.4-1D. have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in Section 275-4.4-1D., or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice via a resolution that the structure will be permitted to be built
with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
B. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to
be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
§ 275-4.4-2 VERNON CODE § 275-5.1-1
1:324
§ 275-5.1-2. Construction materials and methods.
§ 275-5.1-3. Utilities.
§ 275-5.1-4. Subdivision proposals.
§ 275-5.1-5. Enclosure openings.
All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
A. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed and
approved by the Health Department or Utility Company to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
B. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and
approved by the Health Department or Utility Company to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge
from the systems into flood waters;
C. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding; and
D. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
A. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
B. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
C. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and,
D. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development which contain at least fifty (50) lots or
five (5) acres (whichever is less).
§ 275-5.1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5.1-5
1:325
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a
total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 275-5.2. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in Section 275-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in Section 275-4.3-2, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
§ 275-5.2-1. Residential construction.
§ 275-5.2-2. Nonresidential construction.
In an Area of Special Flood Hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities:
either
A. Elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; and
B. Within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if
no depth number is specified). And, require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures; or
A. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or above base
flood elevation;
B. Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
§ 275-5.1-5 VERNON CODE § 275-5.2-2
1:326
or
A. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
B. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
C. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in Section 275-4.3-3B(2).
§ 275-5.2-3. Manufactured homes.
§ 275-5.3. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 275-3.2
are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
A. Manufactured homes and Park Model homes shall be anchored in
accordance with Section 275-5.1-1B.
B. All Manufactured and Park Model homes to be placed or substantially
improved within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Section 275-5.3A. is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 275-5, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths (0.2) of a
foot at any point.
§ 275-5.2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5.3
1:327
Chapter 281
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 142.
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
Food handlers' certification — See Ch. 289.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 341.
Pesticides — See Ch. 440.
§ 281-1. Adoption of code by reference.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6.
A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 281-2. Title of code adopted.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq., Chapter 24 of the New Jersey
State Sanitary Code, "Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food
and Beverage Vending Machines."
§ 281-3. Copies on file. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
Three copies of the said Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food
and Beverage Vending Machines Code have been placed on file in the office
of the Municipal Clerk of Vernon Township.
§ 281-4. License required; transferability; term; operating without a
license.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, or corporation to
conduct a retail food establishment as defined in Chapter 24 of the
State Sanitary Code, referred to in § 281-2, without first having
obtained a license from the Vernon Township Health Officer. This
license shall only be issued if the retail food establishment complies
with all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the
same as contained in the aforementioned Chapter 24 of the State
Sanitary Code and this chapter and any other applicable state laws and
regulations and local ordinances. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
B. The license is not transferable. If there is a change in the ownership
and/or management of the business, a new license must be applied for
at the Vernon Township Health Officer. A license shall expire as
contained in Subsection below. Operating on another person's,
§ 275-5.3 VERNON CODE § 281-4
1:328
§ 281-5. Pesticide operator required.
§ 281-6. Fees.49
Fees pertaining to this chapter are included in Chapter 250, Fees and
Escrows, Article II.
§ 281-7. Suspension or revocation of license; hearing.
persons', firm's or corporation's license shall be considered as
operating without a license. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
C. All licenses issued during the calendar year shall expire on December
31, of that same year. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 08-24]
D. Operating with an expired license shall be considered as operating
without a license.
E. Separate licenses shall be required for each separate retail food
establishment operation even if the operations are owned and managed
by the same person, persons, firm or corporation, are on the same tax
block and lot and/or are located within the same building. A "separate
retail food establishment operation" is defined as an operation which
has a separate kitchen, food preparation area, display and/or bar unless
the bar or display area is directly adjacent to the kitchen or food
preparation area.
A. All retail food establishments, with the exception of those
establishments which serve only prepackaged food, mobile vendors and
bed-and-breakfast establishments, shall hire a certified pesticide
operator. The certified pesticide operator shall be hired to inspect and
apply any necessary insecticides and/or rodenticides on a regular basis,
which shall not be less than monthly.
B. The certified pesticide operator shall be certified by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection as contained in N.J.A.C.
8:24-7.2 and Chapter 440, Pesticides.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter may
be suspended or revoked by the Vernon Township Health Officer for the
violation by the licensee or any licensee's employee of any provisions of
this chapter or Chapter 24 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall not
be revoked, canceled, or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have
been held by the Vernon Township Health Authority. Written notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at
least three days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 281-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-7
1:329
§ 281-8. Violations and penalties.
§ 281-9. Water analyses required.
also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for
revoking, canceling or suspending such license. Notice may be given
either by personal delivery to the licensee or establishment manager
or mailed by regular mail and certified mail return receipt requested
with the United States Post Office, addressed to the licensee at the
business address appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the
Health Authority, the licensee shall have an opportunity to answer and
may thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation
by the Health Authority, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the
Health Authority concludes that the charges have been sustained and
substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the
licensee. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
C. If any such license shall have been revoked, canceled or suspended, the
licensee must cease operation immediately and shall not be entitled to
carry on a retail food business within the Township unless the Health
Officer approves the issuance of a new license. [Amended 11-13-2008
by Ord. No. 08-21]
A. Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19,
Violations and penalties.50
B. Each separate violation of any provision of this chapter or Chapter 24 of
the New Jersey Sanitary Code shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The continuation of any violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense.
D. The person, persons, firm or corporation allowing or permitting the
continuance of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
A. All retail food establishments which are not served by a NJDEP
approved public community water system, as defined under N.J.A.C.
7:10-11.1 et seq., are required to obtain water analyses for coliform
bacteria and nitrate on a quarterly basis as long as the establishment is
in operation.
B. The samples shall be zero coliform bacteria per 100 milliliters (ml) of
water and nitrates of less than 10 parts per million (ppm).
C. Each separate retail food establishment, as defined under § 281-4E,
shall be required to sample as specified in Subsections A and B above,
except as noted herein. When more than three separate retail food
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 281-7 VERNON CODE § 281-9
1:330
Chapter 289
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 281.
§ 289-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the requirements for specific
health-related education of those individuals responsible for overseeing
retail food and/or beverage preparation, processing and storage.
§ 289-2. Word usage; definitions.
establishments are served by the same public noncommunity water
system and are operated by the same owner and/or manager, then only
a minimum of three water samples shall be required per month and
shall be taken from different locations on the system.
D. The owner and/or manager shall be responsible to have a copy of each
required water test, as specified in Subsections A through C above, sent
to the Vernon Township Health Officer within one day of the results
being available from the New Jersey DEP certified laboratory.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
A. Words defined. For the purpose of this chapter, and in the interpretation
and application of any amendments adopted hereafter, except as the
context may otherwise require, definitions recited in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et
seq.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued to a person by
the Vernon Township Health Officer certifying successful completion of
a course of general instruction in bacteria characteristics and growth,
spread of foodborne diseases, methods of preventing food poisoning,
proper food handling techniques, equipment and establishment
sanitation, dishwashing and sanitation, and insect and rodent control.
The prescribed course shall be given by or have received the approval
of the Vernon Township Health Officer.[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-21]
SUPERVISOR — Any person charged with the responsibility of
overseeing the operation of any establishment, including the
supervision of employees engaged in the preparation, processing and
storage of food or drink intended for human consumption, be it for on
or off premises consumption.
§ 281-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-2
1:331
§ 289-3. Application for food handler's certificate by supervisors.
No new retail food establishment or establishment which has changed
ownership shall operate for more than 60 days without the supervisors
employed in that establishment applying for a food handler's certificate.
§ 289-4. Time limit for obtaining food handler's certificate.
No new retail food establishment or establishment which has changed
ownership shall operate for more than six months without the supervisor
employed in that establishment being a holder of a valid food handler's
certificate.
§ 289-5. Certificate to be posted; certified supervisor required.
Except as provided in §§ 289-3, 289-4 and 289-9 of this chapter, no
establishment shall be in operation or open for business in the preparation
or processing of food or drink intended for human consumption without
having a visibly posted certificate and a supervisor who is actively engaged
in the supervisory aspects of the preparation, handling and storage of food
and who has a valid food handler's certificate.
§ 289-6. Issuance of certificate; cost. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-21]
A food handler's certificate shall be issued to any person successfully
completing a course of instruction given or approved by the Vernon
Township Health Officer. The cost of such course shall be borne by the
applicant.
§ 289-7. Transferability.
No person to whom a food handler's certificate is issued shall give, loan,
transfer or permit the same to be used by any other person, for any purpose
whatsoever.
§ 289-8. Expiration of certificate; renewal.
A food handler's certificate shall be valid for a period of three years after
the date of issue. The holder of this certificate must successfully complete
the food handler's course 30 days prior to its expiration date, in order to
maintain a valid certificate.
§ 289-9. Exemptions. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
Agricultural markets, churches or non-profit-type institution meal services
shall be exempted from the requirements of §§ 289-3, 289-4 and 289-5
of this chapter if, because of the infrequent, noncontinuous, unique or
C. Throughout this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and vice
versa, unless the context of this chapter indicates the contrary.
§ 289-2 VERNON CODE § 289-9
1:332
limited nature of food preparation or processing, the Vernon Township
Health Officer determines that the public health will not be jeopardized
by the absence of a certified food handler on the premises. The Vernon
Township Health Officer will conduct voluntary food-handling courses for
those organizations requesting training or where a determination is made
that such training is necessary.
§ 289-10. Violations and penalties.51
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization violating any provision
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set
forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties.
Chapter 294
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 281.
§ 294-1. Bingo permitted on Sundays.
§ 294-2. Raffles permitted on Sundays.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 of New Jersey Bingo Licensing Law, the
conduct of games of chance as authorized by said act on the first day of
the week, commonly known and designated as "Sunday," is hereby
permitted.
B. The authorization to conduct such games of chance on Sunday shall be
provided for in the license issued for the holding, operating and
conducting thereof, pursuant to this chapter.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-58 of the New Jersey Raffles Licensing Law, the
conduct of games of chance as authorized by the said act on the first
day of the week, commonly known and designated as "Sunday," is
hereby permitted.
B. The authorization to conduct such games of chance on Sunday shall be
provided for in the license issued for the holding, operating and
conducting thereof, pursuant to this chapter.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 289-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-2
1:333
Chapter 308
HELIPORTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 330.
§ 308-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Heliport Ordinance of
the Township of Vernon."
§ 308-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide the operation and location of heliports, helistops and
helispots within the Township of Vernon in order to promote public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare of the municipality. It shall be
administered to ensure the orderly growth and development, the
conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for
circulation of traffic, utilities and services.
§ 308-3. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Construction Code
Official, Zoning Officer and any other official of the Township of Vernon
charged with the enforcement of Vernon Township ordinances.
§ 308-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
HELIPORT — An area of defined dimensions designated for the landing
and takeoff of helicopters and used solely for that purpose. Such area may
include passenger and cargo facilities, fueling service, storage space, tiedown
spaces, hangars and other accessory buildings.
HELISPOT — An area of defined dimensions designated for the occasional
landing and takeoff of helicopters but not used solely for that purpose.
Examples: parking lots, golf courses, parks, recreational athletic fields, etc.
HELISTOP, PRIVATE — An area of defined dimensions designated for the
landing and takeoff of helicopters and used solely for that purpose. Such
area shall be limited to the operation of helicopters which are owned or
controlled by the owner or the occupant of the premises or by guests or
patrons of such owner-occupant. Such area may include refueling but no
maintenance, repair or hangar facilities, except that a tie-down area may be
provided for and limited to the accommodation of a single aircraft.
§ 294-2 VERNON CODE § 308-4
1:334
HELISTOP, PUBLIC — An area of defined dimensions designated for the
landing and takeoff of helicopters and used solely for that purpose. Such
area shall be open to use by any helicopter regardless of ownership and
control. Such area may not include any refueling, maintenance, repair or
hangar facilities, except that a tie-down may be provided for and limited to
a single aircraft.
§ 308-5. Operating authorization.
An operating authorization must be obtained from the Construction Code
Official before any of the facilities governed by this chapter may be
occupied or operated. Such authorization may only be issued after all of
the requirements of all applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations and
conditions imposed by the municipal approving agency have been complied
with. In cases where the Zoning Ordinance of Vernon Township52 specifies
that the facility applied for falls in the category of a special exception
use, the resulting special use permit shall take the place of the required
operating authorization.
§ 308-6. Application procedure; site plan.
§ 308-7. Hearing; conditions prior to authorization.
A. In cases where the Zoning Ordinance of Vernon Township specifies that
the facility applied for falls in the category of a special exception use,
the procedures as set forth in Article XVI of Ch. 104, Zoning, shall be
applicable.53
B. In all other cases, the application shall be made to the Mayor and
Township Council of Vernon. Said application shall be accompanied by a
site plan in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter.
C. A site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board prior to the hearing
by the Mayor and Township Council for review by the Planning Board,
and the Planning Board shall submit its findings and recommendations
to the Mayor and Township Council. In case such Planning Board report
has not been received by the Mayor and Township Council within 20
days after submittal to the Planning Board, the Mayor and Township
Council may proceed with its hearing, and render a decision subject to
Planning Board site plan review.
A. The Mayor and Township Council shall set a public hearing, which
hearing may be conducted as part of a regular Mayor and Township
Council meeting.
B. The Mayor and Township Council may impose such reasonable
conditions upon the issuance of an operating authorization as it may
deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and general
52.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
53.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
§ 308-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-7
1:335
§ 308-8. Publication of notice of hearing.
The applicant shall be required to publish, at least 10 days but not more
than 28 days prior to the hearing date in the official newspaper of Vernon
Township, a notice of the hearing, setting forth in a clear and sufficient
manner the subject matter of the application, the hearing date, hearing
place, the location of the proposed facility by tax lot and block number
together with sufficient description to locate the area with respect to roads,
intersections or other landmarks.
§ 308-9. Prior approval required.
No application for a heliport, helistop or helispot shall be considered by
the municipal approving agencies until such time as approval has first been
granted by the New Jersey Division of Aeronautics, or such other agency
which may have jurisdiction over the licensing of such facilities.
§ 308-10. General requirements for helispots.
The following are general requirements for helispots in the Township of
Vernon:
interest. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, the Mayor and
Township Council may impose conditions calculated to provide:
(1) Adequate off-street parking facilities.
(2) Adequate open areas and yard on the site.
(3) Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices where
required and sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees, and
lawn which will be periodically maintained.
(4) The posting of suitable maintenance bonds with the municipality to
assure the proper and continued maintenance.
(5) Approval of proposed flight pattern by the Federal Aviation
Administration and Mayor and Township Council.
C. The Mayor and Township Council may require the submission of
building plans and specifications and such other information as it may
deem necessary for a full consideration of the application. In approving
a site plan, the Mayor and Township Council may act on site plans
submitted by the applicant, as reviewed by the Planning Board, or may
require modifications and changes.
A. The site plan to be submitted must be drawn to the scale of not more
than one inch equals 200 feet, and must show the terrain elevation for
at least 800 feet in all directions from the center limits of the landing
area of the proposed helispot. The site plan must locate within such 800
feet all obstructions, indicate their height and locate the approachdeparture
path corridors.
§ 308-7 VERNON CODE § 308-10
1:336
§ 308-11. General requirements for heliports.
The following are general requirements for heliports in the Township of
Vernon:
B. The application must describe the type and characteristics of the
helicopters to be used and the proposed frequency of operations.
C. The helispot area shall be covered with a dustproof surface as approved
by the Mayor and Township Council.
D. All such helispots shall be marked in accordance with the Federal
Aviation Agency criteria and shall provide those navigation aids as shall
be required by the New Jersey Division of Aeronautics, or other agency
which may have jurisdiction over such facilities. All such helispots shall
be protected in a manner prescribed by the New Jersey Division of
Aeronautics.
E. The particular helispot shall be reasonably necessary and convenient in
the area in which it is to be located, and that its operation shall not
adversely affect the character of the neighborhood.
F. The helispot area shall provide adequate parking facilities as approved
by the Planning Board.
G. Helicopter landings or takeoffs shall not exceed the maximum number
as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of Vernon Township54 for the
particular zone in which the helispot is located. Except that the Mayor
and Township Council may permit more landings and takeoffs as they
determine are required by the individual nature of the helispot,
including occasions of civic interest, provided such additional takeoffs
and landings are not a detriment to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the Township. This provision shall not be interpreted,
however, as permitting the establishment of a regular operating
helistop or heliport as herein defined.
H. No such helispot shall be permitted unless the minimum distances to
residential structures, public rights-of-way, property lines or zone lines
as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance for the zone in which the helispot is
located are met.
A. The application must describe the type and characteristics of
helicopters to be used and the proposed frequency of operation.
B. Operation is limited to helicopters of a gross weight as set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance of Vernon Township.55
C. The site plan must be drawn to a scale of no more than one inch equals
200 feet and must show the terrain elevation for at least 800 feet in all
54.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
55.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
§ 308-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-11
1:337
directions from the center limits of the landing area of the proposed
heliport. It must also locate within such 800 feet all obstructions, giving
their height and locate the approach-departure path corridors.
D. The site plan shall also show the relationship of the heliport to the lot
lines, streets and zoning lines; the location of all buildings or areas to
be used for passenger or cargo operations, maintenance and overhaul
facilities, fueling, storage and hangar or tie-down facilities. All off-street
parking areas, access drives, landscaped areas and traffic patterns
shall also be shown.
E. Off-street parking shall be required in an amount to be determined by
the Planning Board based on the operations contemplated, which shall
include at least one parking space for each two employees serving the
heliport.
F. Any ground level heliport shall be so located as to provide direct access
thereto from a public street.
G. Every takeoff and landing area, taxiway, terminal and/or service area
and parking areas shall be paved with a bituminous or concrete surface
as may be determined by the Vernon Township Planning Board.
H. The heliport shall have an inside area of at least 125 feet by 125 feet.
I. Every ground level heliport shall be fenced with a permanent-type
fence as may be determined by the Planning Board and protected to
prevent entrance of unauthorized personnel with a minimum fence
height of four feet. For each additional foot of fence height, 25 feet must
be added to the minimum inside area dimensions, provided in
Subsection H above.
J. All heliports shall be marked in accordance with the Federal Aviation
Agency criteria and shall provide those navigation aids as shall be
required by the New Jersey Division of Aeronautics or other agency
which may have jurisdiction over such facilities.
K. Rooftop heliports may be permitted, provided the minimum area shall
be not less than 40 feet with a three-foot fence inclined 70º upwards
from the horizontal, unless the roof has a parapet wall already built.
L. Such rooftop heliports must comply with all applicable provisions of the
Township Building and Fire Codes.
M. No portion of any such use shall project into any yards or buffer areas
required in the district in which the heliport is located.
N. Suitable landscaping for the heliport may be required by the Planning
Board based on its relation to surrounding buildings or uses.
O. Any heliport shall be lighted during the hours of darkness in accordance
with Federal Aviation Agency requirements.
§ 308-11 VERNON CODE § 308-11
1:338
§ 308-12. General requirements for helistops.
The following are general requirements for helistops in the Township of
Vernon:
P. No such heliport shall be permitted unless the minimum distances to
residential structures, public rights-of-way, property lines or as set forth
in the Zoning Ordinance56 for the zone in which the heliport is located
are met.
A. The application must describe the type and characteristics of
helicopters to be used and the proposed frequency of operation.
B. Operation is limited to helicopters of a gross weight as set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance of Vernon Township.57
C. The hours of helicopter operations shall be limited as set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance of Vernon Township.
D. No such helistop shall be permitted unless the minimum distances to
residential structures, public rights-of-way, property lines or zone lines
as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance for the zone in which the helispot is
located are met.
E. The site plan shall be drawn to a scale of not more than one inch equals
200 feet and must show the terrain elevation for at least 800 feet in all
directions from the center limits of the landing area of the proposed
helistop. It must also locate all obstructions within such 800 feet, their
height, and the approach-departure path corridors.
F. The site plan shall also show the relationship of the helistop to lot lines,
streets and zoning boundary lines. Any access drives, off-street parking
or landscape areas shall also be shown.
G. The helistop landing/takeoff area shall have an inside area of at least
110 feet by 110 feet, which area shall be paved with a bituminous or
concrete surface as approved by the Planning Board.
H. Every ground level helistop shall be fenced with a permanent-type
fencing as may be determined by the Planning Board and protected to
prevent entrance of unauthorized personnel with a minimum fence
height of four feet. For each additional foot of fence height, 25 feet must
be added to the minimum inside area dimensions, provided in
Subsection G above.
I. Every helistop shall be marked in accordance with the Federal Aviation
Agency criteria and shall provide those navigation aids as shall be
required by the New Jersey Division of Aeronautics, or other agency
which may have jurisdiction over such facilities.
56.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
57.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
§ 308-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-12
1:339
§ 308-13. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-20-1974]
Any person violating, or failing to comply with, any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 325
ILLEGAL DWELLINGS
§ 325-1. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words shall have the following meanings:
ATTIC — The open, non-habitable space between the ceiling beams of the
top habitable story and the roof rafters in any building. Habitable and nonhabitable
space is determined through use of State floor-to-ceiling height
regulations.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground and having more than one-half
(1/2) of its clear height below the finished grade. A basement shall not be
considered a story for purposes of height measurement in determining the
permissible number of stories when used solely for incidental or accessory
storage or for the housing of mechanical equipment, to include a hot-water
heater and furnace, for a washer, dryer, recreation room and a bathroom,
either partial or full.
BATHROOM (FULL) — Any enclosed space which contains a bathtub and/or
shower, a lavatory and/or a sink or fixtures serving similar purposes.
J. Rooftop helistops may be permitted, provided the minimum area shall
be not less than 40 feet by 40 feet with a three-foot fence inclined 70º
upward from the horizontal, unless the roof has a parapet wall already
built.
K. Such rooftop helistops must comply with all applicable provisions of the
Township Building and Fire Codes.
L. No portion of any such use shall project into any yards or buffer areas
required in the district in which the helistop is located.
M. Suitable landscaping for the helistop, based on its relation to street
frontages, residence districts and surrounding buildings or uses, may
be required by the Planning Board.
N. In the case of a public helistop, off-street parking shall be required. The
amount of parking to be provided shall be determined by the Planning
Board based on the operation contemplated.
§ 308-12 VERNON CODE § 325-1
1:340
BATHROOM (PARTIAL) — Any enclosed space which contains a lavatory
and a sink or fixtures serving a similar purpose.
DWELLING INSPECTION — An inspection conducted to determine a unit's
compliance with the housing standards of the Township of Vernon.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building
or portion thereof, forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are
used, designed or arranged to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and
sanitary facilities.
IMPERMISSIBLE DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit:
KITCHEN — Any space containing plumbing fixtures, in conjunction with
other facilities, for the storage and preparation of food.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title to the premises in fee simple
or having charge, care or control of the premises, as owner, agent of the
owner or as executor or mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such
possession was obtained.
TENANT — Any person residing with the consent of the owner in an
apartment or unit of housing space.
§ 325-2. Illegal apartment or dwelling unit.
(1) For which no certificate of occupancy has been issued;
Which is in excess of the number of such units for a particular building
or zone according to the Zoning Code; or
(2)
That was created without the required plumbing-electrical or building
permits.
(3)
A. Any one of the following shall constitute an "illegal" apartment or
dwelling unit:
(1) An apartment or dwelling unit which exceeds the legal dwelling/
occupancy units that are on record with the Township's Code
Enforcement Official;
(2) An apartment or dwelling unit which would exceed the number of
units permitted under the Zoning Ordinance or any approvals
granted by the Land Use Board of the Township of Vernon;
(3) An apartment or dwelling unit which fails to meet the requirements
of any regulation affecting health, safety or welfare of the general
public;
(4) An apartment or dwelling unit which the owner has permitted
occupancy thereof without obtaining the required plumbing,
electrical and building permits.
§ 325-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-2
1:341
§ 325-3. Attic restrictions.
§ 325-4. Cellar and basement restrictions.
§ 325-5. Eviction and relocation.
B. No person shall rent, or allow to be occupied, an "illegal" apartment or
dwelling unit, or permit same to be occupied by any tenant or other
person, in:
(1) A building which such person owns or otherwise controls;
(2) A dwelling unit which such person rents or otherwise controls.
A. Unapproved occupancies of attics are prohibited.
B. Any residential attic used for any purpose other than incidental storage
must meet the following criteria:
(1) Under no circumstances shall a bathroom be permitted in the attic,
whether partial or full, after enactment of this section;
(2) There shall be no kitchen or any semblance of same (i.e. hotplate,
refrigerator, food cabinets, sink);
(3) Except for required fire exits, access to the attic or basement shall
be through the dwelling unit;
(4) Under no circumstances shall the attic be offered as a separate
dwelling unit, rooming unit or independent rooming unit;
(5) An attic must be an integral part of the dwelling unit and shall not
be leased to any party that does not have full access and rights to
the dwelling unit.
A. Any residential cellar or basement used for living space must meet the
following criteria:
(1) Except for required fire exits, access to the cellar or basement shall
be through the dwelling unit;
(2) A cellar or basement must be an integral part of the dwelling unit
and shall not be leased to any party that does not have full access
and rights to the dwelling unit;
(3) A full or partial bathroom shall be permitted, provided the primary
access to same is through the existing dwelling unit.
A. Any tenant who receives a notice of eviction resulting from zoning or
code enforcement activity for an illegal occupancy, shall be considered
a displaced person and shall be entitled to relocation assistance paid by
the landlord in an amount equal to six (6) times the monthly rent.
§ 325-2 VERNON CODE § 325-5
1:342
§ 325-6. Violations.
B. The owner of the structure shall be liable for the payment of relocation
assistance pursuant to this section, and shall make payments for
assistance directly to the displaced tenant.
C. In addition to paying damages, as set forth in this section, the owner of
the real property shall also return to the displaced person any security
deposit, together with interest, plus any rental payment required to be
apportioned upon notification by the enforcement official that the
illegal apartment or dwelling unit must be vacated.
A. In addition to eviction and relocation expenses permitted under § 325-5,
any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to the following
fines:
(1) For the first offense, a mandatory fine of one thousand five hundred
($1,500.) dollars shall be imposed;
(2) For the second offense, a mandatory fine of five thousand ($5,000.)
dollars shall be imposed;
(3) For the third offense and all subsequent offenses, a mandatory fine
of eight thousand ($8,000.) dollars shall be imposed or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both.
B. For purposes of determining violations under this section, each and
every day of continued rental or occupancy shall be deemed a separate
and distinct violation.
C. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by all members of the
Township of Vernon Police Department, the Construction Code Official,
and/or the Code Enforcement Official of the Township of Vernon.
§ 325-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-6
1:343
Chapter 330
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned properties and unfit
buildings — See Ch. 130.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 133.
Body art establishments — See Ch. 165.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 205.
Emergency housing — See Ch. 231.
Right to farm — See Ch. 240.
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 263.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 275.
Heliports — See Ch. 308.
Nuclear-free zone — See Ch. 369.
Performance guaranties — See Ch. 434.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
478.
Soil removal — See Ch. 483.
Board of Adjustment rules and
regulations — See Ch. A600.
§ 325-6 VERNON CODE § 325-6
1:344
ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 330-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Comprehensive Land Development
Subcode of the Township of Vernon" (hereinafter "subcode").
§ 330-2. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter:
A. To regulate development and provide zoning regulations for the
Township of Vernon pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., as interpreted by decisional law.
B. To implement and give effect to the goals and objectives of the Master
Plan for the Township of Vernon, adopted December 27, 1995.
C. To give municipal effect to the purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which purposes are as follows:
(1) To encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate use or
development of all lands in this state, in a manner which will
promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare;
(2) To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade
disasters;
(3) To provide adequate light, air and open space;
(4) To ensure that the development of the municipality does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole;
(5) To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities
and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of
persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and
preservation of the environment;
(6) To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public
funds by the coordination of public development with land use
policies;
(7) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial
uses and open space, both public and private, according to their
respective environmental requirements in order to meet the needs
of all New Jersey citizens;
(8) To encourage the location and design of transportation routes
which will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging
§ 330-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-2
1:345
§ 330-3. Source; nature of authority; relief.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the delegation of power and authority
provided in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Unless
otherwise clearly appearing to be a regulation solely and exclusively
adopted pursuant to Article 6 of the Municipal Land Use Law with respect to
subdivisions and site plans, each provision of this chapter shall be construed
and treated as a regulation of the "Zoning Ordinance" as contemplated
location of such facilities and routes which result in congestion or
blight;
(9) To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
(10) To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open
space, energy resources and valuable natural resources in the state
and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment
through improper use of land;
(11) To encourage planned unit developments which incorporate the
best features of design and relate the type, design and layout of
residential, commercial, industrial and recreational development of
the particular site;
(12) To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
(13) To encourage coordination of the various public and private
procedures and activities shaping land development with a view of
lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient
use of land;
(14) To promote utilization of renewable energy sources; and
(15) To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling
Plan goals and to complement municipal recycling programs.
D. To preserve the features of the natural environment and to enhance the
quality and character of the man-made environment in the Township of
Vernon.
E. To foster economic development and investment in appropriate
locations and districts in the Township of Vernon.
F. To preserve farmlands and historic landmarks in the Township of
Vernon.
G. To offer the citizens of Vernon Township the best opportunities and
protections associated with modern zoning and land use planning,
while making the municipal review and approval process more
responsive to their needs and expectations.
§ 330-2 VERNON CODE § 330-3
1:346
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65. The title of Article VI shall not be construed as
an indication that only the contents of that article comprise the Zoning
Ordinance; instead, this entire chapter shall comprise the Zoning Ordinance
unless component provisions in Articles VI, VII and VIII are clearly
regulations concerning only subdivision and site plan standards. Departures
from any component provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall be by
variance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 and § 330-55. Departures from
any component provisions of Article VI, VII or VIII which are solely and
exclusively regulations concerning standards of subdivision or site plan
approval shall be by exception pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
§ 330-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-3
1:347

ARTICLE II
Language and Definitions
§ 330-4. Interpretations of this chapter.
This chapter shall be interpreted with primary regard to the fundamental
purposes(s) for which the provisions herein were adopted. The sense of any
regulation contained herein is to be gathered from its object, the nature
of its subject matter, the context of its setting, the degree to which the
provision serves to implement the Master Plan, and the reading of the
provisions contained herein in pari materia. Where a literal reading will
lead to a result not in accord with the essential purpose and design of
this chapter, the spirit of this chapter will control the letter. Wherever
it is apparent that the drafters of this chapter or the governing body
did not consider or contemplate a specific situation, the circumstances
shall be interpreted consonant with the probable intent of the drafters
and governing body had they anticipated the situation at hand. Specific
provisions in this chapter shall take precedence over general provisions.
To the greatest practicable extent, the provisions contained herein,
particularly when dealing with the same subject matter, shall be read or
construed together as forming one regulation. This chapter is to receive a
reasonable construction and be liberally construed in favor of the Township
of Vernon. This chapter shall be given reasonable application to serve
the apparent purpose of this chapter. The plain meaning of the language
contained herein shall be construed according to the ordinary meanings of
the words and phrases contained herein.
§ 330-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure detached from a principal building
located on the same lot and customarily incident and subordinate to the
principal building or use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or of a building or portion thereof
customarily incident and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building and located on the same lot containing the principal use.
ACRE — A measure of land area containing 43,560 square feet.
ADDITION —
ADJOINING LOT OR LAND — A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part
of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land.
A structure added to the original structure at some time after the
completion of the original;
A.
An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or
structure.
B.
§ 330-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:349
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Clerk of the municipality unless a
different municipal official or officials are designated by ordinance or
statute.
ADVERSE IMPACT — A condition or effect that creates, imposes,
aggravates, or leads to inadequate, impractical, unsafe, or unhealthy
conditions on a site proposed for development or on off-tract property or
facilities by objective and common analysis.
AESTHETIC — The perception of artistic elements or elements in the
natural or created environment that are pleasing to the eye by objective and
common analysis.
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping, or maintenance, for sale, lease,
or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not
limited to forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals
and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef
cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, or goats or any mutations or
hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such
animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals, trees and forest products;
fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts, and berries; vegetables; nursery,
floral, ornamental, and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil
conservation or forestry management program. In the event that this
definition shall deviate from the meaning of this term as defined under state
law, the definition by law shall control.
AGRICULTURAL USE — When considered in terms of land use, means
land devoted to the activities described in N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.3.[Amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
AIR POLLUTION — The presence of contaminants in the air in
concentrations beyond the normal dispersive ability of the air and that
interfere directly or indirectly with health, safety, or comfort, or with the
full use and enjoyment of property.
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
ALLEY — A service road that provides a secondary means of access to lots.
ALTERATION — Any exchange or rearrangement in the supporting
members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams,
girders, or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors, windows,
means of ingress or egress, or any enlargement to or diminution of a
building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a
building or structure from one location to another.
AMENITY — A natural or created feature that enhances the aesthetic
quality, visual appeal of, or makes more attractive or satisfying a particular
property, place, or area.
AMUSEMENT PARK — A facility, primarily outdoors, that may include
structures and buildings, where there are various devices for
entertainment, including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of
items, buildings for shows and entertainment, and restaurants and souvenir
sales.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:350
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — See "veterinary hospital."
ANIMAL KENNEL — See "kennel."
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure, and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analogue signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communication signals. Excepted from this definition are antennas
used exclusively by ham radio operators or other residential users.[Added
5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-17]
ANTIQUE SHOP — A business enterprise dealing in the buying and selling
of antiques.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 25 or
Section 27 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36).
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the Township of Vernon.[Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No.
00-17]
APPURTENANCES — The visible, functional, or ornamental objects
accessory to and part of buildings.
AQUIFER — A geologic formation that contains a potentially usable supply
of potable water.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — The outcropping part of the aquifer through
which water enters.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS — The areas of Vernon Township that have
been identified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
or other governmental authority as being vital to the potable water supply
of the community and/or surrounding region. An aquifer recharge area for
the purposes of this definition is considered to be the exposed outcropping
or ground-level area above an aquifer that has been determined to contain
substantial volumes of water within unconsolidated subsurface sand and
gravel deposits.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE — Land or water areas that show evidence of
artifacts of human, plant, or animal activity, usually dating from periods of
which only vestiges remain.
ARTERIAL STREET — A higher-order, interregional road in the street
hierarchy; which conveys traffic between centers and should be excluded
from residential areas.
ARTS CENTER — A structure or complex of structures for housing the
visual and/or performing arts.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:351
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any building, land area, or other
premises, or portion thereof, used for the retail dispensing or sales of
vehicle fuels, servicing and repair of automobiles, and including as an
accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and
similar vehicle accessories.
AVERAGE SETBACK — The mean setback from a street right-of-way of
buildings on both sides of a lot.
BANK — A place or office where money is kept, deposited, saved, paid out,
lent, borrowed, issued or exchanged.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly below and partly
above grade, and having a least one-half its height above grade.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An establishment in a private dwelling that
supplies temporary accommodations, including breakfast, to overnight
guests for compensation.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The board established pursuant to Section 56
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69).
BOARDING STABLE — A structure designed for the feeding, housing, and
exercising of horses not owned by the owner of the premises and for which
the owner of the premises receives compensation.
BOAT — See "large boat."
BOTANICAL GARDENS — A place in which plant collections are grown for
display and scientific study, and which may include a herbarium, laboratory,
museum and teaching or training facilities.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard
and open space requirements of this chapter have been met.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building on the same lot as the
principal or main building or use.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the horizontal area measured from
the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal
and accessory buildings on a lot to the total area of the lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average elevation of
the finished grade at the front of the building to the top of the highest roof
beams on a flat, curved or shed roof, the deck level of a mansard roof, and
the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hip,
and gambrel roofs. (See § 330-175, Height exceptions.)
BUILDING LINE — A line drawn as closely parallel as possible to the street
line and touching that part of a building closest to the street.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:352
BUILT ENVIRONMENT — Artificially created fixed elements, such as
buildings, structures, devices and surfaces, that together create the
physical character of an area.
BUS SHELTER — A small, roofed structure, usually having three walls,
located near or adjacent to a street and designed primarily for the
protection and convenience of bus passengers. (See "school bus shelter.")
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as
advertising and mailing, building maintenance, employment services,
management and consulting services, protective services, equipment rental
and leasing, commercial research development and testing, photo finishing,
and personal supply services. (See "retail services.")
CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY — A cable television company as defined
pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1972, c. 186 (N.J.S.A. 48:5A-3).
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, four feet
above ground level.
CAMPER — Any person who occupies a campsite. (N.J.A.C. 8:22-1.2.)
CAMPGROUND, PROPRIETARY — Any real property designed and used
for the purpose of camping and associated recreational uses under a
condominium or cooperative form of ownership.
CAMPGROUND, PUBLIC — A plot of ground upon which two or more
campsites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by camping
units of the general public as temporary living quarters for children or
adults, or both, for a total of 15 days or more in any calendar year, for
recreation, education, or vacation purposes. (N.J.A.C. 8:22-1.2.)
CAMPING UNIT — Any tent or recreational vehicle which is capable of
being temporarily located on a campsite; or a cabin, lean-to, or similar
structure established or maintained and operated in a public campground.
The term "camping unit" does not include a unit kept on land occupied by
the owner or any camping unit which is unoccupied and which is kept at a
public campground for storage purposes only. (N.J.A.C. 8:22-1.2.)
CAMPING VEHICLE — See "recreational vehicle."
CAMPSITE — Any plot of ground within a public campground which is
intended for the exclusive occupation by a camping unit or units. (N.J.A.C.
8:22-1.2.)
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
major construction project.
CARTWAY — The actual road surface area from curbline to curbline which
may include travel lanes, parking lanes, and deceleration and acceleration
lanes. Where there are no curbs, the cartway is that portion between the
edges of the paved, or hard surface, width.
CELLAR — A portion of the building partly underground, having one-half or
more than one-half of its height below the average grade of the building.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:353
CHANGE OF USE — Any use that substantially differs from the previous use
of a building or land.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — An establishment providing for the care,
supervision, and protection of children.
CHURCH — A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures,
that by design and construction is primarily intended for conducting
organized religious services and associated accessory uses. See "place of
worship."
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
CLEAR-CUTTING — The large-scale, indiscriminate removal of trees,
shrubs, and undergrowth with the intention of preparing real property for
nonagricultural development purposes.
CLUB — A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue
common goals, interests, or activities, and usually characterized by certain
membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and
a constitution and bylaws.
CLUBHOUSE — A building occupied by a club for its purposes and
activities.
CLUSTER — A development design technique that concentrates buildings
on a part of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation,
common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive
features.
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION — A form of development that permits a reduction
in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the
number of lots permitted under a conventional subdivision or increase in
the overall density of development, and the remaining land area is devoted
to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive
areas, or agriculture.
COLLOCATION — The use of a common wireless telecommunications tower
or a common structure, by two or more telecommunications license holders
or unlicensed holders nevertheless regulated by the Federal
Communications Commission or by one telecommunications license holder
for more than one type of communications technology and/or the placement
of a wireless telecommunications tower on a structure owned or operated
by a utility or other public entity.[Added 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-17]
COMMERCIAL FARM — [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
A farm management unit of no less than five acres producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually,
and satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation
A.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:354
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Facilities of an active recreational nature
such as riding academy, golf course, tennis club or ski area operated for
profit and open to the public.
COMMERCIAL USE — An activity involving the sale of goods or services
carried out for profit.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMON SEWERS — Sewerage systems wherein all uses on the property
dispose of sewage into a common facility.
COMMON WATER — A water system wherein all water users on the
property obtain their drinking water from a central well, or wells, or public
water supply system.
COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION — A homeowners' association organized to
own, maintain, and operate common facilities and to enhance and protect
their common interests.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
(CRDD) — A residential facility, licensed by the state, providing food,
shelter, and personal guidance, with supervision, to developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community and shall include group
homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment
living arrangements, and hostels.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the governmental agency
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of the
application.
CONCEPT PLAN — An informal review of a plan for development that
carries no vesting rights or obligations on any party.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter, and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor
by the Planning Board.
pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.); or
A farm management unit less than five acres, producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $50,000 or more annually and otherwise
satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation
pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.).
B.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:355
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility used for conferences and seminars,
with accommodations for sleeping, food preparation and eating, recreation,
entertainment, resource facilities, and meeting rooms.
CONFERENCE ROOM — An accessory use in an enclosed space designed,
furnished and equipped to accommodate conferences or meetings.
CONSERVATION AREA — An environmentally sensitive area with
characteristics such as steep slopes, wetlands, floodplains, high water
tables, forest areas, endangered species habitat, dunes, or areas of
significant biological productivity or uniqueness that have been designated
for protection from any activity that would significantly alter their
ecological integrity, balance, or character.
CONSOLIDATION — The removal of lot lines between contiguous parcels.
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail establishment offering the sale of
prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and magazines,
sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, such as salads, for off-site
consumption.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development.
CONVERSION — A change in the use of land or a structure.
COUNTRY CLUB — Land area and buildings containing such features as
golf courses, tennis courts, playfields, beaches, recreational facilities, a
clubhouse, and other customary accessory uses, open only to members and
their guests.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plan for the physical
development of the county in which the municipality is located, with the
accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory matter
adopted by the County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and
40:27-4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The County Planning Board, as defined in
Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1), of the county in which the
land or development is located.
CRITICAL AREA — An area with one or more of the following environmental
characteristics: steep slopes; floodplain; soils classified as having high
water tables; soils classified as highly erodible, subject to erosion, or highly
acidic; land incapable of meeting percolation requirements; land formerly
used for landfill operations or hazardous industrial use; fault areas; stream
corridors; estuaries; mature stands of native vegetation; aquifer recharge
and discharge areas; wetlands and wetland transition areas; and habitats of
endangered species. (Synonymous with "environmental sensitive area.")
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with a single means of ingress and egress and
having a turnaround, the design of which may vary.
CULVERT — A closed or open conduit designed for the purpose of conveying
an open channel watercourse under a road, highway, pedestrian walk,
railroad embankment, or other type of overhead structure.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:356
CURB — A stone, concrete, or other improved boundary marking the end of
the roadway or paved area.
DAYS — Calendar days unless otherwise specified.
DEDICATION — An appropriation of land to some public use made by the
owner and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
to perform engineering services that may include but not necessarily be
limited to development of project requirements, creation and development
of project design, and preparation of drawings and specifications.
DESIGN FLOOD — The magnitude of a flooding event that a facility is
designed to accommodate. This event can also be used as the basis of a
water surface elevation, or the delineation of a floodway and flood hazard
area.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed to perform engineering or other professional design services that
may include but not necessarily be limited to development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design, and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
DETENTION BASIN (POND) — A stormwater management basin or
alternative structure designed to temporarily detain stormwater runoff.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter and prevailing law.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto
adopted and filed pursuant to this chapter and prevailing law.
DISABLED VEHICLE — (Reserved)
DIVIDED STREET — A street having an island or other barrier separating
opposing moving lanes.
DOCK — Any platform, including a floating raft, designed and used to
support boating or swimming activities, or for viewing the scenic vistas
associated with a lake or other water body.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:357
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any component of the drainage system.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Natural and man-made components that contain,
convey, absorb, store, treat, or dispose of surface water runoff or
groundwater.
DRIVEWAY — A paved or unpaved area used for ingress and egress of
vehicles and allowing access from a street to a building or other structure
or facility.[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof that is used exclusively for
human habitation.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building containing one
dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and is
surrounded by open space or yards.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building to be used as a residence designed
for two (2) families having the exterior appearance of a single family
dwelling house. Each unit in the duplex can be designed in a stacked or
side by side configuration. Each dwelling unit has direct access to the
outside.[Added 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended
for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of
a single family maintaining a household.
EASEMENT — A right to use the land of another for a specific purpose.
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION — The grant of a property right stipulating
that the described land will remain in its natural state and precluding future
or additional development.
EASEMENT, DRAINAGE — Land required for the installation of stormwater
sewers or drainage ditches and/or required for the preservation or
maintenance of a natural stream or watercourse or other drainage facility.
ELEVATION —
EMERGENCY SERVICES — (Reserved)
A. A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level;
A fully dimensioned drawing of the front, rear, or side of a building
showing features such as windows, doors, and relationship of grade to
floor level.
B.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:358
ENDANGERED SPECIES — Wildlife species whose prospects for survival
are in immediate danger because of a loss or change in habitat, over
exploitation, predation, competition, disease, disturbance, or contamination
and designated as such by a governmental agency.
ENLARGEMENT — An increase in the size of an existing structure or
use, including physical size of the property, building, parking and other
improvements.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body created
pursuant to P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.).
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS) — A statement of the effect
of proposed development, and other major private or governmental action,
on the natural and built environment.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS — An area with one or more
of the following environmental characteristics: (Synonymous with "critical
areas.")
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
ESTABLISHMENT — An economic unit, generally at a single physical
location, where business is conducted or services or industrial operations
are performed.
EXCAVATION — Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil,
rock, mineral, mineral substances, or organic substances, other than
vegetation, from water or land, on or beneath the surface thereof, or
beneath the land surface, whether exposed or submerged.
A. Steep slopes;
B. Floodplain;
C. Soils classified as having high water tables;
D. Soils classified as highly erodible, subject to erosion, or highly acidic;
E. Land incapable of meeting percolation requirements;
F. Land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous industrial use;
G. Fault areas;
H. Stream corridors;
I. Estuaries;
J. Mature stands of native vegetation;
K. Aquifer recharge and discharge areas;
L. Wetlands and wetland transition areas;
M. Habitats of endangered species.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:359
EXCEPTION — Permission to depart from the design standards in this
chapter.
EXECUTIVE TRAINING CENTERS — See "conference center."
EXTENSION — An increase in the amount of existing floor area beyond the
exterior wall.
FAMILY — A group of individuals, whether related or unrelated by blood,
marriage, adoption or guardianship, living together in a dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan
based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization
and stability, including but not limited to arrangements involving foster
children placed with a family by the Division of Youth and Family Services
or a duly incorporated child care agency, and contemplated in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
FARM (or FARMLAND) — A parcel of land used for agriculture and
agricultural activities. (See "agriculture" and "agricultural use.")
FARMSTAND — A structure for the display and sale of farm products.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate land areas.
FILL — Sand, gravel, earth, or other materials of any composition
whatsoever placed or deposited in or upon the land.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all, or a portion, of a subdivision which is
presented for final approval.
FINANCIAL OFFICE — An office where monetary advice, resources,
products and affairs, including but not limited to securities brokerage, are
managed or accomplished.
FLOOD — The temporary overflowing of water onto land that is usually
devoid of surface water.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — That portion of the flood hazard area outside of
the floodway based on total area inundated during the regulatory base flood
plus 25% of the regulatory base flood discharge.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodplain consisting of the floodway and the
flood fringe area.
FLOODPLAIN — The channel and the relatively flat area adjoining the
channel of a natural stream or river that has been or may be covered by
floodwater.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:360
FLOODWAY — The channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream or river.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of the building from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from
the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but excluding any space
where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of the building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking
or loading, and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used
or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public. Where
net floor area cannot be precisely identified, it shall be presumed to mean
gross floor area minus 15%.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or
structures compared to the total area of the site.
FOREST — Areas of stands of trees, the majority of which are greater
than 12 inches' caliper, covering an area greater than 1/4 acre; or groves
of mature trees without regard to minimum area and caliper consisting
of substantial numbers of individual specimens, or creating the visual
impression of a forest as defined irrespective of the numbers and kinds of
individual specimens.
FORESTRY — Establishments primarily engaged in the operation of timber
tracts, tree farms, forests nurseries, the gathering of forest products or
performing forest services.
FOWL — Domesticated chickens (hens only, no roosters) or ducks kept
primarily for egg-laying purposes.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-25]
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION — A group of people formally organized for
a common cultural, religious or entertainment interest, involving regular
meetings, rituals or ceremonies, and formal written membership
requirements.
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting a street at and along the front lot
line.
FUNERAL HOME — A place where the dead are prepared for burial or
cremation and where visitation to pay final respects and joining in prayer or
other suitable services and ceremonies is invited.
GALLERY — A building or room for the exhibition and sale or brokerage of
art.
GARAGE — A deck, building, or parking structure, or part thereof, used or
intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building that is accessory to the principal building
and in which no occupation, business or service for profit is carried on, but
used primarily for vehicle storage.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:361
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A structure or portion thereof other than a privatecustomer
and/or employee garage or private residential garage, used
primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles and available to the
general public.
GARAGE, REPAIR — Any building, premises and land upon which a
business, service or industry involving the maintenance, service and repair
of vehicles is conducted or rendered, but excluding auto body and painting
establishments.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
development of a planned development, as provided in Section 4 of P.L.
1987, c. 129 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.2).
GOLF COURSE, MINIATURE — A recreational facility patterned after the
game of golf, but involving only the putting stroke.
GOLF COURSE, EXECUTIVE — A tract of land devoted to the playing of
the game of golf and improved with tees, fairways, greens and hazards and
which may include clubhouses, maintenance buildings, pro shops, shelters
and other similar support facilities normally associated with a golf course,
and which shall be at least 3,000 yards in length for 18 holes and designed
according to the standards of the National Golf Foundation or other
prevailing organization exercising authority or design regulation in the
game of golf.
GOLF COURSE, PAR 3 — A tract of land devoted to the playing of the game
of golf and improved with tees, fairways, greens and hazards and which may
include clubhouses, maintenance buildings, pro shops, shelters and other
similar support facilities normally associated with a golf course, and which
shall be at least 2,000 yards in length for 18 holes and designed according
to the standards of the National Golf Foundation or other prevailing
organization exercising authority or design regulation in the game of golf.
GOLF COURSE, REGULATION — A tract of land for playing golf and
improved with tees, fairways, greens and hazards and which may include
clubhouses, maintenance buildings, pro shops, shelters and other similar
support facilities normally associated with a golf course and which shall
have, in the case of a nine-hole course, at least 3,000 yards in length and, in
the case of an eighteen-hole course, at least 6,000 yards in length.
GOVERNING BODY — The chief legislative body of the Township.
GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY — Any department, commission, independent
agency, or instrumentality of the United States, of a state, county,
incorporated or unincorporated municipality, township, authority, district,
or other governmental unit.
GRADE — The inclination of a sloping surface, usually expressed in
percentage terms.
GRADED AREA — As it pertains to streets, land adjacent and parallel to the
cartway within the right-of-way which must be flattened or leveled to the
same width and cross-slope as the sidewalk if a sidewalk had been required
at that location.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:362
GRANITE BLOCK CURB — A curb constructed of rectangular-shaped stone
or granite blocks, placed vertically in a concrete foundation, and also known
as Belgian block curb.
GREENWAY —
GROUND COVER — Grasses or other plants and landscaping grown or
placed to keep soil from being blown or washed away.
GROUNDWATER — The supply of freshwater under the surface in an
aquifer or geologic formation that forms the natural reservoir for potable
water.
GUARANTIES — Cash, letters of credit, bonds or similar financial
instruments deposited with the Township to assure that required
improvements will be constructed, installed or maintained.
GUIDE RAIL — A safety barrier designed to protect motor vehicles from
hazardous areas.
GUTTER — The shallow channel set along the curb or the paved edge of a
road for purposes of catching and carrying off runoff water.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The total floor area of all the habitable rooms
in a dwelling unit.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room in a dwelling unit other than a kitchen,
bathroom, closet, pantry, hallway, cellar, storage space, garage and
basement recreation room.
HABITAT — The sum total of all the environmental factors of a specific place
that is occupied by an organism, population, or a community.
HAZARDOUS USE — A building or structure or any portion thereof that
is used for the storage, manufacture, or processing of highly combustible
or explosive products or materials, which are likely to burn with extreme
rapidity or which may produce poisonous fumes or explosions; for storage
or manufacturing that involves highly corrosive, toxic or noxious alkalies,
acids, or other liquids or chemicals producing flame, fume, poisonous,
irritant, or corrosive gases; and for the storage or processing of any
materials producing explosive mixtures of dust or that result in the division
of matter into fine particles subject to spontaneous ignition.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility or institution, whether public or
private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance
and the treatment of mental or physical conditions.
A linear open space established along either a natural corridor, such as
a stream valley or ridgeline, or over land along a scenic road or other
route;
A.
B. Any natural or landscaped course for pedestrian or bicycle passage;
An open space connector linking park areas, natural reserves, cultural
features, or historic sites with each other and with populated areas.
C.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:363
HEALTH CLUB — An establishment that provides facilities for aerobic
exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts,
swimming facilities, saunas, showers, massage rooms and lockers.
HEALTH SERVICES — Health care facilities as well as establishments
providing support to the medical profession and patients, such as medical
and dental laboratories, blood banks, and miscellaneous types of medical
supplies and services.
HEIGHT (when referring to a tower or lawful structure) — The distance
measured from the lowest finished grade of the parcel to the highest point
on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antennas.
The height of the tower shall not include a lightning rod.[Amended
5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-17]
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity carried out for gain by a resident and
conducted as a reasonable, customary, incidental and accessory use in the
residents' dwelling unit.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Partial office use of a single-family
detached dwelling by a practitioner of a recognized profession, including
but not limited to attorneys, engineers, architects, medical practitioners,
planning consultants, insurance agents, accountants and similar
professionals offering a service for a fee.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community association other than
a condominium association, that is organized in a development in which
individual owners share interests and responsibilities for costs and upkeep
for common open space or facilities.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational facilities.
HOUSEHOLD — A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with
common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and
all areas and facilities for the preparation and serving of food within the
dwelling unit.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The area of a lot covered by impervious
surface.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
IMPOUNDMENT — A body of water, such as a pond, confined by a dam,
dike, flood gate, or other barrier.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:364
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — For subdivision or site plan purposes, any
street which complies in width and construction with municipal standards.
IMPROVEMENT — Any permanent structure that becomes part of, placed
upon or is affixed to land.
INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system for
disposal of sanitary sewage into the ground which is designed and
constructed to treat sanitary sewage in a manner that will retain most of
the settleable solids in a septic tank, and to discharge the liquid effluent to
a disposal field. The term "system" is equivalent in meaning.
INHERENTLY BENEFICIAL USE — A use which clearly and unequivocally
serves the public good according to New Jersey law and which is recognized
as such by the upper courts of New Jersey.
INN — A commercial facility for the housing and feeding of transient guests
in a building which was formerly a residence or which is akin to a residence
in scale and function.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A nonprofit, religious, or public use, such as
a library, public or private school, hospital, or government-owned or -
operated building, structure, or land use for public purpose.
INTERESTED PARTY —
ISOLATED LOT — An undeveloped substandard lot in separate ownership
from surrounding properties.
JUNK — (Reserved)
JUNKYARD — Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, salvage,
or disposal of junk, including but not limited to wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal or other scrap or discarded or abandoned goods, materials,
machinery or one or more unregistered/inoperable/substantially disabled
vehicle, or any other solid or bulk waste.58
KENNEL — A commercial establishment in which dogs or domesticated
animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for a fee or
compensation.
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of
New Jersey; and
A.
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing
within or without the municipality, whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under this act, or
whose rights to use, acquire, or enjoy property under this act, or under
any other law of this state or of the United States have been denied,
violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this act.
B.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:365
KIOSK — A freestanding structure upon which directories, notices,
announcements, posters and/or temporary information are posted.
LAKE — An inland water body fed by springs or surrounding runoff and
impounded naturally or by a dam, dike, flood gate or other barrier.
LAKE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — A development of housing
surrounding a lake comprising at least two acres in surface area.
LAND — Real property, including improvements and fixtures on, above or
below the surface.
LANDMARK — Any site, building, structure, or natural feature that has
visual, historic, or cultural significance.
LANDSCAPE —
LANDSCAPE PLAN — A component of a development plan on which is
shown proposed landscape species (such as number, spacing, size at time
of planting, and planting details); proposals for protection of existing
vegetation during and after construction; proposed treatment of hard and
soft surfaces; proposed decorative features; grade changes; buffers and
screening devices; and any other information that can reasonably be
required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving
authority.
LARGE BOAT — Any boat measuring at least 8 1/2 feet in width and at least
20 feet in length.[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
LEVEL OF SERVICE — The description of traffic conditions along a given
roadway or at a particular intersection.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — Industrial economic activity involving the production
of small or light goods utilizing small amounts of raw materials and
machines and/or equipment which cause no steady or significant noise
levels beyond the property lines, produce no air pollution, glare or
degradation of water quality or routine heavy truck traffic, and involve no
inherently hazardous use or activity. For purposes of this chapter, "light
industry" shall also mean laboratories and research facilities.
LIGHTING PLAN — An iso-footcandle diagram or diagrams showing
existing and/or proposed levels of illumination produced in accordance with
standards contained in the IES Lighting Handbook, as amended, or similar
prevailing standard.
LIMESTONE — A carbonate sedimentary rock consisting chiefly of calcium
carbonate, or any rock consisting of at least 80% calcium or magnesium
carbonate.
A. An expanse of natural scenery; or
Lawns, trees, plants, and other natural materials, such as rock and
wood chips, and decorative features, including sculpture, patterned
walks, fountains and pools.
B.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:366
LOCAL UTILITY — Any sewerage authority created pursuant to the
Sewerage Authorities Law, P.L. 1946, c. 138 (N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.); any
utilities authority created pursuant to the Municipal and County Utilities
Authorities Law, P.L. 1957, c. 183 (N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq.); or any utility,
authority, commission, special district or other corporate entity not
regulated by the Board of Regulatory Commissioners under Title 48 of the
Revised Statutes that provides gas, electricity, heat, power, water or sewer
service to the Township or the residents thereof.
LODGE — A building or group of buildings under single management
containing both rooms and dwelling units available for temporary rental to
transient guests.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit
LOT AREA — The total area contained within the lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at
their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — Impervious coverage as defined in this chapter.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot that separates one lot from
another lot or from a right-of-way.
LOT, SUBSTANDARD — A parcel of land that has less than the minimum
area or minimum dimensions required in the zone in which the lot is
located.
LOT AVERAGING — A form of development of contiguous tracts of land
which are in the same ownership and which permit a reduction in individual
lot areas and bulk requirements, provided that the remaining land area
is devoted to open space, agriculture or preservation of environmentally
sensitive areas.[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
LOT DEPTH — The average distance measured from the front lot line to
the rear lot line. Where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, "lot
depth" means the distance measured by drawing several evenly separated
lines from the front to rear lot lines, at right angles to the front lot line to
the extent possible, and averaging the length of such lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured between the
side lot lines.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts
upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.[Added
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at
setback points on each side lot line an equal distance back from the front
lot line and/or right-of-way line.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:367
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required by this
act, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit under the
circumstances specified in Section 16 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.5), and cash.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance includes the placement
of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or
clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.[Added 6-24-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-11]
MAJOR SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE —
See "Solar."
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality as set forth in and adopted pursuant
to Section 19 of P.L. 1975 c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28).
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Township of Vernon.[Amended 9-26-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-21; Ord. No. 2015-08]
MINIMUM IMPROVABLE AREA — The minimum two-dimensional space
within which a structure and associated improvements are permitted to
be built on a lot and that is defined by minimum yard setbacks and an
absence of environmental constraints, including wetlands, floodplains and
steep slopes.[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
MINOR SITE PLAN — The development plan of a single lot which proposes
new development within the scope of development specifically permitted
under § 330-50 of this chapter and contains the information reasonably
required in order to make an informed determination as to whether the
requirements established by this chapter for approval of a minor site plan
have been met.[Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
MINOR SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE
— See "Solar."
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision or resubdivision of land for the
creation of not more than three lots including the remainder, provided that
such subdivision does not involve a planned development; any new street;
extension of any off-tract improvements, the cost of which is to be prorated
pursuant to this chapter; a parcel of land that was the subject of a minor
subdivision approval within five years prior to the submission of the current
application.[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
MOTEL — An establishment providing sleeping accommodations with a
majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the
necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.
MOUNTAIN RESORT — A planned commercial development in which a ski
area, golf course, recreational facilities, retail sales and/or services, art
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:368
centers, open air activities, restaurants, galleries, office uses, commercial
recreation, hotels or lodges, and other recreational and/or commercial uses,
in any approved combination thereof, would establish a resort or resortoriented
community, or both, operated as a single entity under a common
theme. The mountain resort shall contain components consisting of a
mountain retreat, residential village, and resort village.[Added
11-15-2001 by Ord. No. 01-26]
MOUNTAIN RETREAT — A component of a mountain resort, including
hotels or lodges; accessory commercial uses located in such hotels or
lodges, townhouses, duplexes, and/or other vacation-type units;
recreational uses; and/or conservation uses.[Added 11-15-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-26]
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, or the governing body when acting pursuant to this chapter
and any agency which is created by or responsible to the Township when
such agency is acting pursuant to this chapter or prevailing law.
MUNICIPAL RESIDENT — A person who is domiciled in the
municipality.[Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Vernon.
NATURE PRESERVE — An area in which human activity is limited to hiking
and walking trails with activities of similar impact and which is restricted
by conservation easement.
NOISE — Any undesired audible sound.
NOISE POLLUTION — Continuous or episodic excessive noise in the human
environment.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NUISANCE — An interference with the enjoyment and use of property.
NUISANCE ELEMENT — Any environmental pollutant, such as smoke,
odors, liquid wastes, solid wastes, radiation, noise, vibration, glare, or heat.
NURSERY — Land and/or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs and
plants for sale, and which may include landscaping and gardening supplies.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:369
NURSERY SCHOOL — See "child-care center."
NURSING HOME — See "residential health care facility."
OFFICE — A room or group of rooms used for conducting the administrative
affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government and
generally furnished with desks, tables, files, communication and electronic
equipment.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building containing offices used primarily for
conducting the affairs of businesses, professions, services, industry, or
government, or like activity, and may include ancillary services for office
work, such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand, and
child-care facilities.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions thereto,
adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of the county pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article 5 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32).
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or the closest half of the street or right-of-way
abutting the property of which the lot is a part.[Amended 12-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-27]
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT — Improvement required to be made off site as
a result of an application for development and including, but not limited to,
road widening and upgrading, stormwater facilities, and traffic circulation
improvements.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A storage area for a motor vehicle that
is directly accessible to an access aisle and that is not located within a
dedicated street right-of-way.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on the closest half of an abutting street or
right-of-way.[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENT — Improvement required to be made off tract
as a result of an application for development.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question and excluding any abutting street
or right-of-way.[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE — A storage area for a motor vehicle that is
located within a dedicated street right-of-way.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on the closest half of an abutting street or right-ofway.[
Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:370
land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OPEN-SPACE RATIO — The total area of open space divided by the total site
area in which the open space is located.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping in an unenclosed area of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24
hours.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, partnership, company,
corporation or other entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be developed to commence and maintain proceedings to develop
the same under this chapter.
PANEL — See "Solar."
PARKING SPACE — A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a
public or private parking area.
PARTIAL DESTRUCTION — A building or structure that, because of fire,
flood, explosion or other calamity, requires the rebuilding of less than half
of its floor area.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
Section 7.1 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12).
PAVEMENT —
PEDESTRIAN GENERATOR — A development which will realize high facility
usage by persons arriving on foot.
PERCOLATION TEST ("PERC TEST") — A test designed to determine the
availability of ground to absorb water and used in determining the
suitability of a soil for drainage or for the use of a septic system.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, which may be accepted by
a municipality, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit
under the circumstances specified in Section 16 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.5), and cash.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — See "standards of performance."
PERMEABILITY TEST — A test designed to determine the rate at which
water moves through a unit area of soil or rock material at hydraulic
gradient of one, determined as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2, 6.3, 6.5 or
6.6.[Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
A created surface, such as asphalt, brick, concrete or stone, placed on
the land to facilitate passage;
A.
B. That part of a street having an improvement surface.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:371
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment primarily
engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her
personal goods or apparel, including but not limited to beauty shops, barber
shops, laundries, cleaners, funeral homes, and clothing rental operations.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A church, synagogue, temple or other facility that is
used for prayer and religious services by and for persons of similar beliefs;
a special purpose building that is architecturally designed and particularly
adapted for the primary use of conducting regular, formal religious services
by a religious congregation; a group of such buildings or structures that,
by design and construction, is primarily intended for conducting organized
religious services and associated accessory uses. See "church."
PLANNED ADULT COMMUNITY — A residential community provided for
permanent residents aged 55 years or over in which the residential property
and the residential-related open space, recreational facilities and common
area are all owned by a mutual nonprofit corporation or corporations
established pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey and also
governed by Section 213 of Title 11 of the National Housing Act (or
provisions of a substantially similar or comparable nature) or by individuals,
condominium associations or other entities, all of which shall have rules
and regulations controlling the development, operation and maintenance in
conformance with this chapter.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by this chapter to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses or both and any
residential and other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be
permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.[Amended 12-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-27]
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by this chapter to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan, containing one or more residential clusters of planned
unit residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public,
commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential
uses to residential uses as shall be specified in this chapter.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage of five acres or more to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters,
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:372
which may include appropriate commercial or public or quasi-public uses
all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNING BOARD — The municipal Planning Board established pursuant
to Section 14 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23).
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT, SKETCH — A concept or informal map of a proposed subdivision or
site plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and
classification.
PLAYGROUND — An active recreation area with a variety of facilities,
including equipment for younger children as well as court and field games.
PLOT —
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of this chapter, including permitted towers or antennas that
have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not
expired.[Added 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-17]
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
Sections 34, 36 and 37 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49) prior to development approval after
specific fundamental elements of a development plan have been agreed
upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating, in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PREMISES — A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land, together with the buildings
and structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — See "building, principal."
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of any lot or parcel.
PRIVATE LAKE COMMUNITY — A community of one or more
neighborhoods within an identifiable area surrounding one or more lakes,
sharing a common residential and social purpose pursuant to a charter,
bylaws and other regulations, and in which the rights to the use of the
lake(s) and other common areas are exclusive to member residents and
their invitees, and which is controlled and managed by a community
association as defined in this article.
PRIVATE LEASEHOLD LAKE COMMUNITY — A residential lake community
in which the land is not in fee simple ownership in connection with a
structure (for example, the Lake Pochung and Laurel Lake communities).
A. A single unit parcel of land;
A parcel of land that can be identified in reference to a recorded plat or
map.
B.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:373
Such uses may include existing single-family detached homes, clubhouses
and public and private recreational facilities.[Added 12-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-27]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession maintained for the conduct of that profession.
PROJECT — A development with necessary site improvements on a
particular parcel of land.
PROPERTY — A lot, parcel, or tract of land together with the building and
structures located thereon.
PUBLIC AREAS —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital improvement
program or other proposal for land development adopted by the appropriate
public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and provided for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical, and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state or
county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public utility regulated by the Board of Regulatory
Commissioners and defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Buildings, structures, and facilities,
including generating and switching stations, poles, lines, pipes, pumping
stations, repeaters, antennas, transmitters and receivers, valves and all
buildings and structures relating to the furnishing of utility services, such
as electric, gas, telephone, water, sewer, and public transit, to the public.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
RACQUET SPORTS FACILITY — A facility for court games played with a
racquet and ball and played indoors or outdoors on various surfaces.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of water in an aquifer.
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas;
B. Other public open spaces;
C. Scenic and historic sites; and
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:374
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Leisure time activities commonly of a structured
nature and ordinarily involving more than one person, requiring equipment
and taking place at prescribed places, sites, or fields.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Activities that involve relatively inactive or less
energetic activities, such as walking, sitting, picnicking, board and table
games, and simple appreciation of the environs.
RECREATION FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the conduct
of sports and leisure time activities.
RECREATION FACILITY, ACTIVE — A commercial recreation facility
offering action rides and similar activities to the public, but specifically
excluding amusement parks and rides typically associated therewith.
RECREATION FACILITY, COMMERCIAL — A recreation facility operated as
a business and opened to the public for a fee.
RECREATION FACILITY, PERSONAL — A recreation facility provided as an
accessory use on the same lot as the principal permitted use and designed
to be used primarily by the occupants of the principal use and their guests.
RECREATION FACILITY, PRIVATE — A recreation facility operated by a
nonprofit, private organization and open only to bona fide members and
guests of such organization.
RECREATION FACILITY, PUBLIC — A recreation facility opened to the
general public owned and operated by a governmental agency, quasigovernmental
agency, or other organization on behalf of the governmental
agency or the general public.
RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT — A residential development planned,
maintained, operated and integrated with a major recreation facility, such
as a golf course, ski area or lake.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular-type unit primarily designed as
temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use, and as
otherwise defined in N.J.A.C. 8:22-1.2.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — An establishment engaged in the
experimentation, testing and development of products.
RESIDENCE — A home, abode, or place where an individual is actually
living at a specific point in time.
RESIDENTIAL ACCESS STREET — The lowest order, other than rural street
type, of residential street (see "street hierarchy"). Provides frontage for
access to private lots and carries traffic having destination or origin on the
street itself. Designed to carry traffic at slowest speed.
RESIDENTIAL APPEARANCE — A building structure having the
appearance of a single-family residence, generally similar to single-family
residences Classes 15 through 20, inclusive, as depicted in the Real
Property Appraisal Manual for New Jersey Assessor, 3rd Edition, issued
by the local property and public utility branch, Division of Taxation,
Department of the Treasury, State of New Jersey.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:375
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A private or public facility or
institution, principally engaged in providing services for health
maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury,
deformity or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general
hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center, diagnostic
center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care facility, skilled
nursing home, nursing home, intermediate care facility, tuberculosis
hospital, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic,
dispensary, home health care agency, boarding home or other home for
sheltered care and bioanalytical laboratory or central services facility
serving one or more such institutions but excluding institutions that provide
healing solely by prayer.
RESIDENTIAL MAJOR COLLECTOR — The highest order of residential
street (see "street hierarchy"). Conducts and distributes traffic between
lower-order residential streets and higher-order streets (arterials and
expressways).
RESIDENTIAL MINOR COLLECTOR — Middle order of residential streets
(see "street hierarchy"). Provides frontage for access to lots, and carries
traffic to and from adjoining residential access streets.
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD STREET — A type of residential access
street conforming to traditional subdivision street design, which provides
access to building lots fronting on a street and provides parking on both
sides of street (see "street hierarchy").
RESIDENTIAL VILLAGE — A component of a mountain resort, including
townhouses, duplexes, and/or other vacation-type units, which is designed
to complement a resort village, and is located within a reasonable walking
distance of a resort village.[Added 11-15-2001 by Ord. No. 01-26]
RESORT — A facility for transient guests where the primary attraction
generally involves recreational facilities, features or activities. (See "resortoriented
community.")
RESORT-ORIENTED COMMUNITY — A centrally managed facility which
provides resort-oriented housing; full service lodging; dining or cooking
facilities; and on-site recreational amenities for overnight guests or
members. A resort-oriented community shall include an organized program
of activities such as hunting, fishing, nature study, arts and crafts, skiing,
snowmobiling, boating, horseback riding, and hiking. The community may
also include corporate or religious retreats or conference
facilities.[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
RESORT-ORIENTED HOUSING — Housing associated with a resortoriented
community and may include single-family dwellings, single-family
attached (duplex) dwellings, townhouses, and cabins.[Added 12-13-1999
by Ord. No. 99-27]
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:376
RESORT UNIT — A designated facility for lodging of guests in a mountain
resort, whether located in a hotel, lodge, townhouse, duplex, or other
vacation-type unit.[Added 11-15-2001 by Ord. No. 01-26]
RESORT VILLAGE — A component of a mountain resort in which there
is located various commercial uses, such as bakeries; banks and financial
institutions; barber and beauty shops; bicycle and sports-related rentals,
sales and service; child-care facilities; cocktail lounges and bars; conference
centers; delicatessens; drugstores and pharmacies; galleries; grocery and
convenience stores; health clubs; hotels or lodges; indoor recreation uses
(e.g., amusements and arcades); liquor stores; miniature golf; nightclubs;
offices; restaurants; ski resort support services (e.g., gondolas, resort sales
and operation centers, skier information services, transit center, lift ticket
offices, event areas); spas; theaters; and/or other commercial, retail,
service, and recreational uses normally associated with a resort.[Added
11-15-2001 by Ord. No. 01-26]
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink are prepared,
served, and consumed primarily within the principal building, excluding
fast-food and take-out restaurants.[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-27]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A business establishment whose principal
business is the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the
customer and that is ready for consumption either within the restaurant
building, in cars on the premises or off the premises.[Added 12-13-1999
by Ord. No. 99-27]
RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT — An eating establishment where food and drink
are prepared and served and which may be consumed either within the
principal building or can be picked up for consumption off the premises,
but does not include drive-through window service.[Added 12-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-27]
RESUBDIVISION —
RETAIL SALES — Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise
to the general public for personal or household consumption and without
necessarily rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
RETAIL SALES, OUTDOOR — The display and sale of products and services
outside of a building or structure, including garden and landscaping
supplies, flowers, shrubs, plants, produce, farm equipment, building and
construction materials and boats, but excluding new or used vehicles.
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law; or
A.
The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets
within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
B.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:377
RETAIL SERVICES — Establishments predominately providing services or
entertainment as opposed to, but not necessarily exclusive of, products, as
where a product is consumed or used in the service.
RETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management basin designed to retain
some water on a permanent basis.
RIDING ACADEMY — An establishment where horses are boarded and
cared for and where instruction in riding, jumping and showing is offered
and where horses may be hired for riding.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade tree, or for another special
use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES — The lines forming the boundaries of a right-of-way.
RURAL — As it pertains to streets, when density is one dwelling unit per
acre or lower, a road primarily serving as access to abutting building lots,
which has no on-street parking, and lot-to-street access is designed so
vehicles do not back out of lots onto the street (see "street hierarchy").
SATELLITE EARTH STATION ANTENNA — A parabolic or dish-shaped
antenna or any other apparatus or device that is designed for the purpose
of receiving radio waves.
SCENIC AREA — An open area, the natural features of which are visually
significant or geologically or botanically unique.
SCENIC CORRIDOR — An area visible from a highway, waterway, railway,
or major hiking, biking or equestrian trail that provides vistas over water,
across expanses of land, such as farmlands, woodlands or coastal wetlands,
or from mountaintops or ridges.
SCHOOL — Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or
used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY — Any school licensed by the state and that meets
the state requirements for elementary education.
SCHOOL, PAROCHIAL — A school supported and controlled by a church or
religious organization. (See "school, private.")
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — Any building or group of buildings, the use of which
meets state requirements for elementary, secondary, or higher education
and which use does not secure the major part of its funding from any
governmental agency.
SCHOOL BUS SHELTER — A bus shelter as defined herein, but devoted
exclusively to the protection and convenience of school bus passengers.
(See "bus shelter.")
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:378
SCREENING —
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity and other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground system with a septic tank used for the
decomposition of domestic wastes.
SETBACK — The distance between a building or structure and any side
or rear lot line; in front yards, "setback" means the distance between a
building or structure and the right-of-way line.
SETBACK, ADJUSTED — A setback requirement which is enlarged as a
result of a proposed or claimed right-of-way width pursuant to an official
map, or the duly adopted circulation or traffic plan of State of New Jersey,
County of Sussex or Township of Vernon.
SETBACK LINE — A line established as parallel as possible to a
corresponding right-of-way line or lot line, drawn in such a manner as to
touch the nearest part of a corresponding building or structure.
SETBACK, MINIMUM — The minimum allowable distance between a
building wall or part of a structure and a corresponding right-of-way line or
lot line.
SEWER — Any pipe conduit used to collect and carry away sewage or
stormwater runoff from the generating source to treatment plants or
receiving streams.
SHADE TREE — A tree, usually deciduous, planted primarily for overhead
canopy.
SHARED DRIVEWAY — A single driveway serving two or more adjoining
lots.
SHELTERED CARE FACILITIES — A profit or nonprofit boarding home,
rest home or other home for the sheltered care of adult persons which, in
addition to providing food and shelter to four or more persons unrelated to
the proprietor, also provides personal care or service beyond food, shelter
and laundry.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee
parking provided on site, provision for goods deliveries separated from
customer access, utilizing aesthetic considerations, protection from the
elements, and landscaping and signage in accordance with this chapter and
an approved plan.
A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby
structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely
planted vegetation;
A.
The removal of relatively coarse floating and/or suspended solids by
straining through racks or screens.
B.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:379
SHOPPING MALL — A shopping center with stores on both sides of an
enclosed or open pedestrian walkway.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images,
but excluding the American flag or other governmental flags, window
displays, athletic scoreboards on school premises, or official
announcements and signs of government.
SIGN, ANIMATED OR MOVING — Any sign or part of a sign that changes
physical position or light intensity by movement or rotation or that gives the
visual impression of such movement or rotation.
SIGN, AWNING OR CANOPY — A sign that is mounted, painted, or attached
to an awning, canopy, or marquee that is otherwise permitted by this
chapter.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other
than the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign that directs attention to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service owned, offered, or manufactured,
or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary sign erected on the premises on
which construction is taking place during the period of such construction,
indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects,
contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters,
sponsors and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest in the
construction project.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign limited to directional messages, principally
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as but not limited to "one-way,"
"entrance" and "exit."
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A sign listing the tenants or occupants of a building
or group of buildings and that may indicate their respective professions or
business activities.
SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign lighted by or exposed to
artificial lighting by light(s) directed toward such sign.
SIGN, FACE — The area or display surface used for the message.
SIGN, FLASHING — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign that exhibits
changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever
such as, but not limited to, intermittent lighting.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:380
SIGN, FREESTANDING — See Sign, Ground.[Amended 5-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-05]
SIGN, GROUND — Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building, but
excluding "Pylon Sign." A sign which is supported by two or more upright or
braces in or upon the ground.[Amended 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-05]
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark, or
other identifying symbol, address, or any combination of the name, symbol
and address of a building, business, development, or establishment on the
premises where it is located.
SIGN, INFORMATIONAL — An on-site sign commonly associated with, but
not limited to, information and directions necessary or convenient for
visitors coming on the property, including signs, marking entrances and
exits, parking areas, circulation direction, rest rooms, and pickup and
delivery areas.
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign lighted by or exposed to
artificial lighting by lights within such sign.
SIGN, MEMORIAL — A sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a person,
event, structure, or site.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — A sign located on the premises giving the name or
address, or both, of the owner or occupant of the building or premises.
SIGN, POLE — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, post or other
support so that the bottom edge of the sign is six feet or more above grade.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign announcing or supporting political
candidates, parties or issues in connection with any national, state or local
election.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building,
structure, or the ground.
SIGN, PRIVATE SALE OR EVENT — A temporary sign advertising private
sales of personal property, such as "house sale," "garage sale," "rummage
sale" and the like, and private not-for-profit events, such as picnics,
carnivals, bazaars, game nights, art fairs, craft shows, and Christmas tree
sales.
SIGN, PROJECTING OR SHINGLE — A sign that is wholly or partly
dependent upon a building for support and that projects more than 12
inches from such building.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the
premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas, fabric, plywood, paper, or other light material and designed or
intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
SIGN, WALL — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:381
for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that does not project
more than 12 inches from such building or structure.
SITE — Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land.
SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Any construction work on or improvement in
connection with residential development limited to streets, roads, parking
facilities, sidewalks, drainage structures and utilities.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
SKI AREA — An area developed for snow skiing, with trails and lifts, and
including ski rental and sale, instruction, and eating facilities.
SKI RESORT — A ski area that also includes sales, rental, and service of
related equipment and accessories, eating places, residences, hotels/motels
or similar accommodations.
SOLAR —
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways;
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices; and
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring
review and approval of site plans by the Planning Board.
C.
MAJOR SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY FACILITY OR
STRUCTURE — Major solar or photovoltaic energy facility or structure
or major solar or photovoltaic energy system — A system of fuel cells,
solar or photovoltaic panels and equipment for the production of energy
that is not a minor solar or photovoltaic energy facility or structure.
[Added 6-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-14]
A.
MINOR SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY FACILITY OR
STRUCTURE — [Added 6-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-14] Minor solar
or photovoltaic energy facility or structure or minor solar or
photovoltaic energy system — A fuel cell, solar or photovoltaic
panel or system of panels for the production of energy that:
Uses solar energy as its fuel; is located on the power beneficiary's
premises; is designed and intended primarily to offset part or all
of the beneficiary's requirements for energy consumption on site;
and is secondary to the beneficiary's use of the premises for other
lawful purpose(s);
(1)
B.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:382
SPECIALTY FOOD STORE — A retail store specializing in a specific type or
class of foods, such as an appetizer store, bakery, butcher, delicatessen, fish
market, gourmet shop, or health food store.
SPECIALTY SHOPPING CENTER — A shopping center, the shops of which
cater to a specific market and are linked together by an architectural,
historical or geographic theme, or by a commonality of goods and services,
consisting mainly of small shops with distinctive merchandise.
STABLE — A structure that is used for the shelter and care of horses and
cattle.
STABILIZATION — As it pertains to streets, the ability of a surface to
resist deformation from imposed loads. Stabilization can be accomplished
by adequate thicknesses of asphalt base and surface course, dense graded
aggregates, cement treated soil aggregates, or concrete or precast masonry
units set on a base course.
STABILIZED BASE COURSE (BITUMINOUS) — Stabilized base course or
asphalt concrete base consists of soil aggregate and bituminous material
uniformly mixed and placed on a previously prepared surface.
STABILIZED EARTH — Earth or soil, strengthened usually by the mixing
of cement or lime with the original material to achieve increased strength,
thereby reducing shrinkage and movement.
STABILIZED TURF — Established, mowable vegetation.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE OR PERFORMANCE STANDARDS —
Standards:
Is intended to mitigate electrical system improvement
requirements; and
(2)
Generates not more than 110% of the power consumed by the
beneficiary's premises, which shall be documented through the
submission of power company electricity usage bills for the 12
months prior to the date of application, or another form of
documentation acceptable to the Vernon Township Engineer. This
documentation shall be provided at the time of application.
(3)
If the solar of photovoltaic energy facility or structure is not located
on the same property as the use it serves, then the facility shall be
treated as a major solar or photovoltaic energy facility or structure.
(4)
PANEL — A solar panel is an elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or
array thereof, that captures and converts solar radiation to produce
power, and includes, but is not limited to, flat plate, focusing solar
collectors, or photovoltaic solar cells and excludes the base or
foundation of the panel, plate, canopy or array. [Added 6-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-14]
C.
Adopted by this chapter pursuant to Subsection 52d (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65d) regulating noise levels, glare, earthborn or sonic
vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic
A.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:383
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples,
light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.[Added
5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-17]
STEEP SLOPE — A land area where the slope exceeds 15%.[Amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for temporary storage of
stormwater runoff, and the controlled release of such runoff during and
after a flood or storm.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES — A broad term for structural
and nonstructural control of stormwater runoff and nonpoint pollution.
STORMWATER RETENTION — A provision for the permanent storage of a
fixed volume of water.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there be no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. For
purposes of this chapter, any basement having 50% or more of the surface
area of the front wall located above grade shall be considered a story. In
addition to the above, a basement located in a nonresidential building shall
be considered a story unless the basement is and remains unfinished and
unutilized except for storage or utility purposes.[Amended 12-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-27]
STORY, HALF — A partial story under a gable, hip or gavel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than
four feet above the floor of such story.
STREAM — A watercourse having a source and terminus, banks, and
channel through which waters flow at least periodically.
STREAM CORRIDOR — Any river, stream, pond, lake, or wetland, together
with adjacent upland areas, that supports protective bands of vegetation
that line the waters' edge.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or which
is approved by official action as provided by this act; or which is shown on
a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer
prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board
of the power to review plats; and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
matters, explosive and inflammable matters, smoke and airborne
particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects or conditions
and such other similar matters as may be reasonably required by the
Township; or
B. Required by applicable federal or state laws or municipal ordinances.
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:384
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street
lines.
STREET FURNITURE — The functional elements of streetscapes including
but not limited to benches, trash receptacles, planters, telephone booths,
kiosks, sign posts, streetlights and bollards.[Amended 3-25-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-04]
STREET HARDWARE — The mechanical and utility systems within a street
right-of-way such as hydrants, manhole covers, traffic lights and signs,
utility poles and lines, parking meters, and the like.
STREET HIERARCHY — The conceptual arrangement of streets based upon
function. A hierarchical approach to street design classifies streets
according to function, from high-traffic arterial roads to streets whose
function is residential access.
STREET, LOOP — A street that has its only ingress and egress at two points
on the same street.
STRUCTURE —
STUB STREET — A street which is to be extended when the adjacent
property is developed.
STUDIO — The workshop of an artist, sculptor, photographer, musician, or
craftsman.
A combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy, use
or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the surface of a
parcel of land.
A.
The following shall be exceptions to the definition of "structure" as
presently defined in this section: [Added 5-8-2000 by Ord. No.
00-12]
(1) Wells and well lines.
(2) Utilities, including lines and poles.
(3) Driveways.
Subsurface portions of septic systems and related subsurface
components.
(4)
Heating oil tanks, 1,000 gallons or less, located within 10 feet of
the principal structure and in conformance with applicable UCC
regulations.
(5)
Propane tanks used for the heating of the principal structure, 500
gallons or less, located within 10 feet of the principal structure and
in conformance with applicable UCC regulations.
(6)
(7) Stormwater leaders which enter underground drainage facilities.
B.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:385
SUBDIVISION —
SUBGRADE — The prepared surface upon which pavements and shoulders
are constructed.
SUPERMARKET — A retail establishment primarily selling food as well as
other convenience and household goods on a broad basis.
SURFACE COURSE — The placement of the asphalt concrete material on a
previously prepared base course.
SWALE — A low-lying or depressed land area commonly wet or moist, which
can function as an intermittent drainageway.
TEMPORARY OUTDOOR ACTIVITY — An event or happening that is carried
out primarily out of doors at a scheduled time or for a fixed period of time
not to exceed 15 days per year, including flea markets, fireworks and other
displays, public speeches or performances, seasonal sales, swap markets,
group picnics, concerts and kiosks, and for which a permit or license may
be necessary.[Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure without any foundation or
footings and that is removed when the designated time period, activity, or
use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
TEMPORARY USE — A use established for a limited duration with the intent
to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
A.
The following shall not be considered "subdivisions" within the meaning
of this chapter, if no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size;
(1)
(2) Division of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure;
(3)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument; and
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts, or parcels
of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to
the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax
map or atlas of the municipality.
(5)
B.
C. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:386
TENNIS COURT — An improved area for playing regulation tennis.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion
pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances.
THEME PARK — An entertainment or amusement facility built around a
single theme that may be historical, architectural, or cultural.
THREATENED SPECIES — Wildlife species which may become endangered
if conditions surrounding them begin to or continue to deteriorate and are
so designated by a governmental agency.
TOPSOIL —
TOT-LOT — An improved and equipped play area for small children usually
up to elementary school age.
TOURISM — The attracting and serving of people visiting the Township of
Vernon for recreation and vacations.
TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units
in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit
is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit
by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.
TRACT — An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is the subject
of a development application.
TRAFFIC GENERATOR — A use in the Township of Vernon that is likely to
attract into the Township substantial vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY — A report analyzing anticipated roadway
conditions with and without an applicant's development.
TRAILER — A structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another
vehicle, and used for short-term human occupancy, carrying of materials,
goods, or objects, or as a temporary office.
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
TRANSIENT GUEST — A person who stays and is the recipient of hospitality
in a hotel, lodge, inn or bed-and-breakfast on a brief, short-lived,
impermanent basis, generally less than 14 days.
The natural, undisturbed surface layer of soil having more organic
matter than subsequent layers, a pH of 5.0 to 7.5, and suitable for
satisfactory growth and maintenance of permanent, locally adapted
vegetation.
A.
Where the original surface layer has been removed, the reapplication of
soil material used to cover an area so as to improve soil conditions for
establishment and maintenance of adapted vegetation. The reapplied
material must be friable, loamy soil reasonably free of debris,
objectionable weeds, and stones; have a natural pH of 5.0 to 7.5; have
an organic matter content greater than 2.00%; and contain no toxic
substances which may be harmful to plant growth.
B.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:387
TRAVELED WAY — The portion of a cartway used for vehicular travel.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance pursuant to Section 47 and Subsections 29.2b, 57c and 57d
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40b, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d) of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — A place where animals are given medical care,
and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incident to the
hospital use.
VISTA — A unique and scenic view to or from a particular point, including
but not limited to mountains, lakes, farmlands, historic sites and
settlements, pastures, groves, glens, and similar features.
VISUAL RESOURCE LANDS — Lands broadly comprising a scenic area or
scenic corridor, or involving one or more component features such as but
not limited to those described in § 330-87.
WAIVER — Permission to depart from the requirements of this chapter
with respect to the submission of required maps or documents. (See
"exception.")
WALL — The vertical exterior surface of the building.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in
which water flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously
or intermittently, and has a definite channel, bed, and banks and includes
any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation of reason of overflow or
floodwater.
WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN — The identification and
strategies, polices, and procedures for managing water quality and
wastewater treatment and disposal in a subject area.
WATERFRONT PROPERTY — A property that has frontage on a water body.
WETLANDS, FRESHWATER — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, and
which is regulated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
WILDLIFE HABITAT — Land identifiable as or set aside for animal
habitation.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — All the structures or
uses serving the wireless telecommunications site, such as towers,
equipment sheds, telecommunications antennas and fences.[Added
5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-17]
§ 330-5 VERNON CODE § 330-5
1:388
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE — The enclosed area in which
a tower and its appurtenances are located.[Added 5-8-2000 by Ord. No.
00-17]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER ("TOWER") — A
freestanding or guyed, vertical structure designed to support one or more
wireless telecommunications antennas. This definition shall not apply to
amateur or ham radio towers.[Added 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-17]
WOODLANDS, MATURE — A forested area containing deciduous and/or
evergreen specimens of which the majority are considered mature by
prevailing forestry standards or as otherwise established by a recognized
forestry expert.
YARD — An open space extending between the closest point of any building
and the nearest lot line or right-of-way line, and which is unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically
provided in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — The area extending across the full width of the lot between
the right-of-way line and the building.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the full width of the lot
between the rear lot line and the building.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
and lying between a side lot line and the closest point of the building.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer:
ZOOLOGICAL GARDEN — A place where animals are kept for viewing by
the public in a setting akin to a botanical garden, and which may include
indoor spaces for animals and public gathering, viewing, food consumption
and associated retail sales.
Which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building; and
A.
Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or variance therefrom
duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to Sections 47 and 57
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70) of the Municipal Land Use Law.
B.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:389

ARTICLE III
Municipal Land Use Board
[Amended in entirety 9-11-2008 by Ord. No. 08-19]
§ 330-6. Continuation of Planning Board.
The Planning Board, as heretofore established, shall be and is hereby
continued under the name "Municipal Land Use Board," with all powers and
duties as described herein.
§ 330-7. Municipal Land Use Board membership; terms.
A. There shall be a nine-member Municipal Land Use Board, the
membership of which shall consist of the following four classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor;
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the Township other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor; provided that if
there be an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Municipal
Land Use Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed
to be the Class II Municipal Land Use Board member for purposes
of this section in the event that there be among the Class IV or
alternate members of the Municipal Land Use Board a member of
the Board of Education.
(3) Class III: A member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: other citizens of the Township, to be appointed by the
Township Council.
(a) The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
position or employment except that one such member may be a
member of the Historic Preservation Commission. Not more
than one member of the Board of Education may be a Class IV
member of the Municipal Land Use Board. If and while there is
an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Municipal Land Use Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
shall be a Class IV Municipal Land Use Board member, unless
there be among the Class IV or alternate members of the
Municipal Land Use Board a member of the Historic
Preservation Commission and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case the member common to the
Municipal Land Use Board and Environmental Commission
shall be deemed a Class II member of the Municipal Land Use
Board. For the purpose of this section, membership on a
Township board or commission whose function is advisory in
nature, and the establishment of which is discretionary and not
§ 330-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-7
1:391
§ 330-8. Alternate members.
required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of
municipal office.
B. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to such
member's official tenure. If such member is the Mayor's designee in the
absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms of the members
composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or terminate at
the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs
first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV member
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for
three years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first. The
term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such
other body or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs
first. To the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of the terms of
all Class IV members shall be distributed so that concurrent term
expirations are avoided, provided that the initial Class IV term for no
member shall exceed four years. After the establishment of the Board's
membership as aforesaid, the Class IV term of each member shall be
four years. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of the Municipal Land Use Board term, it shall be filled by
appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term.
C. No member of the Municipal Land Use Board shall be permitted to act
on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest. Any member other than a Class I member,
after a public hearing if requested, may be removed by the governing
body for cause.
D. The term of appointment of any class of member of the Board appointed
pursuant to this section shall commence on January 1, 2009.
[Amended 2-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
E. The Mayor may appoint a designee to serve at his pleasure, provided a
letter of appointment is filed with the Township Clerk. Any person
appointed shall serve until a letter of appointment of another person is
filed with the Township Clerk.
F. All members of the Board, except the Class II member, shall be
municipal residents.
A. There shall be four alternate members of the Municipal Land Use
Board, all of whom shall be municipal residents. Alternate members
shall be appointed by the Township Council for Class IV members and
shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1"
§ 330-7 VERNON CODE § 330-8
1:392
§ 330-9. Lack of quorum; substitute members.
If the Municipal Land Use Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular
or alternate members is prohibited from acting on a matter due to the
member's personal or financial interest therein, the Chairman of the
Municipal Land Use Board shall appoint such persons to serve as substitute
members as may be necessary to constitute a quorum for that matter only.
Any such substitute member shall have the same qualifications as a Class IV
member or the Board.
§ 330-10. Organization of Municipal Land Use Board; offices;
expenses.
The Municipal Land Use Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from the members of Class IV, and select a Secretary who may or may not be
a member of the Municipal Land Use Board or a municipal employee, and
create and fill such other offices as established by ordinance. An alternate
member shall not serve as Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Municipal
Land Use Board. The Board shall have legal counsel pursuant to contract at
a fixed rate of compensation, who shall be an attorney at law of the State of
New Jersey, other than the Municipal Attorney, and who shall be qualified
to serve the Municipal Land Use Board pursuant to Section 1:1-3 of the
Rules and Regulations of the Municipal Land Use Board adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8, as amended. The Board may also appoint a licensed
professional engineer in the State of New Jersey in accordance with Section
1:1-4 of the Rules and Regulations of the Municipal Land Use Board, who
need not be the Township Engineer. The Board may also appoint or engage
a licensed professional planner in the State of New Jersey pursuant to
Section 1:1-5 of the Rules. The Board may also employ, contract for and
through "Alternate No. 4." The terms of the alternate members shall be
for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be
such that the term of not more than two alternate members shall expire
in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms
of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
Township Council for the unexpired term only. [Amended 2-26-2009
by Ord. No. 09-03; 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-07]
B. No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which
he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if requested, be
removed by the governing body for cause.
C. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
§ 330-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-10
1:393
fix the compensation of other staff and services as it may deem necessary,
not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use. The governing body shall make provision in its
budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Municipal Land Use
Board.
§ 330-11. Powers.
A. The Municipal Land Use Board shall follow the provisions of this Code
and the Municipal Land Use Law, and shall accordingly exercise its
powers in regard to:
(1) The Master Plan;
(2) Subdivision control and site plan review;
(3) The Official Map, if there be one;
(4) The Zoning Ordinance;
(5) Conditional uses;
(6) Capital improvements program;
(7) Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval.
B. The Municipal Land Use Board shall also have the following powers
formerly exercised by the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative officer based on, or made in the enforcement
of, the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Ordinance, or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which the Board is authorized to pass by any Zoning or Official Map
Ordinance in accordance with this chapter and the Municipal Land
Use Law.
(3) Variances.
(a) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or by reason of
an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property or the structures lawfully existing
thereon, the strict application of any zoning regulation would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such
property, grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to
§ 330-10 VERNON CODE § 330-11
1:394
such property, a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship;
(b) Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece
of property, the purposes of zoning would be advanced by a
deviation from the Zoning Ordinance requirements and the
benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant a variance to allow departure from such
regulations; provided, however, that no variance from those
departures enumerated in Subsection D of this section shall be
granted under this subsection; and provided further that the
proposed development does not require approval by the
Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to
review a request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60a.
(4) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant of a variance to
allow departure from zoning regulations to permit a use or
principal structure in a district restricted against such use or
principal structure; an expansion of a nonconforming use; deviation
from a specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67
pertaining solely to a conditional use; an increase in the permitted
floor area ratio as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4; an increase in the
permitted density as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, except as applied
to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated
undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or a
height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the
maximum height permitted in the district for a principal structure.
A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least five members.
(5) If an application for development requests one or more variances,
but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in Subsection D of this
section, the decision on the requested variance or variances shall
be rendered under Subsection C of this section.
(6) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and Zoning
Ordinance.
(7) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32;
(8) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street;
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-11
1:395
(9) Hear appeals taken by any interested party affected by any decision
of an administrative officer of the Township based on or made in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or Official Map; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as to
require a developer to file an application for development with the
Board of Adjustment for action under any of its powers without
prior application to an administrative officer; and
(10) Hear appeals, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a, concerning the
question of error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal
made by the administrative officer pursuant to a report submitted
by the Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with Article
X.
(11) Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as
the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval or conditional
use approval whenever the proposed development requires
approval by the Board of Adjustment of the variance pursuant to
Subsection d of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
(12) The Municipal Land Use Board shall, at least once a year, review its
decisions on applications and appeals for variances and prepare
and adopt by resolution a report of its findings on Zoning
Ordinance provisions which were the subject of variance requests
and its recommendations for Zoning Ordinance amendment or
revision, if any. The Board shall send copies of the report and
resolution to the governing body.
C. The Municipal Land Use Board may:
(1) Participate in the review of programs or plans required by state or
federal law or regulation;
(2) Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process; and
(3) Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the governing body for the aid and
assistance of the governing body or other agencies or officers.
D. Whenever the proposed development requires approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a variance pursuant to
Subsection D of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, the Municipal Land Use Board shall
have the power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Board of Adjustment:
(1) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c;
(2) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a permit
for a building or a structure in the bed of a mapped street or a
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32; and
§ 330-11 VERNON CODE § 330-11
1:396
(3) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure not related to a street.
E. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of the
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to
the request for a variance, or direction for issuance of a permit, as the
case may be. The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a
permit and a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit shall be conditioned
upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by the Municipal Land
Use Board. No such subsequent approval shall be granted unless the
approval can be granted without substantial detriment to the public
good and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of
the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
F. The Municipal Land Use Board shall have referral power whenever a
development regulation, revision or amendment thereto is proposed.
Prior to the adoption of any such regulation, revision or amendment,
the Municipal Land Use Board shall receive a true copy of the same as
introduced by the governing body, and shall make and transmit to the
governing body, within 35 days after referral, a report including
identification of any provisions in the proposed regulation, revision or
amendment which are inconsistent with the Master Plan, and any
recommendations concerning these inconsistencies and any other
matters as the Board deems appropriate. The governing body, when
considering the adoption of such regulation, revision or amendment,
shall review the report of the Municipal Land Use Board and may
disapprove or change any recommendation by a vote of a majority of its
full authorized membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons
for not following such recommendations. The failure of the Municipal
Land Use Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five-day period
provided herein shall relieve the governing body from the requirements
of this subsection. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
diminishing the application of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 if
there be an Official Map, or Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 to any
zoning ordinance or any amendment or revision thereto.
G. The governing body may by ordinance provide for the reference of any
matter or class of matters to the Municipal Land Use Board before final
action thereon by the governing body or municipal officer having final
authority thereon except for any matter under the jurisdiction of the
Board of Adjustment. Whenever the Municipal Land Use Board shall
have made a recommendation regarding a matter authorized by this
subsection to another municipal body, such recommendation may be
rejected only by a majority of the full authorized membership of such
other body.
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-12
1:397
§ 330-12. Citizen Advisory Committee; copies of applications for
Environmental Commission.
§ 330-13. Capital improvement program.
A. The Municipal Land Use Board may be assisted in its duties by a
Citizens' Advisory Committee, which shall have no power to vote or take
other action required of the Board, and which shall be appointed and
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
B. If the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to the
Municipal Land Use Board and to the Board of Adjustment an index of
the natural resources of the Township of Vernon, the Municipal Land
Use Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission an
informational copy of every application for development submitted to
the Board. Failure of the Municipal Land Use Board to make such
informational copy available to the Environmental Commission shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
A. The Municipal Land Use Board may be authorized by the governing
body from time to time to prepare a program of municipal capital
improvement projects projected over a term of at least six years, and
amendments thereto. Such program may encompass major projects
being currently undertaken or future projects to be undertaken, with
federal, state, county and other public funds or under federal, state or
county supervision. The first year of such programs shall, upon
adoption by the governing body, constitute the capital budget as
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-43 et seq. The program shall classify projects
in regard to the urgency and need for realization, and shall recommend
a time sequence for implementation. The program may also contain the
estimated cost of each project and indicate probable operating and
maintenance costs and probable revenues, if any, as well as existing
sources of funds or the need for additional sources of funds for the
implementation and operation of each project. The program shall, as far
as possible, be based on existing information in the possession of the
departments and agencies of the Township and shall take into account
public facility needs indicated by the perspective development shown in
the Master Plan or as permitted by other land use controls contained in
this Code.
(1) In preparing such program, the Municipal Land Use Board shall
confer, in a manner deemed appropriate by the Board, with the
Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, and other Township officials and
agencies as well as the school board.
(2) Any such programs shall include an estimate of the displacement of
persons and establishments caused by each recommended project.
B. In addition to any of the requirements in Subsection A of this section,
whenever the Municipal Land Use Board is authorized and directed to
prepare a capital improvements program, every Township department,
§ 330-12 VERNON CODE § 330-13
1:398
§ 330-13.1. Municipal Land Use Board to exercise powers of
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.
All prior ordinances or resolutions or portions thereof the Township Council
of the Township of Vernon inconsistent herewith be and are hereby
repealed. To the extent that any prior ordinance or resolution refers to the
"Planning Board" or "Zoning Board" or "Zoning Board of Adjustment," such
ordinance or resolution shall be deemed to apply to the Municipal Land Use
Board.
authority or agency shall, upon request of the Municipal Land Use
Board, transmit to the Board a statement of all capital projects
proposed to be undertaken by such department, authority or agency,
during the term of the program, for study, advice and recommendation
by the Municipal Land Use Board.
C. Whenever the Municipal Land Use Board has prepared a capital
improvement program as aforesaid, it shall recommend such program
to the governing body which may adopt such program with any
modification approved by affirmative vote of a majority of the full
authorized membership of the governing body and with the reasons for
said modification recorded in its minutes.
D. Whenever the Municipal Land Use Board shall have adopted any
portion of the Master Plan, the governing body or other public agency
having jurisdiction over the subject matter, before taking action
necessitating the expenditure of any public funds, incidental to the
location, character or extent of such project, shall refer the action
involving such specific project to the Municipal Land Use Board for
review and recommendation in conjunction with such Master Plan and
shall not act thereon, without such recommendation or until 45 days
have elapsed after such reference without receiving such
recommendation. This requirement shall apply to action by a housing,
parking, highway, special district, or other authority, redevelopment
agency, school board or other similar public agency, state, county or
municipal.
§ 330-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-13.1
1:399

ARTICLE IV
Zoning Board of Adjustment59
[Amended in entirety 9-11-2008 by Ord. No. 08-19]
§ 330-14. (Reserved)
§ 330-15. (Reserved)
§ 330-16. (Reserved)
§ 330-17. (Reserved)
§ 330-18. (Reserved)
59.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 08-19 dissolved the Zoning Board of Adjustment and created
a combined Municipal Land Use Board. See Article III, Municipal Land Use Board.
§ 330-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-18
1:401

ARTICLE V
Procedures and General Provisions
§ 330-19. Preapplication; concept plan; informal review; complete
application.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure for
Planning Board review and action on applications for subdivisions and/
or site plans. The procedure is intended to provide orderly and
expeditious processing of such applications and encourage early
dialogue between the Board and the developer for the purpose of the
constructive exchange of ideas.
B. Preapplication. For the purpose of expediting applications and reducing
subdivision and site plan design and development costs, the developer
may and is encouraged to request a preapplication conference and/or
concept plan in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Preapplication conference.
(a) At the request of the applicant, the Planning Board shall
authorize a preapplication conference. The purpose of this
conference is to:
[1] Acquaint the applicant with the substantive and
procedural requirements of the Subdivision and Site Plan
Ordinance;
[2] Provide for an exchange of information regarding the
proposed development plan and applicable elements of the
Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance and other development
requirements;
[3] Advise the applicant of any public sources of information
that may aid the application;
[4] Otherwise identify policies and regulations that create
opportunities or pose significant constraints for the
proposed development;
[5] Review any proposed concept plans and consider
opportunities to increase development benefits and
mitigate undesirable project consequences;
[6] Allow input into the planning and design of the project.
(b) The preapplication conference allows the applicant to meet
with appropriate municipal representatives. These individuals,
who shall be designated by the Mayor and governing body, or
by the Planning Board, may include:
[1] Planning Board and/or Township Engineer;
§ 330-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-19
1:403
[2] Township Planner;
[3] Zoning Officer;
[4] Committees or representative(s) from the Planning Board
or the Board of Adjustment;
[5] Representatives from the Environmental Commission,
Historic Preservation Commission, and other
commissions, as deemed appropriate.
(c) Applicants seeking a preapplication conference shall submit a
written request to the Land Use Administrator. The conference
will occur within 14 days of receipt of the written request.60
(d) The applicant shall not be required to pay an application fee for
the preapplication conference; however, an escrow deposit
may be necessary to cover the fees of Board or municipal
consultants whose attendance and review is appropriate. If
requested by the applicant, a brief written summary of the
preapplication conference will be provided within 14 working
days after the conference.
(e) The applicant shall not be bound by the determination of the
preapplication conference, nor shall the Planning Board or
subdivision and site plan committee be bound by any such
review.
(2) Concept plan.
(a) In addition or as an alternative to the preapplication
conference at the request of the applicant, the Board or the
subdivision and site plan committee shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for a development for which the
applicant intends to prepare and submit an application for
development.
[1] The purpose of the concept plan is to provide the Board or
subdivision and site plan committee an opportunity to
guide the applicant in the formative stages of subdivision
and site plan, and foster dialogue to achieve a better
planning result than might have occurred in the absence of
such dialogue.
[2] Applicants seeking concept plan informal review shall
submit the items stipulated in Schedule ____ of this
chapter 10 days before the concept plan meeting. These
items provide the developer and Planning Board or
subdivision and site plan committee with an opportunity to
discuss the development proposal in its formative stages.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-19 VERNON CODE § 330-19
1:404
§ 330-20. Meetings.
(b) At the request of the applicant, a brief written summary of the
concept plan review will be provided within 14 working days
after the final meeting.
(c) The applicant may be charged reasonable administrative fees
for concept plan review. The amount of any administrative fees
for such informal review shall be a credit toward fees for
review of the application for development. An escrow deposit
may be necessary to cover review by Board or municipal
consultants.
(d) The applicant shall not be bound by any concept plan for which
review is requested, nor shall the Planning Board or
subdivision and site plan committee be bound by any such
review.
C. Application.
(1) Content. An application for development shall include the items
specified in Article XVII which constitutes a checklist of items to be
submitted for subdivision and site plan review. A copy of this
checklist shall be completed by the applicant and submitted with
the application form.
(2) Complete application. The completeness of an application shall be
determined in accordance with the provisions of § 330-21H.
A. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall conduct their
business in public meetings unless otherwise provided herein and
permitted by law. The time and place for regular meetings shall be fixed
by rules adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8. Regular meetings shall
be scheduled not less than once a month and shall be held as scheduled
unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
Special meetings may be provided at the call of the Chairman or on the
request of any two of the members of the Board, which shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with this chapter.
No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members of
the Board present at the meeting except as otherwise required by law.
Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes required to approve
an application for development shall be deemed an action denying the
application.
B. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with
this chapter. The Board may convene an executive session for the
purpose of discussing and studying any matters to come before it, and
such session shall not be deemed a regular or special meeting within
the meaning of this chapter.
§ 330-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-20
1:405
§ 330-21. Hearings; decisions; complete application.
C. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board
and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the
Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. Once
adopted the minutes shall thereafter be made available for public
inspection during normal business hours at the office of the
administrative officer. Any interested party, for a fee charged pursuant
to this chapter, may obtain a reproduction of the minutes, once adopted,
for his or her use.
A. The Board shall hold a hearing on each application for development.
The Planning Board shall hold a hearing on the adoption, revisions or
amendment of the Master Plan.
B. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of the Board.
Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at hearing shall
be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days before the
date of the hearing during normal business hours in the office of the
administrative officer. The applicant may produce other documents,
records, or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or
supplement previously filed maps and documents. However, the Board
shall be under no obligation to proceed upon maps and documents for
which approval is sought, including revised maps, received less than
five working days prior to the hearing or a continued date thereof, in
order that the Board and its professionals, as well as the public, shall
have a fair and reasonable opportunity to review the same prior to the
hearing or continued hearing thereon.
C. All persons giving testimony at a hearing shall be duly sworn by the
Board Attorney or, in the absence of the Board Attorney, the Chairman
or his or her designee. The presiding officer shall have the power to
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents
presented by the parties, and the provisions of the County and
Municipal Investigations Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply. All
interested parties shall have the right of cross-examination of witnesses
involved in an application for development, which rights shall be
exercised through an attorney or directly, and subject to the discretion
of the presiding officer, and to reasonable limitations as to time and
number of witnesses. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable
to the hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
D. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings
by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means. The Board
shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on
request, to any interested party at the expense of such party. The Board,
in furnishing a transcript of the proceedings or tape to an interested
party, shall not charge such interested party more than the actual cost
§ 330-20 VERNON CODE § 330-21
1:406
of preparing the transcript or tape. Transcripts shall be certified in
writing by the transcriber to be accurate. [Amended 12-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-27]
E. The Board shall reduce to writing each decision on any application for
development. Such decision shall include findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon. The Board shall provide the findings and
conclusions through the following means:
(1) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in this chapter for action by the Board on the application
for development; or
(2) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Board voted
to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the Board who
voted for the action taken may vote on the memorializing
resolution, and the vote of a majority of such members present at
the meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall
be sufficient to adopt the resolution. If only one member who voted
for the action attends the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption, the resolution may be adopted upon the
vote of that member. An action denying the application for failure of
a motion to receive the number of votes required to approve the
same shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above, with
those members voting against the motion for approval being the
members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution of
operative denial. The vote on a memorializing resolution shall be
deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the Board and not
to be an action of the Board; however, the date of the adoption of
the memorializing resolution shall constitute the date of the
decision for purposes of the mailings, filings, and publications
required by Subsections F and G of this section. [Amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
F. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge, and to all who request a copy of the decision,
for a reasonable fee. A copy of the decision shall also be filed by the
Board in the office of the administrative officer. The administrative
officer shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any
interested party for the fee established therefor pursuant to this
chapter, and shall make the same available for public inspection during
reasonable office hours.
G. Publication of decision.
(1) A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Township, if there be one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Such publication shall be
arranged by the Secretary of the Board or the administrative officer
§ 330-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-21
1:407
if other than the Secretary. Any applicant may also arrange for such
publication. The Township may make a reasonable charge for its
publication.
(2) The period of time in which an appeal of the decision may be made
shall run from the first publication of the decision, whether
arranged by the municipality or the applicant
H. No hearing need be convened by the Board in the absence of a complete
application for development as certified by the Board or its authorized
committee or designee. In the event that an application has not been
certified as complete within 45 days of the date of its submission, the
application shall nevertheless be deemed complete upon the expiration
of the forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the applicable
time period, unless the application lacks information indicated on the
approved checklist which has been provided to the applicant, and the
Board, or its authorized committee or designee, has notified the
applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application within 45
days of submission of the application. If waivers are sought with respect
to one or more of the submission requirements, the applicant must
request the same, in which event the Board or its authorized committee
or designee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days.
I. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that he is entitled to
approval of the application. The Board may subsequently require
correction of any information found to be in error and submission of
additional information not specified in this chapter or any revisions in
the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. However,
the application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying documents
so required by the Board.
J. Appearances, order of presentation, reports, continuances, boardemployed
or other expert witnesses, viewing by the Board of evidence
and exhibits, letters and petitions and burden of proof shall be proffered
or proceeded upon, as the case may be, in accordance with the rules of
the Board.
K. If, at the time set for hearing, a verbatim record cannot be made for
good reason, as where recording equipment is inoperable, the Board
shall, if time is not a factor, continue the hearing to another date.
However, if time is a factor, and if all interested parties present agree,
the Board may proceed with the hearing on the understanding that in
the event of an appeal or further review, an agreed statement of facts
will be supplied to the reviewing body. In the absence of such
agreement, where time is a factor, the Board shall be entitled to deny
the relief sought in order to prevent a statutory approval by reason of
the Board's failure to make a decision within the required time.
§ 330-21 VERNON CODE § 330-21
1:408
§ 330-22. Voting.
§ 330-23. Decisionmaking.
L. The Board, on its own motion, may dismiss any action without prejudice
if neither the applicant nor anyone on his or her behalf appears at the
time set for the hearing of said application. Further, the Board, on its
own motion, may dismiss, without prejudice, any application for failure
to comply with its rules. Any applicant may, at any time before the
commencement of the hearing, voluntarily withdraw his or her
application, in which case the application shall be dismissed without
prejudice. The Board shall have the power to impose reasonable terms
and conditions on the dismissal of any application.
M. If, during the pendency of an application, an ordinance amendment is
adopted which affects the application, such amendment shall control
the decision of the Board. If the adoption of an ordinance prohibits the
proposed use, the Planning Board's jurisdiction shall be terminated,
and the applicant shall be transferred to the jurisdiction of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
A. A member of the Board who has been absent for one or more of the
meetings in which a hearing was held, or was not a member of the
municipal agency at that time, shall be eligible to vote on the matter
upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding an absence
from one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such Board
member certifies in writing to the Board that he or she has read a
transcript or listened to a recording of the hearing from which he or she
was absent or was not a member. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-27]
B. All voting on an application for development shall result from a motion
and a second, together with an opportunity for discussion thereon. All
votes shall be taken by roll call, and the vote and name of the member
casting the vote shall be recorded in the minutes. Unless otherwise
provided in this chapter or by law, any action may be authorized by a
majority vote of the members present at such meeting.
C. An abstention shall be regarded as an assent to the vote of the majority
and as otherwise provided in the rules of the Board. A disqualified
member shall not be counted as an abstention and shall, instead,
remove himself or herself from the panel and not be involved in the
consideration of the application. A tie vote shall defeat an application;
abstentions shall not be construed to approve an application.
A. Each application shall be decided strictly on the basis of the facts
adduced at the hearing and as contained in the maps and other
documents comprising the record for which approval is sought. The
facts adduced at the hearing, all testimony and all evidence on which
the Board makes its decision must be part of the record, and the
Board's decision must include findings of facts from the record on
§ 330-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:409
§ 330-24. Power to rehear, modify or vacate decisions.
which it made its decision and conclusions on the points of law
pertaining thereto. The Board's decision must be reached at a public
meeting, and the Board's vote on the making of its decision and the
adoption of its resolution must be taken at a public meeting.
B. The Board shall have the discretionary power to grant relief other than
the precise relief or portion thereof sought by the applicant, provided
that any interested party shall have received reasonable notice of the
fact that such relief might be sought and granted.
C. The Board may decide to reserve decision on a matter after the hearing
is completed and may make its decision at the next meeting, provided
that the required or extended period within which to decide the
application will not expire prior to the next succeeding meeting.
D. The Board may authorize the Board Attorney to prepare a resolution for
consideration at the next meeting, provided the prevailing time
limitation will not expire prior to such meeting. Any action to authorize
the preparation of such a resolution shall not be construed as the
making of a decision or action on the application, but shall be only an
indication of an intention to act upon an application in a certain manner.
The Board shall not be bound by such measure.
E. Any resolution prepared by the Board Attorney and transmitted to the
Board for consideration at its next meeting shall be considered a
privileged document between the Attorney and the Board and shall not
become a matter of public record until such time as it is determined by
the Board and its Attorney that the resolution properly memorializes
and reflects the decision of the Board in the final work product of the
Attorney. The Board and the Attorney may consent to a waiver of this
requirement for good cause shown and expressed by the applicant or
interested parties at or before the time of decision.
A. In the event that it appears to the Board on reasonable grounds that an
applicant or witness has not been truthful, or that a mistake has been
made, and such circumstances bear on facts which are essential in the
granting of the relief sought by the applicant and were relied upon by
the Board taking action, then, upon discovery of such
misrepresentation, fraud or mistake, the Board may rehear the matter,
either on application of an interested party or on its own motion when
unusual circumstances so require in the interests of justice. In such
event, the Board may, upon notice directed to the applicant and all
other interested parties, require the applicant to appear before it for
the purpose of explaining the testimony previously given at the hearing.
At such subsequent hearing, it may be determined whether or not the
testimony as given at the original hearing was, in fact, false or
mistaken. Mistake or fraud in proceedings, left uncured, shall
constitute grounds for a rescission.
§ 330-23 VERNON CODE § 330-24
1:410
§ 330-25. Notice of applications.
Notice pursuant to Subsections A, B, D, E, F, G and H of this section shall
be given by the applicant unless a particular Township official is hereafter
so designated by ordinance; provided that nothing contained herein shall
prevent the applicant from giving such notice if he or she so desires. Notice
pursuant to the said subsections shall be given at least 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing.
B. At any time after the adoption of a resolution of memorialization, any
person having an interest in such decision may move the Board for an
order relaxing, vacating or modifying any term or condition of said
decision by filing with the Board a request in the form of a letter setting
forth the reasons therefor and the grounds relied upon. If the nature,
extent, scope or consequence of the proposed change would be
substantial in any manner or respect, a hearing shall be set and the
movant shall give notice of such hearing in the same form and manner
as otherwise required in the case of the original application. The Board,
on its own motion, may, in a proper case, similarly order all parties in
interest to show cause at the time and place fixed in the notice why the
terms or provisions of any decision ought not to be vacated or modified.
A. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for an extension of approvals
for five or more years under Subsection d of Section 37 of P.L. 1975, c.
291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49) and Subsection b of Section 40 of P.L. 1975, c.
291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52) for modification or elimination of a significant
condition or conditions in a memorializing resolution in any situation
wherein the application for development for which the memorializing
resolution is proposed for adoption required public notice, and for any
other applications for development with the following exceptions: minor
site plan review as defined in this chapter, minor subdivisions as
defined in this chapter or final approval pursuant to Article VI of this
chapter. Public notice shall be given for appeals of determinations of
administrative officers pursuant to Subsection a of Section 57 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70), and for requests for interpretation
pursuant to Subsection b of Section 57 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70). Public notice shall also be given in the event that relief is
requested pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or 40:55D-76 as part of an
application for development otherwise excepted herein from public
notice. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Township, if there be one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-27]
B. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection A of
this section shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on
the current tax duplicate, located in the state and within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing; provided
that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has
§ 330-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-25
1:411
a unit above or below it; or horizontal property regime, in the case of
any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it.
Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner
as shown on the said current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the
property; or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property
owner at his address as shown on the said current tax duplicate. Notice
to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner.
Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president,
a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment
or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to
a condominium association, horizontal property regime, community
trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which is
the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to
a corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or
homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
C. Upon the written request of an applicant, the administrative officer
shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax
duplicates of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to Subsection B of this section. In
addition, the administrative officer shall include on the list the names,
addresses and positions of those persons who, not less than seven days
prior to the date on which the applicant requested the list, have
registered to receive notice pursuant to Subsection H of this section.
The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in
such list, and failure to give notice to any owner or to any public utility,
cable television company, or local utility not on the list shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A sum not to exceed $0.25 per
name or $10, whichever is greater, may be charged for such list.
D. Notice of hearings on applications for development involving property
located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be given by
personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such municipality.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Sussex
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development
of property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown
on the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining
other county land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
G. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. The notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Subsection b of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.
§ 330-25 VERNON CODE § 330-25
1:412
§ 330-26. Notice of applications to public utilities, cable television
companies and local utilities.
§ 330-27. Special circumstances involving notice.
H. Notice of hearings on applications for approval of a major subdivision or
site plan not defined as a minor site plan requiring public notice
pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall be given, in the case of a
public utility, cable television company or local utility which possesses a
right-of-way or easement within the Township and which has registered
with the Township in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1, by:
(1) Serving a copy of the notice on the person whose name appears on
the registration form on behalf of the public utility, cable television
company or local utility; or
(2) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person whose name
appears on the registration form at the address shown on that
form.
I. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the board
holding the hearing on the application for development in the event that
the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to this section.
J. Notice pursuant to Subsections D, E, F, G and H of this section shall not
be deemed to be required unless public notice pursuant to Subsection A
and notice pursuant to Subsection B of this section are required.
A. Every public utility, cable television company and local utility interested
in receiving notice pursuant to Subsection h of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 may
register with the Township. Such registration shall remain in effect
until revoked by the public utility, cable television company, or local
utility or by its successor in interest.
B. The Township Clerk shall adopt a registration form and shall maintain a
record of all public utilities, cable television companies, and local
utilities which have registered with the Township pursuant to
Subsection A of this section. The registration form shall include the
name of the public utility, cable television company or local utility and
the name, address and position of the person to whom notice shall be
forwarded, as required pursuant to Subsection h of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
The information contained therein shall be made available to any
applicant, as provided in Subsection c of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
C. A registration fee of $10 shall be paid by any public utility, cable
television company or local utility which registers to receive notice
pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
A. Notice concerning the adoption, revision or amendment of the Master
Plan shall be given in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-13.
§ 330-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-27
1:413
§ 330-28. Exclusive authority of Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment.
Any power expressly authorized by this chapter and the Municipal Land
Use Law61 to be exercised by either the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment shall not be exercised by the other board or any other body,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter and the said law.
§ 330-29. Tolling of running of period of approval.
In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by
any state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare, and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with said development, the running of the period of approval shall
be suspended for the period of time said legal action is pending or such
directive or order is in effect.
§ 330-30. Conditional approvals.
B. Notice concerning the adoption, revision or amendment of a
development regulation involving property situated within 200 feet of
an adjoining municipality shall be given in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-15.
C. Notice concerning hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of
any development regulation, municipal capital improvement program
or municipal official map shall be given to the Sussex County Planning
Board in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15b.
D. Notice of a hearing on an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
proposing a change to the classification or boundaries of the zoning
district, exclusive of classification or boundary changes recommended
in a periodic general reexamination of the Master Plan by the Planning
Board, shall be given by the Township Clerk in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-62.1. The Clerk shall execute affidavits of proof of service of the
notices required pursuant thereto, and shall keep the affidavits on file
along with proof of publication of the notice of the required public
hearing on the proposed Zoning Ordinance change. Costs of the notice
provision shall be the responsibility of the proponent of the amendment.
A. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare or by
61.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 330-27 VERNON CODE § 330-30
1:414
§ 330-31. Term of variance.
Any variance granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 pursuant to the Board
of Adjustment's powers, or by the Planning Board pursuant to its ancillary
powers under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 where a separate or bifurcated application
has been made to the Planning Board for a variance subject to subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use, shall expire one year from the date of adoption of the
resolution granting such variance unless an appropriate building permit
has been obtained in connection therewith or as otherwise permitted or
required by law. In the event that the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to
its powers under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76, or the Planning Board, pursuant to
its powers under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25, shall have granted subdivision, site
plan or conditional use approval either predicated on a variance pursuant
to Subsection d of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 or involving ancillary variances
contemplated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, or as otherwise permitted by law, and
provided that such approval has been granted concurrently with or not
later than one year after approval of the subject variance, then, in that
event, the term of any such variance shall be coterminus and coextensive
with the period of protection conferred upon the applicant pursuant to such
concurrent or subsequent approval.
§ 330-32. Application by corporations or partnerships; list of
certain stockholders required.
A corporation or partnership applying to either Board for permission to
subdivide a parcel of land into six or more lots, or applying for a variance to
construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more family units, or for approval of a
site to be used for commercial purposes, shall list the names and addresses
of all stockholders or individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock of
a directive or order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or
court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare,
the Board shall process such application for development in accordance
with the development regulations contained in this chapter, and, if
such application complies with the said regulations, the Board shall
approve such application conditioned on removal of such legal barrier
to development.
B. In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the Board, the Board shall, in appropriate instances, condition its
approval upon the subsequent approval of such governmental agency;
provided that the Board shall make a decision on any application for
development within the time period provided by this chapter and by law
or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by the
applicant, unless the Board is prevented or relieved from so acting by
the operation of law. The Secretary of the Board shall monitor the
performance of all such conditions.
§ 330-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-32
1:415
any class or at least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as the case may
be.
§ 330-33. Disclosure of 10% ownership interest of corporation or
partnership.
If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of the
corporation, or 10% or greater interest in a partnership, subject to
disclosure pursuant to § 330-32, that corporation or partnership shall list
the names and addresses of its stockholders holding 10% or more of its
stock or of 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the case may be,
and this requirement shall be followed by every corporate stockholder or
partner in a partnership, until the names and addresses of the noncorporate
stockholders and individual partners, exceeding the ten-percent ownership
criterion established hereinabove, have been listed.
§ 330-34. Failure to comply with disclosure requirements; fine.62
No application of any corporation or partnership which does not comply
with §§ 330-32 and 330-33 shall be approved by the respective board. Any
corporation or partnership which conceals the names of the stockholders
owning 10% or more of its stock, or of the individual partners owning a tenpercent
or greater interest in the partnership, as the case may be, shall be
subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000 which shall be recovered in the name
of the Township in any court of record in the state in a summary manner
pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 330-35. Time periods.
A. The period within which a board must decide an application shall
commence as of the date of certification of completeness and, if not
certified as being complete within 45 days, then on such date as the
application is deemed to be complete by operation of law; provided that
nothing herein shall be construed to disallow an extension pursuant to
Subsection C of this section.
B. The Secretaries to the Board of Adjustment and Planning Board shall
monitor the status of all pending applications, keep a record thereof,
and keep each Board advised accordingly.
C. The Board may seek, and an applicant may grant, consent to an
extension of time on the record or in writing. If an applicant fails to
appear and the period within which to decide the application will expire
prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board, such
application will be dismissed without prejudice. It shall not be
necessary to obtain the consent of any objector to an application in
order that an application be extended.
D. The time for action by the Board of Adjustment shall be as follows:
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-32 VERNON CODE § 330-35
1:416
(1) On variance applications: 120 days after certification or the
deeming of completeness, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
(2) On applications for site plan approval or subdivision approval if
such application was filed simultaneously with the application for a
use variance: 120 days.
(3) On subdivision and site plan applications filed separately after a
use variance application: as provided under Subsection E of this
section.
E. The time for action by the Planning Board on site plan, subdivision,
conditional use and general development plan applications shall be as
follows:
(1) Where simultaneous application for a site plan, subdivision or
conditional use and for a variance is made: 120 days.
(2) On an application for subdivision of 10 or fewer lots: 45 days.
(3) On an application for subdivision of more than 10 lots: 95 days.
(4) On a minor site plan or minor subdivision: 45 days.
(5) On a site plan involving 10 acres of land or less and 10 or fewer
dwelling units: 45 days.
(6) On a site plan involving more than 10 acres or more than 10
dwelling units: 95 days.
(7) On a conditional use application: 95 days.
(8) On a general development plan: 95 days.
§ 330-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-35
1:417

ARTICLE VI
Subdivision and Site Plan Review and Approval
§ 330-36. Grant of power; referral of proposed ordinance; County
Planning Board approval.
§ 330-37. General requirements.
A. There shall be no subdivision of lands nor land development associated
with subdivision or site plans unless such subdivision or a site plan shall
have been approved by resolution of the Planning Board, and such
resolution shall be a condition for the issuance of a permit for any
development, except that subdivision or individual lot applications for
detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings shall be exempt from site
plan review and approval. A resolution of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall substitute for that of the Planning Board whenever the
Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction over a subdivision or a site plan
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76b.
B. Prior to the hearing on adoption of an ordinance providing for Planning
Board approval of either subdivisions or site plans or both or any
amendment thereto, the governing body shall refer any such proposed
ordinance or amendment thereto to the Planning Board pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a.
C. Each application for subdivision approval, where required pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, and each application for site plan approval, where
required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Sussex County Planning Board for review or approval,
as required by the aforesaid sections, and the Township Planning Board
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period. The Planning Board and/or governing
body shall have the right to offer comment on the review, approval and
report(s) of the county, either partly or entirely, and join with or depart
from the position of the applicant with respect thereto.
A. All applications for development as defined in this chapter shall be
submitted and proceeded upon in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, including standards for preliminary and final approval and
provisions for processing of final approval by stages or sections of
development.
B. The layout and arrangement of any subdivision or land development
shall be consistent with and satisfy the requirements of Article XI of this
chapter.
C. All streets in a subdivision or land development shall be of sufficient
width and suitable grade and shall be suitably located to accommodate
prospective traffic and to provide access for fire-fighting and
§ 330-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-37
1:419
emergency equipment to buildings, and coordinated so as to compose
a convenient system consistent with the circulation element of the
Master Plan and the Official Map, if there be one, and so oriented
as to permit, consistent with the reasonable utilization of land, the
buildings constructed thereon to maximize solar gain; provided that no
street of a width greater than 50 feet within right-of-way lines shall be
required unless said street constitutes an extension of an existing street
of the greater width or already has been shown on the Master Plan at
the greater width, or already has been shown in greater width on the
Official Map, if there be one. All streets in a residential development
shall satisfy the requirements for residential development contained in
Article VIII.
D. Every subdivision and land development shall make provision for
adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage facilities and
other utilities as are necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants.
E. In the event that area within a subdivision or land development is to be
reserved for public use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44, such area shall
be of suitable size, shape and location for its intended purpose.
F. In any application involving planned development or residential cluster
development, adequate and suitable provision shall be made for the
setting aside of open space for the use and benefit of the residents of
such development.
G. Any land subject to flooding pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65(e) shall only
be developed in accordance with state and Township regulations
concerning development of lands that are subject to flooding, and all
such development shall be designed to avoid danger to life or
property.63
H. Soils shall be conserved to the greatest practicable extent and
protected from erosion by wind or water or from excessive disturbance
by excavation or grading. Soils shall be protected and conserved in
accordance with prevailing standards and, where appropriate, subject
to the review and approval of the Sussex County Soil Conservation
District.
I. All land development shall be undertaken and be subject to conformity
with any Township Recycling Ordinance.64
J. All development adjacent to or otherwise involving New Jersey State
Highway Route 94 shall conform with the State Highway Access
Management Code adopted by the Commissioner of Transportation
under Section 3 of the State Highway Access Management Act, N.J.S.A.
27:7-91. Any development adjacent to or involving a county road within
the Township shall conform with the Access Management Code adopted
63.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 275, Flood Damage Prevention.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 452, Recycling.
§ 330-37 VERNON CODE § 330-37
1:420
by the County of Sussex, N.J.S.A. 27:16-1. Land development adjacent
to or involving an existing or proposed municipal street shall conform
with any municipal access management code adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:67-1.
K. Any proposed development which shall be adjacent or proximate to, or
otherwise involve, potable water supply reservoirs shall include
adequate and suitable protections for such potable water supply from
pollution or other degradation of water quality resulting from the
development, or other uses of surrounding land areas. All such
provisions shall be in accordance with any siting, performance, or other
standards or guidelines adopted therefor by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
L. Any stormwater detention facilities proposed in connection with land
development shall conform with prevailing public safety regulations of
the Township of Vernon, the County of Sussex and the State of New
Jersey, and as otherwise reflected in stormwater management plans and
stormwater management ordinances adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-93 et seq.
M. In the event that proposed land development involves new multifamily
housing, provision shall be made for the inclusion of facilities for the
collection or storage of source-separated recyclable materials in
conformity the model ordinance promulgated by the Department of
Environmental Protection and Department of Community Affairs
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.
N. No plan shall be approved nor any land developed unless adequate and
suitable provision has been made for grading, improvement and
construction of streets or drives or for any required walkways, curbs,
gutters, streetlights, shade trees, fire hydrants and water, and drainage
and sewerage facilities and other improvements as shall be found
necessary. All such development designs and activities shall conform
with the standards contained in this chapter. However, the absence of
one or more specific standard(s) in these respects shall not relieve the
applicant from making adequate and suitable provision(s) therefor by
prevailing standards of engineering and planning. Such facilities shall
be completed either prior to final approval of a subdivision or site plan,
or subsequent thereto by the posting of performance guaranties
pursuant to this article and chapter.
O. All subdivisions and site plans shall conform to the applicable
provisions of Article XI, Zoning.
P. The performance of any land development pursuant to subdivision or
site plan approval shall be in substantial accordance with the final
development plan, provided that the Planning Board may permit a
deviation from the final plan if caused by change of conditions beyond
the control of the developer since the date of final approval, and the
deviation would not substantially alter the character of the
§ 330-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-37
1:421
§ 330-38. Additional development requirements and options.
development or substantially impair the intent and purpose of the
Master Plan, the Zoning Ordinance or this chapter.
A. Provision shall be made for off-tract water, sewer, drainage, and street
improvements which are necessitated by a subdivision or land
development, subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42. As a
condition to approval of a subdivision or site plan, a developer may be
required by the Planning Board to pay his pro rata share of the cost of
providing reasonable and necessary street improvements and water,
sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements therefor, located
outside the property limits of the subdivision or development, but
necessitated or required by construction or improvements within such
subdivision or development. A determination of the proportionate pro
rata amount of the cost of such facilities that shall be borne by the
developer shall be determined in accordance with the standards
contained in Article IX of this chapter or as otherwise provided by law,
and shall not be altered subsequent to preliminary approval.
B. As a development option, and where permitted subject to the Zoning
Ordinance, the developer may propose a planned development. In
exercising such option, a developer shall demonstrate creativity in
development and economy in the use of lands as well as the layout and
design of the proposed planned development. To encourage and exploit
greater creativity, flexibility and economy, a developer may seek, and
the Planning Board shall be authorized to grant, general development
plan approval upon mutual agreement between the applicant and the
Planning Board on the basic scheme of a planned development, and
otherwise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for general
development plans.
C. Any common open space resulting from the application of standards for
density or intensity of land use shall be set aside for the use and benefit
of the owners or residents in such development subject to §§ 330-201
and 330-202 of Article XI.
D. The Planning Board shall be and is hereby authorized to allow for a
greater concentration of density or intensity of land use within a section
or sections of development, whether it be earlier, later or simultaneous
in the development, than in others; such greater concentration of
density or intensity of land use for any section to be developed shall be
offset by a smaller concentration in any completed prior stage or by an
appropriate reservation of common open space on the remaining land
by grant of easement or by covenant in favor of the Township; provided
that such reservation shall, as far as practicable, defer the precise
location of common open space until an application for final approval is
filed, so that flexibility of development can be maintained.65
65.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 603e, Requirements for timing a development among the
various types of uses and subgroups (which was a reserved subsection), which previously
§ 330-37 VERNON CODE § 330-38
1:422
§ 330-39. Reservation of public areas.
E. In the case of a development which proposes construction over a period
of years, the applicant shall make adequate and suitable provision for
the protection of the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development.
F. As a condition of Planning Board approval, the applicant shall submit
proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or
delinquent on the property for which any subdivision, site plan or
planned development application is made.
G. The developer may seek and the Planning Board may approve the
varying, within a conventional subdivision, of lot areas and dimensions,
and yards and setbacks otherwise required by Township development
regulations in such a way that the average lot areas and dimensions,
yards and setbacks within the subdivision conform to the conventional
norms of the Township development regulations; provided that such
standards shall be appropriate to the type of development permitted.
H. All site plan applications shall make adequate and suitable provision for
the following:
(1) Preservation of existing natural resources on the site;
(2) Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and
loading;
(3) Screening, landscaping and location of structures;
(4) Exterior lighting as necessary for safety reasons, as well as
provision for streetlighting;
(5) Conservation of energy and use of renewable energy sources; and
(6) Recycling of designated recyclable materials.
A. If the Master Plan, as amended, (or the Official Map, if and when there
be one) provides for the reservation of designated streets, public
drainageways, flood control basins, or public areas within the proposed
development, then, before a subdivision or site plan shall be approved,
the developer shall show on a plan or plan, in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses, such streets, ways, basins or areas as
the Planning Board may require. The Planning Board may reserve the
location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or areas shown on the
plat or plan for a period of one year after the approval of the final plat or
plan, or within such further time as may be agreed to by the developer.
Unless during such period or extension thereof the Township shall have
entered into a contract to purchase or institute condemnation
followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-39
1:423
§ 330-40. Planned developments.
As and where permitted pursuant to this chapter and, specifically, Article
XI, the following shall be established prior to approval of any planned
development:
proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser interest in the land
comprising such streets, ways, basins, or areas, the developer shall
not be bound by such reservations shown on the plat or plan and may
proceed to use such land for private use in accordance with applicable
development regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to streets and roads, flood control basins, or public drainageways
necessitated by the subdivision or land development and required for
final approval.
B. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of
use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair
market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period
of reservation; provided that determination of such fair market value
shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the real property
tax as apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation. The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable
increased cost of legal, engineering, or other professional services
incurred in connection with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan
approval, as the case may be, caused by the reservation.
A. That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the Zoning
Ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c and Article XI of
this chapter;
B. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space are reliable, and the amount, location and purpose of the
common open space are adequate and suitable;
C. That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation, and visual
enjoyment are adequate and suitable;
D. That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established;
E. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate and suitable.
§ 330-39 VERNON CODE § 330-41
1:424
§ 330-41. General development plan; duration.
General development plans shall be permitted in accordance with Article XI
and this section.
§ 330-42. General development plan contents.
A general development plan may include, but not be limited to, the
following:
A. The general development plan shall set forth the permitted number of
dwelling units, the amount of nonresidential floor space, the residential
density and the nonresidential floor area ratio for the planned
development, in its entirety, according to a schedule which sets forth
the timing of the various sections of the development. The planned
development shall be developed in accordance with the general
development plan approved by the Planning Board notwithstanding any
provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or an ordinance or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto after the effective date of the approval.
B. The term of the effect of the general development plan approval shall be
determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set forth in
Subsection C of this section, except that the term of the effect of the
approval shall not exceed 20 years from the date upon which the
developer receives final approval of the first section of the planned
development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and this article, and/
or Article XI.
C. In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
approval of the development plan, the Planning Board shall consider
the number of dwelling units or amount of nonresidential floor area to
be constructed, prevailing economic conditions, the timing schedule to
be followed in completing the development and the likelihood of its
fulfillment, the developer's capability of completing the proposed
development, and the contents of the general development plan and
any conditions which the Planning Board attaches to the approval
thereof.
A. A general land use plan at a scale specified by ordinance indicating the
tract area and general locations of the land uses to be included in the
planned development. The total number of dwelling units and amount of
nonresidential floor area to be provided and proposed land area to be
devoted to residential and nonresidential use shall be set forth. In
addition, the proposed types of nonresidential uses to be included in the
planned development shall be set forth, and the land area to be
occupied by each proposed use shall be estimated. The density and
intensity of use of the entire planned development shall be set forth,
and a residential density and a nonresidential floor area ratio shall be
provided.
§ 330-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-42
1:425
B. A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian access within
the planned development and any proposed improvements to the
existing transportation system outside the planned development.
C. An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land areas to be set aside for
conservation and recreational purposes and a general description of
improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for the
operation and maintenance of parks and recreational lands.
D. A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed location
of sewage and water lines, any drainage facilities necessitated by the
physical characteristics of the site, proposed methods for handling solid
waste disposal and a plan for the operation and maintenance of
proposed utilities.
E. A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed method of
controlling and managing stormwater on the site.
F. An environmental inventory including a general description of the
vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate and
cultural resources of the site, existing man-made structures or features
and the probable impact of the development on the environmental
attributes of the site.
G. A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of supporting
community facilities which may include, but not be limited to,
educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals,
firehouses and police stations.
H. A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be provided
and the extent to which any housing obligation assigned to the
municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et al. will be fulfilled by
the development.
I. A local service plan indicating those public services which the applicant
proposes to provide and which may include, but not be limited to, water,
sewer, cable and solid waste disposal.
J. A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal services
to be generated by the planned development and any other financial
impacts to be faced by municipality or school districts as a result of the
completion of the planned development. The fiscal report shall also
include a detailed projection of property tax revenues which will accrue
to the county, municipality and school district according to the timing
schedule provided under Subsection K of this section, and following the
completion of the planned development in its entirety.
K. A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned development
whose construction is contemplated over a period of years, including
any terms or conditions which are intended to protect the interests of
§ 330-42 VERNON CODE § 330-42
1:426
§ 330-43. General development plan approval procedure.
§ 330-44. General development plan; timing schedule; modification.
In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing
schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or not to grant
approval of the modification, take into consideration prevailing economic
and market conditions, anticipated and actual needs for residential units
and nonresidential space within the municipality and the region, and the
availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate the proposed
development.
§ 330-45. General development plan hearing on modifications
required.
The developer shall be required to gain the prior approval of the Planning
Board if, after approval of the general plan, the developer wishes to make
any variation in the location of land uses within the planned development or
to increase the density of residential development or the floor area ratio of
nonresidential development in any section of the planned development.
§ 330-46. General development plan on modifications not required.
the public and of the residents who occupy any section of the planned
development prior to the completion of the development in its entirety.
L. A municipal development agreement, which shall mean a written
agreement between a municipality and a developer relating to the
planned development.
A. Any developer of a parcel of land greater than 100 acres in size for
which the developer is seeking approval of a planned development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. may submit a general
development plan to the Planning Board prior to the granting of
preliminary approval of that development by the Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.
B. The Planning Board shall grant or deny general development plan
approval within 95 days after submission of a complete application to
the administrative officer, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute general development plan
approval of the planned development.
C. The granting by the Planning Board of an approval of a general
development plan for a planned development shall not constitute a
preliminary or final approval as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.12(d).
[Added 6-12-2000 by Ord. No. 00-15]
§ 330-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-46
1:427
§ 330-47. General development plan certification upon completion;
failure to complete or comply; termination of approval.
A. Except as provided hereunder, once a general development plan has
been approved by the Planning Board, it may be amended or revised
only upon application by the developer approved by the Planning Board.
B. A developer, without violating the terms of the approval pursuant to this
act, may, in undertaking any section of the planned development,
reduce the number of residential units or amount of nonresidential floor
space by no more than 15% or reduce the residential density or
nonresidential floor area ratio by no more than 15%; provided, however,
that a developer may not reduce the number of residential units to be
provided pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et al. without prior municipal
approval.
A. Upon the completion of each section of the development as set forth in
the approved general development plan, the developer shall notify the
administrative officer, by certified mail, as evidence that the developer
is fulfilling his obligations under the approved plan. For the purpose of
this section, "completion" of any section of the development shall mean
that the developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy for every
residential unit or every nonresidential structure, as set forth in the
approved general development plan and pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-133. If the Township does not receive such notification at the
completion of any section of the development, the Township shall notify
the developer, by certified mail, in order to determine whether or not
the terms of the approved plan are being complied with.
B. If a developer does not complete any section of the development within
eight months of the date provided for in the approved plan, or if at any
time the Township has cause to believe that the developer is not
fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved plan, the Township
shall notify the developer, by certified mail, and the developer shall
have 10 days within which to give evidence that he is fulfilling his
obligations pursuant to the approved plan. The Township thereafter
shall conduct a hearing to determine whether or not the developer is in
violation of the approved plan. If, after such a hearing, the Township
finds good cause to terminate the approval, it shall provide written
notice of same to the developer and the approval shall be terminated 30
days thereafter.
C. In the event that a developer who has general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
development which is the subject of that general development plan
approval within five years of the date upon which the general
development plan has been approved by the Planning Board, the
Township shall have cause to terminate the approval.
§ 330-46 VERNON CODE § 330-48
1:428
§ 330-48. General development plan; satisfactory completion.
In the event that a development which is the subject of an approved general
development plan is completed before the end of the term of the approval,
the approval shall terminate with the completion of the development. For
the purposes of this section, a development shall be considered complete on
the date upon which a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the final
residential or nonresidential structure in the last section of the development
in accordance with the timing schedule set forth in the approved general
development plan and the developer has fulfilled all of his obligations
pursuant to the approval.
§ 330-49. Procedure for preliminary site plan approval.
A. The developer shall submit to the administrative officer a site plan and
such other information as is reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision as to whether the requirements necessary for preliminary site
plan approval have been met; provided that minor site plans shall not
be subject to this section. The site plan and any engineering documents
to be submitted shall be required in tentative form for discussing
purposes for preliminary approval. Preliminary architectural plans and
elevations shall be required and shall be sufficient for preliminary
review.
B. If the Planning Board requires or the developer seeks any substantial
amendment in the layout of improvements proposed by the developer
that have been the subject of a hearing, an amended application for
development shall be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of
the original application for development. The Planning Board shall, if
the proposed development complies with this article and chapter, grant
preliminary site plan approval.
C. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a complete
application for a site plan which involves 10 acres of land or less, and 10
dwelling units or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval
within 45 days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of a
complete application for a site plan which involves more than 10 acres,
or more than 10 dwelling units, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval to the site plan.
D. If any substantial modification is proposed or required after preliminary
approval has been granted, an application for such a modification shall
be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the original
application for development. The applicant may apply for modification
approval either independently of or concurrently with an application for
final approval. In either case, notice pursuant to §§ 330-25 and 330-26
shall be required and shall state the nature of the proposed
§ 330-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-49
1:429
§ 330-50. Minor site plan.
modification. A "substantial modification" shall mean one which
increases density of development; increases the square footage of
buildings; proposes a different use; would result in increased adverse
impact upon properties in the immediate area with respect to factors
such as, but not limited to, noise, glare, and increased drainage runoff;
or materially changes a required element of the development plan. Any
modification which decreases the number of proposed lots, dwelling
units, number of square feet, density or intensity of use shall not be
considered a substantial modification so long as there is no proposed
change of use and no additional variances or exceptions are required.
E. The Planning Board may grant preliminary approval subject to
conditions; provided, however, that the Planning Board shall specify the
time for performance of such conditions and shall not grant approval
subject to subsequent submission of additional planning information
fundamental to an essential element of the development plan and an
informed decision thereon. In the event that development requires the
subsequent approval of one or more governmental agencies other than
the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall, prior to approval,
determine the basic planning feasibility of any fundamental element of
the development plan that is otherwise subject to the jurisdiction and
powers of such other agency or agencies.
A. A minor site plan as defined in this chapter shall not require notice or
public hearing, but shall instead be proceeded upon by the Site Plan
Committee of the Planning Board, which Committee shall, where
appropriate, report to the Planning Board that the application for
development conforms to the definition of minor site plan and requires
no further review by the Planning Board. Such report shall be then
adopted as the basis for an approval to be reflected in a memorializing
resolution of the Planning Board. Minor site plan approval thus
memorialized shall be deemed final approval of the site plan by the
Board, provided that the Board or subcommittee may condition such
approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 40:55D-39, 40:55D-41 and 40:55D-53.
B. Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the administrative
officer, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute minor site plan approval.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the Sussex County
Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, the Township Planning
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
§ 330-49 VERNON CODE § 330-50
1:430
D. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor site plan approval. The Planning Board shall grant an extension
of this period for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding
one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally
required approvals from other governmental entities and that the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the approvals. A
developer shall apply for this extension before what would otherwise be
the expiration date, or the 91st day after the date on which the
developer receives the last of the legally required approvals from the
other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
E. A minor site plan shall not involve a planned development or any new
street or extension of any off-tract improvement, which is to be prorated
pursuant to this chapter; involves no variances; does not involve any
substantial detrimental impacts either on-site or off-site, and poses no
detriment to public health, safety or welfare. [Added 1-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-04]
F. A change of use or alteration to existing commercial properties. A
minor site plan application shall not be required for the alteration of an
existing commercial property, or a change of use to a use permitted in
Schedule A of this chapter66 and which does not exceed the following
limitations: [Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
(1) A change in use and/or alterations involving no building
construction other than interior modification or interior structural
alteration.
(2) Minor exterior or structural changes, such as entry enclosures,
porticos and other structural appurtenances, including roof
appurtenances.
(3) Building additions not exceeding 500 square feet in building
coverage or 25% of existing building coverage, whichever is
greater, and accessory structures not exceeding 500 square feet in
lot coverage, provided that the same do not invade upon any
required parking area, setback area or otherwise violate any
requirements of this chapter.
(4) Requires no additional off-street parking and includes no change in
the type, location, and lighting of any signage, except for a change
in lettering.
66.Editor's Note: Schedule A, Permitted, Conditional and Accessory Uses and Structures, is
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 330-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-51
1:431
§ 330-51. Procedure for preliminary major subdivision.
A. The developer shall submit to the administrative officer a plat and such
other information as is reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision as to whether the requirements necessary for preliminary
approval have been met; provided that minor subdivisions pursuant to
§ 330-25 of this article shall not be subject to this section. The plat and
any other engineering documents to be submitted shall be required in
tentative form for discussion purposes for preliminary approval.
B. If the Planning Board requires or the developer seeks any substantial
amendment in the layout of improvements proposed by the developer
that have been the subject of a hearing, an amended application shall
be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original
application for development. The Planning Board shall, if the proposed
subdivision complies with the ordinance and this act, grant preliminary
approval to the subdivision.
C. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a complete
application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Upon the submission of a complete application for a
subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval to the subdivision.
D. If any substantial modification is proposed or required after preliminary
approval has been granted, an application for such a modification shall
be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the original
application for development. The applicant may apply for modification
approval either independently of or concurrently with an application for
final approval. In either case, notice pursuant to §§ 330-25 and 330-26
shall be required and shall state the nature of the proposed
modification. A "substantial modification" shall mean one which
increases density of development; increases the square footage of
buildings; proposes a different use; would result in increased adverse
impact upon properties in the immediate area with respect to factors
such as, but not limited to, noise, glare, and increased drainage runoff;
or materially changes a required element of the development plan. Any
modification which decreases the number of proposed lots, dwelling
units, number of square feet, density or intensity of use shall not be
considered a substantial modification so long as there is no proposed
change of use and no additional variances or exceptions are required.
E. The Planning Board may grant preliminary approval subject to
conditions; provided, however, that the Planning Board shall specify the
time for performance of such conditions and shall not grant approval
subject to subsequent submission of additional planning information
§ 330-51 VERNON CODE § 330-51
1:432
§ 330-52. Minor subdivision.
fundamental to an essential element of the development plan and an
informed decision thereon. In the event that development requires
the subsequent approval of one or more governmental agencies other
than the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall, prior to approval,
determine the basic planning feasibility of any fundamental element of
the development plan that is otherwise subject to the jurisdiction and
powers of such other agency or agencies.
A. A minor subdivision as defined in this chapter shall not require notice or
public hearing, but shall instead be proceeded upon by the Subdivision
Committee of the Planning Board, which Committee shall, where
appropriate, report to the Planning Board that the application for
development conforms to the definition of minor subdivision and
requires no further review by the Planning Board. Such report shall be
then adopted as the basis for an approval to be reflected in a
memorializing resolution of the Planning Board. Minor subdivision
approval thus memorialized shall be deemed final approval of the
subdivision by the Board, provided that the Board or Subcommittee
may condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision of
improvements pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 40:55D-39, 40:55D-41
and 40:55D-53.
B. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the administrative
officer, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision approval, and a certificate
of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to
act shall be issued on request of the applicant; and it shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein
required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Township Planning Board
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
D. Except as provided in Subsection F of this section, approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date on which the resolution
of municipal approval is adopted unless, within such period, a plat in
conformity with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law,
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved
minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording
officer, the Township Engineer and the Township Tax Assessor. Any such
plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing the
§ 330-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-52
1:433
§ 330-53. Effect of preliminary approval.
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48
or of a site plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46 shall, except as provided in
Subsection D of this section, confer upon the applicant the following rights
for a three-year period from the date on which the resolution of preliminary
approval is adopted:
application for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the
Planning Board may accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing
Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.; provided that if the developer chooses to
file the minor subdivision as provided herein by plat rather than deed,
such plat shall conform with the provisions of said act.
E. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date on
which the resolution of minor subdivision approval is adopted, provided
that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as
provided in this section.
F. The Planning Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period for
filing a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to Subsection D of this
section if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required
approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of
delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by
the Planning Board. The developer may apply for the extension either
before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
G. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision
approval for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one
year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer
was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with
the development because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental entities and that the developer
applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. A
developer shall apply for the extension before what would otherwise be
the expiration date of minor subdivision approval or the 91st day after
the developer receives the last legally required approval from other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
A. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; and, in
the case of a site plan, any requirements peculiar to site plan approval
§ 330-52 VERNON CODE § 330-53
1:434
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41; except that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the Township from modifying by ordinance such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
B. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may
be.
C. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that, if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such
revised standards may govern.
D. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsections A, B, and C of this section for such period of time, longer
than three years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions, and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
and the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
of the section or sections awaiting final approval, economic conditions
and the comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if the
design standards have been revised, such revised standards may
govern.
E. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to Subsection C or D of this section and preliminary
approval has expired before the date on which the extension is granted,
the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration
date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date.
F. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for
a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
government entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply for
the extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of
preliminary approval or the 91st day after the developer receives the
§ 330-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-53
1:435
§ 330-54. Final approval of site plans and major subdivisions.
last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this
subsection shall not preclude the Planning Board from granting an
extension pursuant to Subsection C or D of this section.
A. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by ordinance for final approval,
the conditions of preliminary approval, and, in the case of a major
subdivision, the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.; provided that, in the case of a planned unit
development, planned unit residential development or residential
cluster, the Planning Board may permit minimal deviations from the
conditions of preliminary approval necessitated by change of conditions
beyond the control of the developer since the date of preliminary
approval without the developer being required to submit another
application for development for preliminary approval.
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the administrative officer
as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein required, and shall
be so accepted by the county recording officer for purposes of filing
subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of a subdivision, or
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, in the case of a site plan, the Township Planning
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of
a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
D. The Planning Board may grant final approval subject to conditions to be
formed prior or subsequent to development or a particular stage or
section of development; provided, however, that the Planning Board
shall specify the time for performance of such conditions and shall not
grant approval subject to subsequent submission of additional
information fundamental to an essential element of the development
plan and an informed decision thereon. In the event that development
requires subsequent approval of one or more governmental agencies
other than the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall, prior to
approval, determine the basic feasibility of any fundamental element of
the development plan that is otherwise subject to the jurisdiction and
powers of such other agency or agencies.
§ 330-53 VERNON CODE § 330-55
1:436
§ 330-55. Exceptions in application of subdivision or site plan
regulation; simultaneous review and approval; consolidated
applications.
§ 330-56. Effect of final approval of site plans and major
subdivisions.
A. The Planning Board when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for subdivision review and approval of this chapter, if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question.
B. The Planning Board when acting upon applications for preliminary site
plan approval shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of the provisions for site plan review and
approval of this chapter, if the literal enforcement of one or more
provisions of this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
C. The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make
further application to the Planning Board, or the Planning Board being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the Planning Board, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or
site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use
is requested by the developer pursuant to this subsection, notice of the
hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for such
conditional use.
D. Consolidated application. The applicant may file a consolidated
application for final approval without having made prior application for
preliminary approval by submitting a single application for final
approval that includes the information required for preliminary
approval together with the information required for final approval. The
applicant may also file for consolidated disposition of certain elements,
stages or sections of the development plan and obtain final approval
thereon; provided, however, that preliminary approval shall have been
granted as to the remaining elements, stages or sections of the
development plan, and provided that adequate terms, conditions and
guaranties have been established to insure the completion of the
development or the restoration of the site or tract, or portion thereof, to
the extent of disturbance. A consolidated application shall be
proceeded upon in accordance with the procedure for preliminary
approval pursuant to § 330-49 or 330-51. Approval of a consolidated
application shall confer the rights provided under § 330-56.
§ 330-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-56
1:437
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed for a period for two years after the date on which the
resolution of final approval is adopted; provided that, in the case of a
major subdivision, the rights conferred by this section shall expire if the
plat has not been duly recorded within the time period provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54. If the developer has followed the standards
prescribed for final approval, and in the case of a subdivision, has duly
recorded the plat as required in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54, the Planning Board
may extend such period of protection for extensions of one year but not
to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this act, the granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49 for the section
granted final approval.
B. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of 50
acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or
more, or site plan for development of a nonresidential floor area of
200,000 square feet or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights
referred to in Subsection A of this section for such period of time,
longer than two years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to
be reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval,
economic conditions, and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
C. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final approval
pursuant to Subsection A or B of this section and final approval has
expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the
extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date.
The developer may apply for the extension either before or after what
would otherwise be the expiration date.
D. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a
period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued these approvals. A developer shall apply for the
extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of final
§ 330-56 VERNON CODE § 330-56
1:438
§ 330-57. Performance and maintenance guarantees. [Amended.
6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 13-11]
approval or the 91st day after the developer receives the last legally
required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection A or B of this section.
A. Before recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of a final
site plan approval for a major development project, the governing body
shall require and accept guarantees in accordance with the standards
of this chapter for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of on-tract improvements.
B. The furnishing of a performance guarantee shall be required for all
subdivisions which include public improvements or major development
projects which will have a disturbance area of one (1) acre or more. The
performance guarantee shall be in favor of the Township in an amount
not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation of improvements which
the approving authority may deem necessary or appropriate. Said
improvements shall include but not be limited to streets, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees,
surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and required by the
Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., water mains, culverts, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans only, other onsite
improvements and landscaping. The itemized cost estimate for the
improvements covered by the performance guarantee shall be prepared
by the Township Engineer according to the method of calculation set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
C. A maintenance guarantee shall be posted with the governing body for
improvements constructed as part of subdivision or development
projects which are deemed public improvements or are in the interest
of the governing body to assure proper post-construction maintenance.
Said maintenance guarantee shall be for a period not to exceed two
years after final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to
exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement, which cost shall be
determined by the Township Engineer according to the method of
calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
D. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as
the case may be, shall be required by the Township for such utilities or
improvements.
§ 330-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-57
1:439
E. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation, which cost shall be determined by the Township
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
F. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected and the Township may,
either prior to or after receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such
improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements shall be
subject to the public bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
G. Inspection and list of uncompleted or unsatisfactory improvements.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the roadway surface course paving) and appurtenant
utility improvements, the obligor may request of the governing
body in writing (by certified mail addressed in care of the Township
Clerk) that the Township Engineer prepare an updated itemized
cost estimate and that the performance guarantee be appended to
include only the uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed
improvements that exist at the time of the request. If such a
request is made, the obligor shall send a copy of the request to the
Township Engineer. The request shall indicate which improvements
have been completed and which improvements remain
uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the
Township Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by the
obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing,
with the governing body, and shall simultaneously send a copy
thereof to the obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the
obligor's request.
(2) The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete improvement. The report prepared by the Township
Engineer shall identify each improvement determined to be
complete and satisfactory together with a recommendation as to
the amount of reduction to be made in the performance guarantee
that has been posted.
H. Approval or rejection of improvements.
(1) The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
§ 330-57 VERNON CODE § 330-57
1:440
Township Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements
upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection.
The governing body shall also approve and authorize the amount
of reduction to be made in the performance guarantee relating to
the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer. This resolution shall
be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and
report prepared by the Township Engineer. Upon adoption of the
resolution by the governing body, the obligor shall be released from
all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, with respect to
those approved improvements, except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements
not yet approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guarantee posted may be retained to ensure
completion of all acceptability of all improvements.
(2) If the Township Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report
as requested by the obligor within 45 days from receipt of the
request, the obligor may apply to court in a summary manner for an
order compelling the Township Engineer to provide the list and
report within a stated time, and the cost of applying to the court,
including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the
prevailing party. If the governing body fails to approve or reject the
improvements determined by the Township Engineer to be
complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for
the complete and satisfactory improvements within 45 days from
the receipt of the Township Engineer's list and report, the obligor
may apply to the court, in a summary manner for an order
compelling, within a stated time, approval of the complete and
satisfactory improvements and approval of a reduction in the
performance guarantee for the approvable complete and
satisfactory improvements in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of this section;
and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
(3) In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the
Township or approving authority as part of the performance
guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the performance
guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash
deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to
the full amount of the performance guarantee.
I. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements, and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification, as set forth in this section, shall be followed.
§ 330-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-57
1:441
§ 330-58. Maintenance guaranty limitations.
No maintenance guaranty required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 need be
in cash, nor need more than 10% of a performance guaranty pursuant to
that section be in cash. A developer may, however, provide at his option
some or all of a maintenance guaranty in cash, or more than 10% of a
performance guaranty in cash.
J. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the Township Engineer.
K. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; provided that the Township may require of the
developer a deposit for the inspection fees in an amount not to exceed,
except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of
the cost of improvements, which cost shall be determined pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. For those developments for which the reasonably
anticipated fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the
developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited by
a developer shall be 50% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the
balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees
because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by
the amount paid to the Township Engineer for inspection, the developer
shall deposit the remaining 50% of the anticipated inspection fees. For
those developments for which the reasonably anticipated fees are
$10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in
four installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be
25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit
drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Township Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make additional
deposits of 25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. The Township
Engineer shall not perform any inspection if sufficient funds to pay for
those inspections are not on deposit.
L. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development,
the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or section.
M. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
Township on the subdivision plat or site plan, the governing body shall
be deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee required
pursuant to Subsection A of this section, to accept dedication for public
use of streets or roads and any other improvements made thereon
according to site plans and subdivision plats approved by the approving
authority, provided that such improvements have been inspected and
have received final approval by the Township Engineer.
§ 330-57 VERNON CODE § 330-59
1:442
§ 330-59. Performance guaranty acceptance.
The approving authority shall, for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53,
accept a performance guaranty or maintenance guaranty which is an
irrevocable letter of credit if it:
§ 330-60. Appeal procedure for disputed guaranty amounts.
The cost of the installation of improvements for the purposes of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 shall be estimated by the Township Engineer based on
documented construction costs for public improvements prevailing in the
general area of the Township. The developer may appeal the Township
Engineer's estimate to the governing body. The governing body shall decide
the appeal within 45 days of receipt of the appeal in writing by the Township
Clerk. After the developer posts a guaranty with the Township based on the
cost of the installation of improvements as determined by the governing
body, he may institute legal action within one year of the posting in order
to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the fairness and
reasonableness of the amount of the guaranty.
§ 330-61. Acceptance of certain public utilities.
If the Planning Board includes, as a condition of approval of an application
for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the installation of
streetlighting on a dedicated public street connected to a public utility,
then upon notification in writing by the developer to the Planning Board
and governing body that the streetlighting on a dedicated public street
has been installed and accepted for service by the public utility and that
certificates of occupancy have been issued for at least 50% of the dwelling
units and 50% of the floor area of the nonresidential uses on the dedicated
public street or portion thereof indicated by section pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38, the Township shall, within 30 days following receipt of the
notification, make appropriate arrangements with the public utility for, and
assume the payment of, the costs of the streetlighting on the dedicated
public street on a continuing basis. Compliance by the Township with the
A. Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer running
solely to the municipality for an express initial period of time in the
amount determined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
B. Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do and doing
business in this state;
C. Is for a period of time at least one year; and
D. Permits the Township to draw upon the letter of credit if the obligor
fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies with the
provisions of this section 30 days or more in advance of the expiration
date of the letter of credit or such longer period in advance thereof as is
stated in the letter of credit.
§ 330-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-61
1:443
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute acceptance of
the street by the Township.
§ 330-62. Recording of final approval of major subdivision; filing of
all subdivision plats.
§ 330-63. Selling before approval; violations and penalties; suit by
Township.
A. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plats unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The
Planning Board may for good cause shown extend the period of
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat. The Planning Board may extend the ninety-fiveday
or one-hundred-ninety-day period if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that the developer was
barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays
in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental or
quasi-governmental entities; and that the developer applied promptly
for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The length of the
extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the
required approvals, as determined by the Planning Board. The
developer may apply for an extension either before or after the original
expiration date.
B. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording
officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as indicated on
the instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board or a certificate has been issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-47, 40:55D-50, 40:55D-56, 40:55D-61, 40:55D-67, or
40:55D-76. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board shall not be affixed until the developer has posted the
guaranties required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. If the county
recording officer records any plat without such approval, such
recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon request of the
Township, the plat shall be expunged from the official records.
C. It shall be the duty of the county recording officer to notify the Planning
Board in writing within seven days of the filing of any plat, identifying
such instrument by its title, date of filing, and official number.
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
municipal approval is required by ordinance pursuant to this chapter,
such person shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each
lot disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation.
§ 330-61 VERNON CODE § 330-63
1:444
§ 330-64. Certificates as to approval of subdivision of land.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and maintain a
civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief; and
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made to such a contract
of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
C. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land, from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer
or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposits made
or purchase price paid, and also, a reasonable search fee, survey
expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be
brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six
years, if unrecorded.
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, or which
formed part of such a subdivision three years preceding the effective
date of this act, may apply in writing to the administrative officer of the
municipality, for the issuance of a certificate certifying whether or not
such subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board. Such
application shall contain a diagram showing the location and dimension
of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name of the owner
thereof.
B. The administrative officer shall make and issue such certificate within
15 days after the receipt of such written application and the fees
therefor. Said officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a
binder as a permanent record of his or her office.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land," and shall certify:
(1) Whether there exists in the Township a duly established Planning
Board and whether there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of
land adopted under the authority of this act.
(2) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board, and, if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
showing that subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly
existing subdivision.
§ 330-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-64
1:445
§ 330-65. Right of owner of land covered by certificate as to
approval of subdivision of land.
§ 330-66. Condominiums and cooperative structures and uses.
This article and all development regulations pursuant hereto and to this
chapter shall be construed and applied with reference to the nature and
use of a condominium or cooperative structures or uses without regard
to the form of ownership. No development regulation shall establish any
requirement concerning the use, location, placement or construction of
buildings or other improvements for condominiums or cooperative
structures or uses unless such requirement shall be equally applicable to all
buildings and improvements of the same kind not then or thereafter under
the condominium or cooperative corporate form of ownership. No approval
pursuant to this chapter shall be required as a condition precedent to the
recording of a condominium master deed or the sale of any unit therein
unless such approval shall also be required for the use or development of
lands described in the master deed in the same manner had such lands not
been under the condominium form of ownership.
(3) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
D. The administrative officer shall be entitled to demand and receive for
such certificate issued a reasonable fee not in excess of those provided
in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and 54:5-15. The fees so collected by such official
shall be paid to the Township.
A. Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an interest in
the lands covered by "certificate as to approval of a subdivision of land"
in reliance upon the information therein contained shall hold such
interest free of any right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted
or maintained by the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-55.
B. If the administrative officer designated to issue any such certificate fails
to issue the same within 15 days after receipt of an application and fees
therefor, any person acquiring an interest in the lands described in such
application shall hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action
which could be prosecuted or maintained by the Township pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.
C. Any such application addressed to the Clerk of the Township shall be
deemed to be addressed to the proper designated officer, and the
Township shall be bound thereby to the same extent as though the same
was addressed to the designated official.
§ 330-64 VERNON CODE § 330-66
1:446
ARTICLE VII
Design and Development Principles and Standards
§ 330-67. Consistency with purpose.
Design of every site plan, subdivision and planned development shall be
consistent with the purposes of this chapter, as provided in § 330-2,
particularly, but without limitation, as follows:
A. Every design shall, to the greatest practicable extent, preserve the
features of the natural environment and enhance the quality and
character of the man-made environment in the Township of Vernon.
B. Any design involving farmlands shall, to the greatest practicable extent,
protect and preserve the integrity and viability of a working farm, or,
where the farm is no longer actively worked or viable and will be
replaced by other development, then, in that event, every practicable
effort shall be made to preserve the visual environment of the farm by
reasonable concentration and arrangement of buildings and other
improvements, and preservation of open fields, through the
employment of the design devices provided in this article and chapter.
C. Where a development will be proximate to or associated with, or
otherwise involve, an historic landmark, such development shall be
designed to be in accord with or complementary of the prevailing
historic and architectural character of such landmark.
D. Every nonresidential development project shall be designed to foster
economic development and investment in and around the subject
property, and shall be designed to be of long-range economic utility to
the citizenry.
E. Each project shall be designed to promote the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare.
F. All development shall be designed to protect occupants and all others
from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters.
G. Each development project shall be designed to contribute to the wellbeing
of persons, neighborhoods and communities within the Township,
the Township generally, and the surrounding region.
H. Every development shall be designed to protect the environment and
shall be designed in strict accordance with prevailing environmental
laws of the state and federal governments.
I. The location and design of transportation routes shall promote the free
flow of traffic and shall prevent congestion or blight.
J. Each development project shall be designed to enhance the visual
elements of the built environment. Creative development techniques
are specifically favored, particularly to the extent that they are
§ 330-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-67
1:447
§ 330-68. Basic design principles.
In the design and review of all projects, the following principles shall apply:
designed or employed to enhance the natural and desirable man-made
environments of the Township.
K. All development shall be designed to promote the preservation of
historic sites, landmarks, and districts as aforesaid, as well as open
space, energy resources and valuable natural resources.
L. All development shall be designed to prevent sprawl and degradation of
the environment through improper use of land. Without limitation
hereto, "strip" development for commercial or other purposes is
specifically disfavored.
M. All development shall promote the utilization of renewable energy
resources and shall promote the maximum practicable recovery and
recycling of recyclable materials.
A. Data gathering and site analysis. The characteristics of each site shall
be assessed on a site-specific basis and in the context of the conditions
of such site. Such assessment shall include but not be limited to an
analysis of geology and soils; topography; climate; ecology; existing
vegetation; structures; road networks; visual features; past and present
use of the site; historic landmarks; and potential scenic vistas.
B. Subdivision and site design.
(1) Every design of a subdivision, site plan or planned development
shall be based upon data and analysis performed pursuant to
Subsection A of this section. Improvements shall be located to the
greatest practicable extent to preserve the natural features of the
site or tract, to preserve and protect the areas of environmental
sensitivity, and to minimize negative impacts upon and alterations
of natural features. All development shall be based on
consideration of the goals, objectives and policies of the 1995
Master Plan, as amended.
(2) All streets, lots, parking areas, buildings and units shall be
designed and arranged to reduce unnecessary impervious
coverage, and to mitigate adverse effects of shadow, noise, odor,
traffic, transportation, drainage and utilities on neighboring
properties.
(3) All storm drainage facilities shall be designed as an integral part of
the development, and such design shall be arranged to use as much
of natural drainage patterns as possible so long as doing so is a
matter of best engineering and environmental practice.
(4) Site and tract development shall be designed to reduce cut and fill,
to avoid flooding, to avoid adverse impact upon groundwater
§ 330-67 VERNON CODE § 330-68
1:448
supplies and aquifer recharges, to be suitably served by
infrastructure elements, including, but not limited to, sewage
disposal installations, and to be provided with adequate access.
C. Residential development. Residential development shall be designed in
accordance with Article VIII and pursuant to Article XI. Cluster
development involving either contiguous or noncontiguous parcels is
specifically encouraged and shall be undertaken in the absence of
compelling reasons to the contrary. Consideration shall be given to
topography, privacy, building height, building orientation, drainage and
aesthetics in the placement of all units. All residential units shall be
provided with adequate private outdoor space, and all single-family
residential properties shall be provided with useful yards, particularly
but not limited to rear yards.
D. Commercial and industrial development design. Commercial and
industrial projects shall be designed generally according to the same
principles governing design of residential developments. Buildings
shall be located to minimize disturbance, to avoid environmentally
sensitive areas and to respect surrounding land uses.
E. Circulation systems. The circulation system shall be designed to permit
the safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic. Street and other
circulation systems shall be designed to meet the present and future
needs of the citizenry, and shall have a simple and logical pattern.
Circulation systems shall be designed to respect natural features and
topography and to present an attractive streetscape. Streets shall be
designed in accordance with the hierarchical system. In appropriate
instances, pedestrian walkways and bikeways may be located apart and
away from the road system but shall generally be required to be roughly
parallel to the street pattern for reasons of safety. However, in
appropriate instances, and particularly to preserve topographical and
natural features or to provide visual interest, pedestrian walkways and
bikeways need not be parallel to the street, provided that the same will
not be unsafe. Whenever walkways or bikeways are designed, the same
shall be designed to follow or make use of scenic routes and vistas, and
to afford access to points of interest.
F. Landscape design.
(1) Landscaping shall be provided or preserved in all public or common
areas, on recreation sites, adjacent to or surrounding buildings,
and to provide suitable screening for parking areas and buffers as
provided in this article. Parking areas shall be designed to include
natural-appearing landscaped islands, preferably in a random and
natural-appearing pattern, provided that safety is not
compromised. Landscaping shall be designed to provide
windbreaks for winter winds and summer cooling for buildings,
streets and parking.
§ 330-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-68
1:449
§ 330-69. Architectural principles.
(2) Plants and other landscaping materials shall be selected to best
serve the intended function, and all such materials shall be
appropriate for local soil conditions, water availability and the
environment.
(3) Landscaping shall be varied in amount and species or by material,
yet shall be consistent with, or complementary of, the type of
development and the indigenous species and materials of Vernon.
Site entrances shall be accented with special landscaping
treatment.
(4) Wherever practicable, shade trees and other trees and vegetation
shall be clustered at critical points rather than in a straight line at
predetermined intervals along streets, unless there are compelling
design and visual factors suggesting a contrary approach.
(5) Consideration shall be given to the future growth of shrubs and
other vegetation so that the same will not block sight distances nor,
when planted at and along building foundations, block out building
windows.
G. Building design. The architecture of buildings shall be consistent with
the principles contained in § 330-69 and shall be consistent with the
provisions of § 330-204.
A. Creative architectural design is favored. However, to the greatest
practicable extent, such creativity shall be effected to foster and
complement a sense of order and organization in the built environment
instead of disjointed and haphazard development. Every developer shall
seek to design buildings in a manner which is consistent with or
complementary of the prevailing and desirable patterns in a particular
community or neighborhood of Vernon. For instance, lake-style
architecture shall be expected in the PLC Private Lake Community
Districts. Alpine or similar suitable architectural styles are encouraged
in mountainous sites associated with ski areas and ski resorts.
Traditional architecture is encouraged in locations involving or
proximate to historic landmarks and/or older patterns and examples of
architecture or the rural landscape, as where farmhouses of the
Colonial, Victorian or other traditional style or period have emerged
and have been established.
B. The following criteria shall be considered:
(1) Promotion of harmony of design.
(a) The design character of a desirable existing development shall
be preserved, and desirable visual patterns of the Township
shall be protected. All architecture shall be designed to
promote harmony in the visual relationships and transitions
between new and older buildings. New buildings shall be made
§ 330-68 VERNON CODE § 330-69
1:450
sympathetic to the scale, form and proportion of older
development. Consideration shall be given to repeating
existing building lines and surface treatment, and requiring
some uniformity of detail, scale, or proportion, textures,
materials, color and building form; provided, however, that this
provision shall not be construed to limit creativity, invention
and innovation consistent with the spirit of these provisions.
(b) The use of unusual shapes, color and other characteristics
which cause new buildings to call excessive attention to
themselves and create a stark or distinct disharmony shall be
avoided, except to the extent that such structures are intended
to invite distinct architectural appreciation and be of broad
public significance, as where a public building is proposed to
have special significance and to stand alone as a work of
architecture. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(c) All new buildings shall strengthen the particular design
features of their locale by, for example, framing scenic views,
defining and inviting the use of open spaces, or continuing
particular and desirable design features or statements.
(d) Without limitation to specific height and bulk requirements
contained in this chapter, the height and bulk of new buildings
shall be related to the prevailing scale of development to avoid
overwhelming or dominating the same.
(e) The rhythm of structural mass to voids, such as windows and
entries, of a front facade, shall relate to rhythms established in
adjacent buildings, if the rhythms of such adjacent buildings
are aesthetically pleasing.
(f) If several storefronts are to be located in one building or are to
be developed on lots where zero lot lines are permitted or
required, such storefronts shall be unified in overall design
treatment, particularly as to the design of windows and door
openings, and the use of materials and colors. All storefronts
shall include display windows with a sill height of not more
than two feet from grade. Strip-mall development is prohibited.
Commercial buildings containing separate stores or spaces
shall be designed with architectural relief and interesting
facade treatment to suggest the creation of separate spaces
instead of repeated spaces of the same visual appearance.
(g) All building additions shall be designed to reflect the existing
building in terms of scale, materials, fenestration and color. A
change in scale may require a transitional design element
between the addition and the existing building. Facade
renovations should include as few different materials as
possible.
§ 330-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-69
1:451
(h) Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be
made compatible by use of unifying materials, repetition of
certain plant varieties, screens, and sight breaks. Where
different architectural styles are proposed among buildings,
good cause shall be shown that doing so is designed to lend
architectural interest and is preferable to construction of
buildings sharing more elements in common.
(2) Promotion, creativity and diversity of design.
(a) The criteria contained in this section shall not be construed to
restrict imagination, innovation or variety. These criteria shall
be construed to promote creativity in an ordered context to
give strong visual appeal to the built environment.
(b) Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall
be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to
provide visual interest.
(c) Architectural evaluation of the appearance of the project by
the Board shall be based on the quality of its design in
relationship to surroundings.
(3) Specific criteria regarding architectural design.
(a) Where large structures are required, massing and blank walls
shall be avoided as much as possible and, where necessary,
relieved by variation and architectural relief and details.
Excessively expansive blank walls are prohibited. No building
shall measure longer than 80 feet on any plane. Building
offsets shall be provided along each building wall to relieve the
visual effect of a single long wall. Roof lines shall also be
varied. An individual building shall use a combination of story
heights to provide further visual relief. Building designs should
incorporate details such as masonry chimneys, cupolas,
dormers, and similar features of architectural appeal.
(b) A human scale shall be achieved at ground level, at entryways,
and along street frontages through the use of such elements as
windows at appropriate sill heights, doors, columns and
canopies.
(c) Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roofs, the
ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with
materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be so
located so as not to be visible from any public ways.
(d) Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and
parapets, shall be in proportion to one another.
(e) Roof shape and material shall be architecturally compatible
with the rest of the building and shall reflect surrounding
§ 330-69 VERNON CODE § 330-69
1:452
patterns. Unless necessary pursuant to construction,
architectural, engineering or safety standards, flat roofs shall
be prohibited. Mansard roofs are discouraged except to soften
or otherwise improve the appearance of a predominantly flat
roof. Gable, hip, and gambrel roofs are favored.
(f) Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of
buildings and the design in which they are to be used.
Buildings shall have the same materials, or those that are
architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls and
other exterior building components wholly or partly visible
from public ways. Materials shall be of durable quality and
shall complement the rural and natural qualities of Vernon
Township.
(g) Colors shall be selected to be harmonious. Only compatible
accent colors shall be used. Building colors should reflect earth
tones or historical colors. Accent or complementary colors,
harmonizing with the main color, may be used for trim,
awnings and other accents. Metal awnings are prohibited.
(h) Facade renovations shall not destroy or cover original details
on a building of historic or architectural interest.
(i) In renovation projects, prevailing natural materials and themes
shall be retained. Facades of natural materials such as stone,
wood siding and brick shall not be covered with artificial siding
or panels except for good cause shown. If an original material
is or appears most appropriate on a facade, such material, if
available, shall be used for renovations and additions. Roof
cornices shall be retained, repaired, replaced or added where
appropriate. When replacing windows on a facade, windows
and window trim of the same size and character of the original
shall be used.
(j) Signs shall be designed in accordance with § 330-180 and shall
complement the architectural style and scale of the building.
To the greatest practicable extent, a sign shall be designed as
an integral element of the building and site to which it
principally relates. As an architectural element, a sign shall
reflect the period or style of architecture of the building and
shall be in harmony with the building's character and use. No
sign shall interfere with architectural lines and details. Each
sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and
shall not compete for attention. The number of graphic
elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to
convey the sign's principal message and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign face.
(k) Exterior lighting shall be designed to enhance the building
design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting features and
§ 330-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-69
1:453
§ 330-70. Design standards of general application.
§ 330-71. Design of open space and recreation areas.
fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the
building and adjacent areas.
(l) The choice of materials, together with the types of finished and
other protective elements and measures, shall be conducive to
easy maintenance and upkeep. Materials and finishes shall be
selected for their durability and wear as well as for their
beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be incorporated for
protection against the elements, neglect, damage, and abuse.
Provisions for washing and cleaning of buildings and
structures, and control of dirt and refuse, shall be included in
the design. Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate
debris, leaves, trash, dirt, and rubbish shall be avoided.
A. Site design shall insure the preservation of undeveloped open space to
an extent consistent with the reasonable utilization of land. Site design
shall specifically protect unique and/or environmentally sensitive areas,
including wetlands, significant trees and woodlands, floodplains, steep
slopes, habitats of endangered species and historically significant
structures and sites, particularly when designated as landmarks.
B. Where conventional subdivision developments appear appropriate or
necessary, the same shall nevertheless be subject to variable lot areas
and dimensions, yards, and setbacks for the purpose of encouraging
and promoting flexibility, economy and environmental soundness and
layout and design; provided that the average lot areas and dimensions,
yards, and setbacks within the development shall conform to the
minimum requirements of Article XI, and provided that such standards
shall be appropriate to the type of development permitted.
C. All residential development shall comply with the requirements of
Article VIII. Without limitation thereto, all residential lots shall front on
residential access or subcollector streets. The road system for
residential subdivisions shall be designed to serve the needs of the
neighborhood and to discourage use by through traffic.
D. Every lot and site shall have access to it that is sufficient to afford a
reasonable means of ingress or egress for emergency vehicles as well
as for all those likely to need or desire access to the property to the
extent of its intended use.
E. To an extent consistent with the reasonable utilization of land, site
design shall promote the conservation of energy and the use of planning
practices designed to reduce energy consumption and to provide for
maximum utilization of renewable energy resources.
§ 330-69 VERNON CODE § 330-71
1:454
A. Open space, whether contiguous or noncontiguous, shall be required in
connection with all planned developments and residential cluster
developments. Undeveloped or passive open space shall be designed to
preserve important site amenities, natural features, historical
landmarks, and environmentally sensitive areas. Developed or active
open space areas shall be designed to provide active recreational
facilities to serve the residents of the development. The establishment
and maintenance of open space shall comply with §§ 330-201 and
330-202.
B. A percentage of the tract proposed for development shall be set aside
for developed and undeveloped open space. Two and one-half acres per
1,000 persons of developed open space shall be created, plus 20% of
the total development area for undeveloped/passive open space,
adjusted, as appropriate, for conditions such as population density,
existing municipal facilities, topography, socioeconomic characteristics
of the prospective population, and other appropriate site-specific
factors. When open space is set aside to protect environmentally
sensitive features, the set aside shall correspond to the same
notwithstanding the fact that such set aside may exceed that which is
otherwise provided herein. The area of each parcel of open space
designed for active recreational purposes shall be of such minimum
dimensions as to be functionally usable. In no event shall contiguous
area of any such parcel be less than five acres.
C. Open space parcels shall be convenient to the dwelling units they are
intended to service, but shall also be sited with sensitivity to
surrounding development. Environmentally sensitive areas need not
(and perhaps should not, based upon individual circumstances) be
convenient to high levels of pedestrian traffic.
(1) The Planning Board may require the improvement of open space
parcels, including the installation of recreational facilities, taking
into consideration the character of the open space land, the
estimated age and recreation needs of persons likely to reside in
the development, proximity of municipal recreation facilities, and
the cost of the recreation facilities.
(2) Undeveloped open space, as a general principle, shall be left in its
natural state. With the permission of the Planning Board, a
developer may make certain improvements such as the cutting of
trails for walking or jogging, or the provision of picnic areas and
the like. The Planning Board may require a developer to make other
improvements or take other measures, such as removal of dead or
diseased trees and thinning of trees or other vegetation, to
encourage more desirable growth, and, where appropriate, grading
and seeding.
D. Open space shall be conserved, owned and maintained pursuant to
§§ 330-201 and 330-202.
§ 330-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-72
1:455
§ 330-72. Landscape design.
A. Landscaping shall be provided as an integral part of any site plan or
subdivision design. Landscaping shall be conceived in a total pattern
throughout the site, integrating the various elements of site design,
preserving and enhancing the particular identity of the site, and
creating a pleasing site character. Wherever possible and appropriate,
existing natural features and vegetation shall be preserved in an effort
to preserve the rural natural qualities of the Township's landscape.
However, this provision shall not be construed to relieve the developer
of responsibility in connection with the installation of necessary or
suitable landscaping. Landscaping may include plant materials such as
trees, shrubs, ground cover, perennials and annuals, and other
materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls, fences and certain
other man-made materials, provided that the same are of a distinct and
high order of architectural quality.
B. Except in applications for minor approvals, a landscape plan prepared
by a certified landscape architect in the State of New Jersey shall be
submitted with each application. Each such plan shall identify existing
and proposed trees, shrubs, ground cover, natural features such as rock
outcroppings, and other landscaping elements. The plan shall show
where all such plantings exist or are proposed, together with planting
or construction details. When existing natural growth is proposed to
remain, the plan shall include notes and details as appropriate thereto
and explain the proposed methods to protect existing trees and growth
during and after construction. At a minimum, all landscape plans shall
include the following:
(1) A layout of the entire site indicating the location and area of all
open space, existing vegetation, structures, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation systems and general physical features.
(2) Planting plan indicating topography and existing physical features,
as well as plants shown to scale at mature size, with appropriate
symbols and/or abbreviation labels for each plant type.
(3) Plant list, including symbol and/or abbreviation, botanical name,
common name, quantity, size at time of planting, root condition and
spacing.
(4) Site details and written specifications required for the installation
of the plantings, including trees, shrub planting pits, berms,
seeding mixture or sod specifications, topsoil, mulch, fertilizer and
proposed soil stabilization.
C. Site protection and general planting requirements.
(1) Topsoil preservation. The topsoil moved during the course of
construction shall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces so as to
provide at least four inches of even cover to all disturbed areas of
the development and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
§ 330-72 VERNON CODE § 330-72
1:456
(2) Removal of debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush,
weeds, excess or scrap building materials, or other debris shall be
removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with
prevailing laws. No tree stumps, portions of tree trunks or limbs
shall be buried anywhere in the development. All dead or dying
trees, standard or fallen, shall be removed from the site. If trees
and limbs are reduced to chips, they may, subject to approval of the
Board or the Board's Engineer, be used as mulch in landscaped
areas.
(3) Protection of existing plantings. Every practicable effort shall be
made to save fine and other indigenous specimens whenever
possible. No material of temporary soil deposits shall be placed
within four feet of shrubs or 10 feet of trees designated to be
retained in the development plan. Protective barriers or tree wells
shall be installed around each plant and/or group of plants that are
to remain on the site. Barriers shall not be supported by the plants
they are protecting, but shall be self-supporting. Such barriers
shall be at least four feet in height and shall be constructed of a
durable material, and shall remain until construction is completed.
Snow fences and silt fences are examples of acceptable barriers.
(4) Slope plantings. Landscaping of the area of all cuts and fills and/or
terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway
slopes steeper than one foot vertically to three feet horizontally
shall be planted with ground cover appropriate for the purpose and
soil conditions, water availability and prevailing environmental
conditions.
(5) Conformance with plan. In residential developments, besides
screening and street trees as required, additional plantings or
landscaping elements shall be required throughout the subdivision
where necessary for climate control, privacy or for aesthetic
reasons in accordance with the landscaping plan approved by the
Planning Board. In nonresidential developments, all areas of the
site not occupied by buildings and required improvements shall be
landscaped by the planting of grass or other ground cover, shrubs,
and trees as part of the landscaping plan approved by the Planning
Board.
(6) Plant specifications. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) All plant materials shall be equal to or better than the
requirements of the "American Standard for Nursery Stock,"
latest edition, as published by the American Association of
Nurserymen (hereafter referred to as "AAN Standards"). All
plants shall be typical of their species and variety, shall have a
normal habit of growth, and shall be first quality, sound,
vigorous, well-branched and with healthy, well-furnished root
systems. They shall be free of disease, insect pests and
mechanical injuries.
§ 330-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-72
1:457
(b) All plants shall be nursery grown and shall have been grown
under the same climatic conditions as the location of this
project for at least two years before planting. Neither heeled-in
plants nor plants from cold storage will be accepted.
(c) All plant material shall be dug, balled and burlapped (B&B)
container stock or bare root in accordance with AAN
Standards.
(7) Plant species. The plant species selected should be hardy for the
climatic zone in which Vernon Township is located, and shall be
appropriate in terms of function and size. Street trees, shrubs and
other plant material shall be selected from those recommended.
[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2767]
(8) Sight distance; obstructions. No plantings shall be planted,
maintained or neglected so as to impair sight distance or cause an
obstruction with respect to the use or maintenance of a street.
[Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(9) Plant sizes. All plant materials shall conform to the measurements
specified below: [Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) Caliper measurements shall be taken six inches above grade
for trees under four-inch caliper and 12 inches above grade for
trees four inches in caliper and over.
(b) Minimum branching height for all shade trees shall be six feet.
(c) Minimum size for deciduous trees shall be three-and-one-halfinch
to four-inch caliper, 15 to 17 feet in height.
(d) Minimum size for ornamental trees shall be two-inch to twoand-
one-half-inch caliper, eight to 10 feet in height.
(e) Minimum size for evergreen trees shall be six to seven feet in
height.
(f) Minimum size for shrubs shall be, in general, 18 to 24 inches in
height or spread, except that a larger size may be required
when deemed appropriate by the Board.
(10) Plant names. Plant names used in the Plant Schedule shall be
identified in accordance with Hortus Third, by L.H. Bailey, latest
edition. [Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(11) Installation. Plant material shall be installed, pruned, staked and
mulched in accordance with accepted horticultural practices.
[Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(12) Maintenance. [Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-72 VERNON CODE § 330-72
1:458
(a) All landscaping, buffering, and screening shall be maintained
in healthy condition. Failure to maintain or to replace dead or
diseased material shall constitute a zoning violation and shall
be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in § 330-215 of
this chapter.
(b) The developer shall replace dead or dying plants noted during
the first year during the next growing season. The developer/
owner shall replace dead or dying plants noted after the first
year during the next growing season.
D. Design objectives and standards.
(1) General objectives. All areas of the site to be developed shall be
landscaped with appropriate grasses, trees, shrubbery and other
appropriate plant material, except that naturally appearing
landscape elements shall remain and be preserved, and
environmentally sensitive areas shall not be disturbed for the sake
of landscaping in strict accordance with this article. Landscaping
shall be designed and implemented in accordance with the highest
standards and best practices of landscape architecture, and shall
be both functional and aesthetically pleasing. Plantings shall
generally be of a simple palette of hardy, deciduous and evergreen
species appropriate to the particular site. Informal massings of
plant materials are encouraged rather than single specimen
plantings. Designs which reflect indigenous patterns and local
examples of the natural environment are favored. [Amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2768]
(2) Shade trees. A minimum of one deciduous shade tree shall be
provided for each 1,000 square feet of open space within the
project site. Such trees shall have a minimum of 3 1/2 inches to four
inches in caliper and 12 feet to 14 feet in installed height. The
arrangement of trees shall be designed in conformance with the
most imaginative prevailing principles of landscape architecture.
(3) Function. In developing a landscape plan, every effort shall be
made to include some usable open space for the benefit and
enjoyment of occupants, employees or visitors, including
appropriate seating and picnic areas. Suitable forms of recreational
amenities are encouraged. Consideration shall be given to the size
of the building, lot, number of employees and other related factors
when designing a landscape plan to fulfill the requirements of this
subsection.
(4) Entry experience. Every landscaping design shall provide a
pleasant entry experience for pedestrians, providing the
appropriate scale of planting and paving materials as well as
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-72
1:459
directional signs and markings to aid pedestrians in identifying the
building's entrance.
(5) Size. In order for landscaped open space to effectively fulfill its
purpose and to facilitate maintenance, such space shall have a
minimum dimension of 10 feet in any direction.
(6) Existing vegetation. All site plans shall indicate existing vegetation
with more than a six-inch caliper. Efforts shall be made to preserve
existing trees by individual or grouped stand or as an effective
buffer along edges of development. All buildings shall be sited to
preserve the maximum number of trees on the site.
(7) Ground cover. Vegetative ground cover is encouraged under most
circumstances in order to retard weed growth, minimize soil
temperature fluctuations, increase water penetration into the soil,
prevent water evaporation in dry weather, and to provide contrast
in color and texture as well as other aesthetic advantages.
Decorative stones are specifically discouraged as a ground cover.
(8) Screening. Screening shall generally be of densely planted
evergreens for the purpose of concealing from view the area
behind such evergreens. Fencing may be used as a screen when the
same is architecturally, functionally and aesthetically an integral
part of the design theme and elements of the principal building and
other structures on the site. All loading areas, tanks, electrical and
mechanical equipment and outdoor storage areas shall be
screened. All evergreen trees planted for purposes of screening
shall be planted in a compact pattern designed to provide an
effective screen and shall have a height of at least six feet.
However, spacing shall be sufficient to insure the health of
individual trees. Landscaping in conjunction with earthen berms or
decorative fencing is acceptable, provided neither a berm nor a
fence is of disproportionate height or mass. Where buffering and
screening are required pursuant to this subsection and Subsection
F(3), both subsections shall apply to a practicable and effective
extent.
(9) Location. The location of all plantings and other landscape
materials shall not interfere with other site improvements,
including but not limited to underground utilities, light fixtures,
utility poles, paved areas, and other structures, both on site and
adjacent thereto. No planting or other landscape material shall be
allowed to affect vehicular safety or control.
(10) Height and size requirements. All shade trees shall not be less than
3 1/2 inches to four inches in caliper, 12 feet to 14 feet in height at
the time of planting. All ornamental trees shall not be less than six
feet in height at the time of planting. All evergreen trees shall not
be less than six feet in height at the time of planting. All shrubs
shall be not less than two feet in height at the time of planting.
§ 330-72 VERNON CODE § 330-72
1:460
E. Street trees.
(1) Location. Street trees shall be installed on both sides of all streets
in accordance with the approved landscape plan. Trees shall either
be massed or clustered at critical points or spaced evenly along the
street, or both, as and where appropriate.
(2) Spacing. When trees are planted at predetermined intervals along
streets, spacing shall depend on tree size. Generally trees expected
to reach a height of 40 or more feet shall be planted at intervals of
50 to 75 feet. Trees of an expected height of 30 to 40 feet shall be
planted at intervals of 40 to 50 feet. Small trees shall be planted at
intervals of 30 to 40 feet. When spacing intervals exceed 40 feet,
small ornamental trees should be spaced between the larger trees.
If a street canopy effect is desired by the Planning Board, trees may
be planted closer together, following the recommendations of the
certified landscape architect. All trees shall be planted so as not to
interfere with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, site easements, or
streetlights. Tree location, landscaping design and spacing plan
shall all be approved by the Planning Board as part of the
landscape plan.
(3) Tree type. Tree types may vary depending on overall effect desired
if and as recommended by the certified landscape architect. In the
absence of such recommendation, however, all street trees shall be
the same kind on the street, except to achieve special effects
acceptable to the Planning Board.
(4) Planting specifications. All trees shall have a caliper of 3 1/2 to four
inches and shall be nursery grown, of substantially uniform size
and shape, and have straight trunks. Trees shall be properly
planted and staked, and provision shall be made by the applicant
for regular watering and maintenance until they are established.
Dead or dying trees shall be replaced by the applicant during the
next planting season.
F. Buffers.
(1) Function and materials. Buffering shall provide a year-round visual
transition or screen in order to minimize adverse impacts from the
site on an adjacent property or from adjacent areas. Buffering shall
generally consist of dense-growth evergreens. Under special
circumstances, subject strictly to the requirements of the Planning
Board, fencing, berms, rocks, mounds, or combinations thereof
may be designed to achieve a buffering effect.
(2) When required. Buffering shall be required when topographical or
other barriers do not provide reasonable screening and when the
Planning Board determines that there is a need to shield the site
from adjacent properties and to minimize adverse impacts such as
incompatible land uses, noise, glaring light, and traffic. In small-lot
developments, when building design and siting do not provide
§ 330-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-72
1:461
privacy, the Planning Board may require landscaping, fences, or
walls to insure privacy and screen dwelling units.
(3) Dimensional requirements. Where more-intensive land uses abut
less-intensive uses, a buffer strip of a width of not less than 10 feet
shall be designed and maintained. The length of such strip shall be
designed to fulfill the function identified in Subsection F(1) of this
section. Parking areas, garbage collection and utility areas, and
loading and unloading areas shall be buffered around their
perimeter by a buffer strip having a minimum width of 10 feet.
Where residential subdivisions abut higher-order streets such as
collectors or arterials, lots should front on lower-order streets, and
a landscaped buffer area shall be provided along the roadway. The
buffer strip shall be a minimum of 35 feet wide but not to exceed
10% of any single lot area. For reasons of public health, safety or
welfare, these requirements may be reasonably increased by the
Planning Board. Trees and shrubs shall be required in such in
instances. This subsection shall not apply in the TC Districts.
(4) Design. Arrangement of plantings in buffers shall provide
maximum protection to adjacent properties and avoid damage to
existing plant material. The plantings may be arranged in parallel,
serpentine, or staggered rows. If planting berms are used, the
minimum top width shall be four feet, and the maximum side slope
shall be 2:1. No berm shall be so high in height or mass as to be
disproportionate to the characteristics of its setting.
(5) Planting specifications. Plant materials shall be sufficiently large
and planted in such a fashion that a screen at least eight feet in
height shall be produced within three growing seasons. All
plantings shall be installed according to accepted horticultural
standards.
(6) Maintenance. Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a manner
appropriate for the specific plant species through the first growing
season, and dead or dying plants shall be replaced by the developer
during the next planting season. No buildings, structures, storage
of materials or parking shall be permitted within the buffer area.
Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept free of all debris,
rubbish, weeds, and tall grass.
(7) Basic standards. In the absence of more specific standards
contained herein, the following buffer requirements shall apply
unless it is shown or apparent to the Planning Board that an
alternative arrangement is more suitable:
(a) Along the side and rear lot lines of all commercial, industrial
and other nonresidential uses: 10 feet.
(b) Along the front lot line of all commercial, industrial and other
nonresidential uses: 20 feet.
§ 330-72 VERNON CODE § 330-72
1:462
(c) Along the rear lot lines of nonresidential uses that abut
residential zones and uses: 50 feet.
(d) Along the front lot lines of multifamily residential uses: 50 feet.
(8) Buffers need not be added cumulatively to setback requirements; a
buffer area shall instead be an overlay of a required setback.
G. Parking lot landscaping.
(1) Amount required. In parking lots, at least 15% of the interior
parking area shall be landscaped with plantings, and one tree for
each 10 spaces shall be installed. Parking lot street frontage
screening and perimeter screening shall be a minimum of 10 feet
wide. Planting required within the parking lot shall be exclusive of
other planting requirements. Planting islands and landscaping
areas within a parking area shall, to the greatest practicable
extent, be randomly located so as to lend visual interest and avoid a
sense of parking area expanse. The Planning Board may require
additional parking space or snow disposal areas or easements to
insure that this section is adequately reconciled with effective
parking requirements following significant snow events.
(2) Isolated locations. Landscaping shall be located in protected or
isolated areas, such as along walkways, in center islands, at the
end of bays or between parking stalls. All landscaping in parking
areas and on street frontage shall be placed so that it will not
obstruct sight distance.
(3) Plant type. A mixture of hardy flowering and/or decorative
evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted; the area between
trees shall be planted with shrubs or ground cover or covered with
mulch.
(4) All open parking areas containing six or more parking spaces shall
be effectively screened by densely planted compact evergreen
hedge not less than six feet in height with respect to all sites where
such parking adjoins any property situated in a residential district,
and where otherwise needed to insure privacy for residential
properties. Parking areas shall be arranged and designed so as to
prevent damage to or intrusion into existing vegetated areas.
Planting areas shall be incorporated between rows of stalls and
trees; flowers and shrubbery shall be grown therein and properly
maintained.
(5) Off-street parking shall be generally screened from public view and
from adjacent properties in all nonresidential zones. A combination
of earth berms and evergreens and deciduous plantings is
acceptable under appropriate circumstances. The use of planting
islands within the parking lot to relieve visual monotony of a paving
surface and to channel traffic flow shall be required, consistent
with § 330-68F.
§ 330-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-72
1:463
(6) A minimum of one shade tree shall be provided per 10 parking
stalls or one shade tree per 3,000 square feet of parking area,
whichever is greater, and shall be distributed evenly throughout
the parking area. Such trees shall have a minimum of 3 1/2 inches
to four inches in caliper and an installed height of 12 feet to 14 feet.
Wherever possible, at the intersection of four ninety-degree
parking stalls or in other unused areas not affecting parking stall
utility, maneuverability or adequate door-swing, a shade tree shall
be installed and protected by curbing, planter structure or other
suitable means to avoid possible damage by vehicles. Such
protective device structure shall not interfere with vehicles
entering or exiting a parking stall or aisle.
H. Paving materials, walls and fences as elements of landscaping.
(1) Paving materials. Paving for pedestrian ways may be of man-made
or natural material, such as stone or some combination thereof.
Surface paving must produce a firm and level surface to facilitate
passage and stabilize the surface. Surface paving must be naturally
decorative and provide visual interest, and be of suitable material,
texture and color. Asphalt paving of pedestrian ways is prohibited.
Cobblestones, stone block and pavers made of slate, concrete or
natural stone are preferred. Concrete walkways are acceptable. An
appealing combination of materials is also acceptable. Clay brick
should be avoided for its propensity to become slippery under
freezing conditions.
(2) Walls and fences.
(a) Walls and fences may be utilized as elements of a landscaping
plan in order to prevent trespassing, create privacy, provide
screening or retain earth. Walls shall be designed to become an
attractive special feature, and may be constructed out of
materials such as brick, stone (rough cut, flagstone, or ledge),
fieldstones laid in a drywall, or other material or pattern
designed to reflect the rural nature of Vernon Township.
(b) Fences shall be of wooden or simulated wood material, and be
of picket, basket-weave, lattice, split-rail, panel, woven or
similar design or construction. Wooden fences may be left to
weather naturally, stained, and/or painted; provided, however,
that painted fencing shall be repainted as necessary. Chain link
fences are discouraged except in necessary and appropriate
circumstances. If a chain link fence must be used, it shall be of
dark green or black color, and its visibility obscured to a
significant extent by plantings or vines. Plastic slats or other
inserts in chain link fences are prohibited.
(c) To the greatest practicable extent, walls and fences shall be
designed to be consistent with the traditions of rural Vernon,
as where stone walls separate farmlands and fields.
§ 330-72 VERNON CODE § 330-72
1:464
§ 330-73. Street design.
(d) In all cases, walls and fences must complement the character
of the site and the architectural design of the buildings. All
fences and walls shall be suited to the nature of the project.
(e) All fence and wall designs are subject to § 330-178.
I. Street furniture.
(1) Street furniture such as, but not limited to, trash receptacles,
benches, phone booths, fountains, planters, kiosks, lighting
fixtures, and street hardware shall be located and sized in
accordance with their functional need and aesthetic potential.
(2) Street furniture elements shall be compatible in form, material and
finish. Styles shall be coordinated with the existing or proposed site
architecture.
(3) Selection of street furniture shall take into consideration the
durability, maintenance and long-term cost of the same. All street
furniture shall be of safe design and construction.
(4) Street furniture in the TC Town Center District shall conform with
the requirements of § 330-184B and Appendix _____.
(5) Disparate components of street furniture which create a sense of
clutter and disharmony shall be prohibited. Street furniture
components shall be coordinated with each other and their setting.
All items shall be compatible in form, material, and finish. Strong,
simple shapes, preferably of native materials and natural finishes,
shall be used. Street furniture shall be designed to withstand the
effects of the elements, including sun, wind, moisture, frost and ice.
A. The regulations contained herein shall have general application and are
not to be construed to supplant or supersede the requirements of
Article VIII or any requirements contained in this chapter of a more
specific nature. Street design may also be subject to certain
requirements contained in Appendix (Reserved) to the extent the same
are not supplanted or superseded by provisions contained in Article
VIII.
B. The arrangement of all new streets shall be such as to provide for
appropriate extension of existing streets wherever possible.
C. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the governing body under such terms
and conditions as may be approved by the Planning Board.
D. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets but do not conform
to the width requirements of this chapter shall propose a dedication of
such additional widths as are necessary as to either one or both sides of
§ 330-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-73
1:465
§ 330-74. Blocks and lots.
Unless otherwise provided under Article VIII:
any such street. If the subdivision involves only one side of an existing
street, then half of the required width shall be dedicated.
E. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any point by
more than 10º but not more than 45º, they shall be connected by a curb
with a radius of not less than 100 feet.
F. Any horizontal curves or changes of direction other than in an
intersection shall have a minimum radius of 100 feet.
G. If a dead-end proposed street is to be of a temporary nature, a
turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension
of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way for annexation to
the adjoining respective properties.
H. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
the name of an existing street as to be confused with the same. The
extension of any existing street shall bear the same name as the
existing street.
I. All subdivision streets and driveways, whether or not they connect with
streets or roads accepted or maintained by the Township, shall be
constructed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including
appendixes hereto, particularly Appendix _____ ("Streets and
Sidewalks") and Appendix _____ ("Driveways and Road Openings"),
except to the extent that the same are in conflict with Article VIII, in
which event the provisions of Article VIII shall apply to the extent of
conflict.
J. Any major subdivision fronting on an arterial or collector roadway shall
be designed so as to limit direct access to such roadway. Access to the
lots contained in the proposed subdivision shall be accomplished by
internal road network constructed to Township standards.
A. Block length, width and acreage shall be sufficient to accommodate the
size lot or lots required in the respective zoning district and to provide
for convenient access, circulation, control and traffic safety.
B. Blocks over 1,000 feet long in residential districts are discouraged; if
such length is necessary as a result of the particular characteristics of
the tract, pedestrian crosswalks and/or bikeways between lots may be
required by the Planning Board in locations deemed necessary, and
shall be at least eight feet wide and be relatively straight from street to
street. In nonresidential districts and with respect to nonresidential
uses, block lengths shall be sufficient to meet yard area and yard
requirements for such uses and to provide proper street access and
circulation patterns.
§ 330-73 VERNON CODE § 330-74
1:466
C. Lot requirements shall be generally as follows:
(1) Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements
provided in under Schedule B69 and/or the requirements for
respective conditional uses pursuant to the respective uses
regulated in § 330-189.
(2) Insofar as is practicable, side lot lines shall be either at right angles
or radial to street lines, except where a different design would
appear more suitable from a planning and/or design perspective.
(3) Each lot must abut and front upon an approved street which is
sufficiently improved and maintained to allow for access by
emergency vehicles. In the case where a lot fronts on a street with
less than a fifty-foot right-of-way, sufficient additional right-of-way
shall be dedicated to provide for same, measuring 25 feet from the
center line of such street unless the Planning Board shall
determine that such width is unnecessary or inappropriate.
(4) Through lots are discouraged as a matter of planning, except that
the same may be permitted to have frontage on two streets as
follows:
(a) Where the length of the lot between those streets is such that
the future division of the lot into two lots is improbable; and
(b) Access shall be to the street with the lower traffic function; and
the portion of the lot abutting the other street shall be clearly
labeled on the plat and in any deed that street access to such
secondary street is prohibited.
(5) Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra-width line, and all setbacks
shall be measured from such line.
(6) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors such as rock formation, flood
conditions or similar circumstance, the Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots in the absence of good
cause shown to the contrary. This provision shall not be construed
to curtail the Board's discretion and power with respect to the
requirements and criteria of § 330-83.
(7) No permit for the erection of any building or structure shall be
issued unless the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed
building or structure. Such street shall be an existing state, county
or municipal street or highway; a street shown upon a plat
approved by the Planning Board; or a street on a plat duly filed in
the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the passage of
69.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 330-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-74
1:467
§ 330-75. Basic on-site pavement and curbing requirements.
§ 330-76. Design of parking areas.
this chapter or its predecessor ordinances or any prior law which
required prior approval of plats by a governing body or an agency
of the Township. Before any such permit shall be issued, such street
shall have been certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction
of the governing body, or such suitable improvement shall have
been assured by means of a performance guaranty, in accordance
with standards and specifications for road improvements pursuant
to this chapter. Where the enforcement of this subsection would
entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or where the
circumstances of the case do not require the building or structure
to be related to a street, the Board may, upon application or appeal,
vary the application of this subsection and direct the issuance of a
permit subject to conditions that will provide adequate access for
fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles
necessary for the protection of health and safety and that will
protect any future street layout shown on the general circulation
plan element of the Master Plan.
A. Residential. Single-family detached residential lots shall have
driveways paved for at least the first 25 feet from the edge of street
pavement at driveway opening, or the edge of the existing traveled way,
whichever is greater. Pavement material shall be bituminous concrete
or pavement pavers of concrete block or natural stone.
B. Nonresidential. Parking and loading spaces and required access
driveways and aisles for all nonresidential uses and sites shall be
surfaced with a dustless, durable, all-weather pavement adequately
graded and drained, subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board, paving material
shall be bituminous concrete or pavement pavers of concrete block or
natural stone. Drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with
prevailing engineering practice as approved by the Board Engineer. All
parking lots with more than 10 spaces shall have granite block curbing
around the perimeter and surrounding all planting areas within the
interior of the lot unless otherwise acceptable to and approved by the
Planning Board.
A. Parking area design shall be pursuant to an analysis of traffic patterns
as applied to anticipated ingress and egress, as well as analysis of the
internal system of vehicular and pedestrian movement, so as to avoid
congestion, provide for the safety of pedestrians going to and from
buildings, and separate truck traffic from pedestrian traffic and
passenger vehicle traffic. Truck loading and unloading areas shall be
provided to allow the transfer of goods and products without
interference with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or vehicle parking.
§ 330-74 VERNON CODE § 330-76
1:468
§ 330-77. Minimum parking requirements.
The number of parking spaces required for each use shall be as provided
in Appendix _____. References to "square feet" as a measure of required
parking shall be construed to refer to gross floor area of proposed buildings.
Where a particular project contains more than one use, the minimum
parking requirements shall be the sum of the component parts of use.
§ 330-78. Stormwater and sanitary sewage disposal designs.
B. Each off-street parking space shall be designed to measure not less
than 10 feet wide and not less than 18 feet deep. Spaces for handicap
parking shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and shall be located in the
closest possible proximity to the building being served. Handicap
parking shall be otherwise provided in accordance with the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
C. Access aisles and drives for off-street parking areas shall be a minimum
of 24 feet in width.
D. Off-street loading spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and 40
feet in length, with a minimum of 15 feet of vertical clearance.
E. Individual parking or loading spaces shall be served by interior
driveways and shall be designed for vehicle access without requiring
the moving of any other vehicle. Spaces shall not have direct access
from public streets or major interior drives and roads.
A. Unless otherwise provided pursuant to Subsection B of this section,
stormwater and sanitary sewage disposal systems associated with
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential development shall be
designed in accordance with the standards contained in Article VIII
notwithstanding the title of that article. Any conflict between the
provisions of this section and those of Article VIII shall be resolved by
supersession of Article VIII.
B. (Reserved)
C. All developments shall be provided with necessary and appropriate
systems to adequately provide for the control of stormwater runoff, the
collection and treatment of sanitary sewage and the storage and
distribution of potable water supplies. Where available, all such
services shall be connected to an improved public utility system.
D. Drainage.
(1) Stormwater drainage systems shall be adequate to carry off
stormwater and natural drainage water which originates not only
within the lot, site or tract boundaries, but beyond the lot, site or
tract boundaries in their current state of development. No
stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall be so diverted as
to overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or the
§ 330-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-78
1:469
need for additional drainage structures on other private properties
or public lands without proper and approved provisions being made
for such conditions. No drainage shall be allowed to flow over
sidewalks, and/or through curb drains for the purpose of disposing
of sump pump and/or roof leader runoff; such facilities must find an
outlet into a watercourse or drainage system of sufficient capacity.
(2) Storm sewers, open channels, bridges and culverts shall be
designed for minimum flow capacities as follow:
Systems
Design Capacity
(years)
Collection 25
Culverts under 1/2 square mile
drainage area
100
Detention systems over 1/2 square
mile drainage area
100
(3) All materials used in the construction of storm sewers, bridges, and
other drainage structures shall be in accordance with
specifications of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction of the New Jersey Highway Department," current
edition, and any supplements, addenda and modifications thereto
unless otherwise specified in this chapter pursuant to Article VIII
or as may otherwise be provided by superseding governmental
standard, either local or state.
(4) All lots, sites and tracts shall be graded to secure proper drainage
away from buildings. All drainage systems shall insure the
prevention of stormwater collection in pools or other authorized
concentrations in flow, and, to the extent practicable, water shall
not flow across adjacent property lines.
(5) Whenever approval by a governmental agency other than the
Planning Board is required in connection with a drainage system
such as but not limited to the County of Sussex, State of New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, the approval of such
agency or agencies shall be obtained and all terms and conditions
thereof performed. The Planning Board may require such approval
and/or performance as a condition precedent to development.
(6) Wherever required, appropriate or indicated with respect to a plan
for development, a drainage easement shall be provided to the
Township or other public or private property owner, as and where
appropriate, where a tract, lot or site is traversed or to be traversed
by a watercourse, surface or underground drainageway or
drainage system, channel or stream. Such easement shall conform
substantially with the lines of such watercourse and, in any event,
shall meet any minimum widths and locations as may be provided
§ 330-78 VERNON CODE § 330-78
1:470
§ 330-79. Potable water supply and fire protection designs.
in the Master Plan and/or this chapter. Such easement shall be
expressed on an approved plat or plan as follows: "Drainage
easement granted for the purposes provided and expressed in the
Comprehensive Land Development Subcode of the Township of
Vernon."
E. Sewage disposal.
(1) If a sewage treatment and distribution is accessible, the developer
shall construct facilities in such a manner as to provide adequate
sewerage within the development to transport all sewage from
each lot, site and tract to said collection and treatment system.
(2) Any sanitary sewer collection system shall be adequate to handle
all present and probable future development. Alignments outside
streets shall require easements subject to the review and approval
by the Planning Board Attorney and Engineer and, thereafter,
Municipal Attorney and Engineer if such alignment involves
municipal lands or interests.
(3) Any treatment plant and collection system, including individual
subsurface sewage disposal systems, shall be design in accordance
with the requirements of NJDEP and/or the Vernon Township
Department of Health and Human Services.
A. All proposed on-site wells shall be subject to testing, inspection and
approval of the Vernon Township Department of Health and Human
Services.
B. Where a proposed lot, site, building or use is to be served by a public
water supply system or can be reasonably served by an existing system,
said supply shall have been installed in and tested and all required fire
hydrants or fire connections shall have been installed and tested and
approved by the Fire Official in accordance with prevailing standards,
including but not limited to fire insurance rating organization
standards. When in the opinion of the Planning Board a public water
supply system is accessible for a proposed development, each lot or site
shall be provided with water supply by such system. All facilities for
such system shall be installed pursuant to and in accordance with
Article VIII and any other ordinances or regulations of the Township of
Vernon or State of New Jersey.
C. In the event that a public water supply system does not appear
available to supply the proposed subdivision or other development
presently but nevertheless appears likely to become available, a
developer may be required to construct a private water supply system
within the development in such a manner that an adequate supply of
potable water will become available to each lot within the subdivision
§ 330-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-79
1:471
§ 330-80. Lighting. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
and so that such system can be incorporated within the extended public
system when and if the same shall become available.
D. Where streams or ponds exist, or are proposed on lands to be
developed, facilities shall be provided to draft water for fire-fighting
purposes. This requirement shall include access to a public street
suitable for use by fire-fighting equipment and construction of or
improvements to ponds, dams, or similar on-site or off-site development
where feasible. As possible and appropriate, fire hydrants shall be
installed where essential water supply systems exists. Hydrants shall be
of the type approved by the Township of Vernon in accordance with the
standards of Fire Insurance Rating Organization of New Jersey and
shall be placed and installed in accordance with the standards of the
Township and the reasonable requirements of the Fire Subcode Official.
Such installation shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the
Planning Board Engineer and, where appropriate, the Township
Engineer.
A. A lighting plan prepared by a qualified individual shall be provided with
major subdivision and site plan applications. The lighting plan shall
show limits of the isolux/isocandela trace where the minimum
footcandles occur and shall be in compliance with minimum
illumination levels in Subsection C(5). Dimensioned manufacturer's
light details and specifications, including footcandle distributions, shall
be provided.
B. Streetlighting of a type supplied by a local utility and of a type and
number approved by the Planning Board or Township Engineer shall be
provided where deemed necessary for safety purposes. Wherever
electric utility installations are required to be underground, the
applicant shall provide for underground service for streetlighting.
C. Design.
(1) The fixture spacing, illumination type, mounting height, wattage,
and photometric pattern shall be shown and calculated for each
type of fixture used. The lighting for off-street parking shall be
designed to direct light downward towards the parking areas.
Shield or cutoffs when necessary shall be installed to prevent
spillover of light onto residential areas and public streets.
(2) Any outdoor lighting such as building or sidewalk illumination,
driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan, in the
form of manufacturer's details and specifications to allow a
determination of effects upon adjacent properties, traffic safety and
sky-glow.
§ 330-79 VERNON CODE § 330-80
1:472
(3) Illumination shall be designed to minimize undesirable off-site
effects. Lighting shall be designed to respect and protect the use
and enjoyment of neighboring properties and in such a manner as
to avoid distraction of motorists. The intensity of all light sources
proposed in connection with the development, together with all
proposed light shielding and similar features, shall be subject to
Planning Board approval.
(4) Light intensity shall not exceed 0.3 footcandle along any property
line and shall be arranged and shielded to reflect the light away
from adjoining streets or properties. This regulation shall not apply
to lights that are used solely for the illumination of entrances or
exits or driveways leading to a parking lot.
(5) Lighting shall be provided by fixtures with a mounting height not
more than 25 feet or the height of a building, whichever is less,
unless said standard is located within 250 feet of a residential zone,
in which case the mounting height shall not exceed 15 feet.
Mounting height shall be measured from the ground level to the
center line of the light source. Light source other than pedestrian
walkway lighting shall be spaced at a distance not to exceed five
times the mounting height.
(6) Minimum levels of illumination (lux/footcandles).
Zone
Pedestrian
Walkway Parking Areas Streets
R-1 4/0.4 5/0.5 4/0.4
R-2 4/0.4 5/0.5 4/0.4
R-3 4/0.4 5/0.5 4/0.4
R-4 4/0.4 5/0.5 4/0.4
PLC 4/0.4 5/0.5 4/0.4
C-1 10/0.9 16/1.5 13/1.2
C-2 10/0.9 16/1.5 13/1.2
C-3 6/0.6 16/1.5 6/0.6
CR 6/0.6 16/1.5 6/0.6
SR 4/0.4 5/0.5 4/0.4
LI 4/0.4 11/1.0 6/0.6
AET 6/0.6 16/1.5 6/0.6
CON 6/0.6 16/1.5 6/0.6
TC 10/0.9 20/2.0 13/1.2
The uses in the following table shall be illuminated at the levels
of the stated zone regardless of the zone the use is located in.
§ 330-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-80
1:473
Use Per Zone
Agriculture/farm R-1
Arts center CR
Banks, savings and financial offices C-1
Bath house/rest rooms CR
Beaches CR
Bed-and-breakfast R-1
Boarding stable CR
Child care center C-1
Club CR
Clubhouse CR
Country club CR
Dock CR
Farm stand/produce CR
Golf course CR
Health club CR
Health services C-2
Inn CR
Institutional use C-1
Multifamily age-restricted housing CR
Nature preserve R-1
Nursery C-3
Office C-3
Place of worship C-3
Planned adult community CR
Professional office C-3
Resort-oriented housing CR
Restaurant C-1
Retail sales C-1
Retail sales, outdoor C-1
Riding academy/stables CR
Specialty food store C-1
Specialty shopping center C-2
Studio C-1
Theater CR
§ 330-80 VERNON CODE § 330-80
1:474
Use Per Zone
Theme park C-1
Veterinary hospital C-3
Covered Parking Facilities Day Night
General parking and
pedestrian access
54/5 54/5
Ramps and corners 110/10 54/5
Entrance areas 540/50 54/5
Lux/footcandles. The levels shown are measured in lux/
footcandles. The minimum standards are based on the level of
light that will be available for new lamps and clean luminaries.
When by test or other means it has been determined that less
than 80% of the light specified in the minimum standards is
attained, or a significant number of burnouts are evident, the
owner shall be notified and he will have 30 days in which to
correct the lighting level to the minimum standards.
(7) Freestanding lights at the perimeter of parking lots shall be aligned
with parking stall striping and located a minimum of 2 1/2 feet from
the edge of curb. Exposed concrete pedestrian or bollard light
foundations shall not exceed two inches above grade or four incites
above grade when located within a lawn area.
(8) The style of any light or light standard within nonresidential and
multifamily developments shall be consistent with the architectural
style for the principal building and, where appropriate, the
architectural character of the surrounding area.
(9) No outdoor floodlight or spotlight and no light beam or emission
from any light, whether indoors or outdoors, shall be directed
toward any point off the premises.
(10) The following types of outdoor lighting are prohibited: any search
light, flashing light, blinking light, moving light, rotating light,
oscillating light, shuttered light or similar device, strobe light,
fluttering light or any other light of which the intensity and color is
not maintained constant, as perceived by the human eye, when in
use.
(11) The Planning Board shall have the power to reduce or eliminate
streetlighting where prevailing conditions, including but not
limited to visual resource lands, lands in the AET Districts, open
and rural locations, and the like, warrant the same. In residential
subdivisions, streetlighting shall be limited to ornamental lamppost
lighting unless utility standards are necessary or appropriate under
Subsection A.
§ 330-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-81
1:475
§ 330-81. Sight distance design; sight triangles.
§ 330-82. Soil erosion and sediment control; cuts and fills; site
disturbance.
A. Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an intersection of
streets. The area within such sight triangles shall either be dedicated as
part of the street right-of-way or maintained as part of the obligation of
the ownership of the lot adjoining such street or streets, and which
shall be set aside on a respective plat or plan as a sight triangle
easement.
B. Within a sight triangle, no grading, planting or structure shall be
erected and maintained more than 30 inches above center line grade of
either intersecting street or driveway or lower than eight feet above
their center lines, including utility poles, but excluding street name
signs and official traffic regulation signs. Where any street or driveway
intersection involves earthen berms or vegetation, including trees, the
developer shall trim such vegetation and trees as well as establish
proper excavation and grading to provide the sight triangle.
C. The sight triangle shall be that area bounded by the intersecting street
lines and a straight line which connects sight points located on each of
the two intersecting street lines the following distances away from the
intersecting street lines:
(1) Arterial streets at 130 feet.
(2) Collector streets at 60 feet.
(3) Primary and secondary local streets at 35 feet.
D. Where the intersecting streets are both arterial, both collectors or one
arterial and one collector, two overlapping sight triangles shall be
required, formed by connecting the sight points noted above with a
sight point 35 feet with respect to the intersecting street. Classification
of existing and proposed streets shall be by those shown on the Master
Plan, this chapter, or as designated by the Planning Board at the time of
the application for approval of a new street not included therein.
E. A sight triangle easement dedication shall be expressed on the plat or
plan as follows: "Sight triangle easement subject to grading, plant and
construction restrictions as provided pursuant to the Vernon Township
Comprehensive Land Development Subcode." Portions of a lot set aside
for a sight triangle may be calculated and determining the lot area and
may be included in establishing the minimum setbacks required by
Article XI, Schedule B.70
70.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 330-81 VERNON CODE § 330-82
1:476
§ 330-83. Environmentally sensitive areas; minimum improvable
area. [Amended 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. No building permit shall be issued in connection with any application
requiring either site plan or major subdivision approval until a soil
erosion and sediment control plan has been reviewed and approved by
the Sussex County Soil Conservation District. A copy of the approved
plan shall be forwarded to the Planning Board Secretary for
verification. Planning Board approval shall be conditioned upon the
timely receipt of such verification.
B. Design standards for soil erosion and sediment control shall be those as
are currently promulgated by the Sussex County Soil Conservation
District.
C. Where reasonable and appropriate, the Planning Board may require the
submission and approval of a soil erosion and sediment control plan in
connection with a minor site plan or minor subdivision approval when it
is apparent that disturbance may or will be similar to or the same as
that which would make approval of such a plan appropriate. Even under
circumstances where Sussex County Soil Conservation District
approval is unnecessary, standards and guidelines of the district shall
be followed whenever significant site disturbance is to be undertaken.
D. Cuts and fills; retaining walls. (Reserved)
A. Rationale and purpose.
(1) Certain lands are not suitable for development. All such lands shall
be and are hereby known as "environmentally sensitive areas"
("ESAs") and shall not be disturbed for any development except as
and only to the extent permitted by the Planning or Zoning Board.
The ESA's are identified in the list below. It is the expectation of the
Township that the protections of this section, together with
minimum lot sizes as provided pursuant to Article XI and Schedule
B thereto,71 will prevent the disturbance and development of ESA's
to the benefit of the Township's citizenry and natural environment.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS
• Wetlands, lakes, ponds and their buffers, as determined by
NJDEP.
• Floodplains, stream encroachment boundaries, and their buffers
as established by NJDEP.
• Streams, brooks, rivers and their associated stream buffer
conservation zone as established by either Vernon Township or
NJDEP, whichever is greater.
71.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 330-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-83
1:477
• Areas with a seasonal high water table less than 2 feet from
the surface, as established by the Sussex County Soil Survey. Site
specific soil testing in the field will be considered in lieu of the soil
survey if witnessed by and acceptable to the Township Engineer
and/or Health Officer.
• Areas with ledgerock less than 4 feet from the surface, as
established by the Sussex County Soil Survey.
Site specific soil testing in the field will be considered in lieu of
the soil survey if witnessed by and acceptable to the Township
Engineer and/or Health Officer.
• Slopes that exceed 18%.
Construction within slopes > 18% is strongly discouraged, and
shall be avoided to the greatest extent possible, but may be
approved by the Planning or Zoning Board with due cause shown,
as follows:
o Slopes between 18% and 21% may be applied at the rate of onehalf
(0.50) for the purpose of calculating the minimum improvable
area (MIA) below. In addition, slopes between 21% and 24% may
be applied at the rate of one-third (.33).
For example, a 20,000 s.f. site contains a variety of slopes, and the
minimum improvable area requirement is 9,000 s.f.
The site is evaluated with a slope analysis, as follows:
0% to 18%: 5,000 s.f. x 1.0 = 5,000 s.f. towards MIA
18% to 21%: 3,000 s.f. x 0.50 = 1,500 s.f. towards MIA
21% to 24%: 12,000 s.f. x 0.33 = 4,000 s.f. towards MIA
Total MIA: = 10,500 s.f., which
complies
Additional site protection measures shall be incorporated into the
design, including but not limited to the use of block or rubble
retaining walls, supplemental soil erosion and sediment control
techniques, and phased construction to limit the amount of
disturbed area at any one time. The additional site protection
measures must be presented with and documented on the site or
subdivision plans, and are subject to the review and approval of
the Planning or Zoning Board and their professionals.
(2) It is also the purpose of this section to insure that no lot be created
for residential purposes and no site be developed for nonresidential
purposes pursuant or subject to this chapter which does not
provide reasonably ample contiguous land to form an envelope in
which to locate a principal building, a private well and subsurface
sewage disposal systems, driveways, parking areas, yards
§ 330-83 VERNON CODE § 330-83
1:478
sufficient in size for normal use and enjoyment, and which is
otherwise suitable and reasonably improvable for its intended
purposes.
In the case of residential properties, no new lot shall be created
until the ESA's have been identified and evaluated by the Board
and their Professionals, and the applicant has demonstrated that
the minimum improvable area can be met as required below.
In the case of nonresidential properties, the applicant shall identify
the ESA's on the plans, and avoid any disturbance to said areas to
the greatest extent possible when designing the site plans.
If the applicant cannot comply with the Minimum Improvable Area
requirements for residential properties, or proposes to disturb
ESA's on nonresidential properties, the applicant shall apply for
a waiver from either the Planning or Zoning Board, depending
on which Board is hearing the application. The Board and their
Professionals shall review the proposed impact to ESA's and may
require the design be modified so as to reduce or eliminate the
impact to ESA's, at the Board's discretion.
B. Prohibition against disturbance and development. No ESA as described
in Subsection A of this section shall be disturbed, improved or
developed in any manner for any use without the express approval of
the Planning or Zoning Board for good cause shown or without the
approval of New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or
other governmental agency in connection with such agency's
jurisdiction and powers concerning one or more of the subjects of this
section.
C. In designing a lot or lots, or a site for development, any lot or site
proposed for development which would fail to satisfy the requirements
of this section shall not be approved, disturbed, improved or developed
unless authorized by the Planning or Zoning Board. Where a waiver is
not granted by the Planning or Zoning Board, such lot or lands expected
to be developed shall instead be annexed to and become contiguous
with such adjacent lands to such an extent as shall appear necessary
and appropriate to establish a lot which satisfies this section and
chapter. Alternatively, the developer may and is encouraged to conserve
such lot or lands in accordance with Subsection E of this section or as
otherwise determined by the Planning or Zoning Board.72
D. Conservation of fault areas or areas underlain by certain carbonate
bedrock formations. Lands known and expected to be subject to faults,
subsidence, sinkholes, or underlain by carbonate bedrock formations,
the conditions of which cannot be reasonably remediated, shall not be
disturbed or developed unless authorized by the Planning or Zoning
Board. The Planning or Zoning Board may grant approval for
72.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 717e, Water body conservation buffer, which previously
followed this section, was repealed 3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04-04.
§ 330-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-83
1:479
disturbance or development in such areas after hearing expert
testimony from a Professional Geologist and after presentation and
acceptance of a remediation plan by the Board's professionals.
E. Conservation easements. The Planning or Zoning Board may require
that a conservation easement or other protective or restrictive
covenant be conveyed to enforce this section, as contemplated in
§ 330-200 or as otherwise appearing appropriate.
F. Minimum improvable area.
(1) Every residential lot to be created, in addition to the other
regulations contained in this section, be subject to the requirement
that such lot can and will produce a minimum improvable area in
accordance with Table 7.2. For purposes of construing this
subsection, "minimum improvable area" shall mean that contiguous
area produced by and which satisfies all principal setback and bulk
requirements of this chapter, and which is not constrained or
intruded upon by one or more environmentally sensitive features or
components of an ESA as provided in this section, together with
such other contiguous land areas as are necessary for useful yards,
accessory uses, structures and appurtenances as are normally
incident to the principal use and structure, subject to the pertinent
limitations of this chapter, including but not limited to maximum
building and lot coverage. Wherever a building or improvement
envelope shall be created by application of the requirements
contained in Schedule B to Article XI,73 a minimum improvable area
within the same, together with any other areas needed as
aforesaid, shall be established as an environmentally suitable and
sufficient area to insure the utility of the lot or site for its intended
purpose.
Only the area within the principal building setback lines shall be
considered in the ESA calculation. In addition, easements, rights
of ways, and deed restricted areas shall not be considered as
improvable area.
Table 7.2
Zone Minimum Improvable Area
R-1 10,000
R-2 9,000
R-3 7,000
R-4 6,000
PLC 6,000
CR 6,000
73.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 330-83 VERNON CODE § 330-83
1:480
(2) Improvable area thus produced shall be a contiguous area where
the principal and accessory buildings, structures, appurtenances,
and yards for active open space use can be suitably located and
developed.
G. Orientation and arrangement of buildings and site improvements.
Insofar as is reasonably possible given anticipated construction or
permanent access for ingress/egress or utility service, improvements
and site disturbance shall be limited to the improvable area. All
buildings and improvements proposed for development on a lot or site
subject to this section shall be oriented and arranged to satisfy this
section.
H. Preliminary grading and land disturbance activities. Applicants desiring
to initiate preliminary grading, earth-moving, cutting, filling, treeclearing,
or any other land disturbance activity are hereby required to
obtain approval for such activities by the Planning or Zoning Board.
Applicants shall submit a concept plan to the appropriate Board for
review. The concept plan shall provide existing and proposed contours,
and a delineation of all ESA's on the property, along with a proposed
limit of disturbance. The plan shall detail what ESA's, if any, will be
disturbed by the proposed activities. The disturbance of any ESA's is
prohibited unless authorization is granted by the Planning or Zoning
Board. In addition to Board approval, the applicant is required to obtain
a soil erosion and sediment control plan certification from either Vernon
Township or the Sussex County Soil Conservation District, whichever
has jurisdiction.
The only exception to the above shall be existing single-family
residential lots, for which a soil erosion and sediment control plan
certification has been obtained from either Vernon Township or the
Sussex County Soil Conservation District, whichever has jurisdiction.
Planning or Zoning Board approval would not be required in such
instances.
I. Tree Clearing. Tree clearing shall only occur where necessary and as
approved on the site plan or subdivision drawings.
(1) The limit of disturbance shall be clearly delineated on the plans,
and kept to a minimum. Clear cutting of trees is prohibited, unless
approved by the reviewing Board for due cause shown. The
applicant shall show existing wooded areas on the site plan or
subdivision drawings, and minimize the amount of tree removal by
using such techniques as retaining walls to reduce disturbance and
tree wells to preserve existing trees within disturbed areas. In the
case of subdivisions, existing trees shall be preserved along the
side lines between houses at a minimum.
(2) Phasing of construction for larger scale projects shall be required
by the reviewing Board and the Township Engineer. In the case of
subdivisions, Phase I shall be the roads, utilities and detention
§ 330-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-83
1:481
§ 330-84. Design for sites underlain by carbonate bedrock;
Carbonate Area Overlay Districts.
basins, and the second phase shall be the home sites. Phase II
cannot be cleared until Phase I is graded and stabilized with grass
and other plantings to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer
and Soil Conservation District.
(3) The limit of disturbance (LOD) shall be staked by a licensed
surveyor prior to any land disturbance, and marked with orange
snow fencing. The Township Engineer shall inspect the LOD
stakeout, and shall have full authority to adjust the LOD in order to
save trees where practical based upon his or her judgment.
A. Purpose and scope.
(1) Areas within the Township are underlain by carbonate bedrock
such as limestone and dolomite. The solution of this bedrock causes
surface depressions, open drainage passages, and the development
of irregular, subsurface rock topography known as "karst." These
conditions make such areas unstable and susceptible to subsidence
and surface collapse. As a result, the alteration of drainage
patterns in these areas by the placement of impervious coverage,
grade changes, or increased loads from site improvements can lead
to land subsidence and sinkholes. Fractures or solution openings
and fissures in limestone formations may lead to public or private
water supplies, making those sources especially susceptible to
groundwater contamination. Contamination of water sources can
occur from solid and liquid wastes, contaminated surface water,
septic system effluent, or other hazardous substances moving
through fractures or solution openings and fissures within the rock.
(2) Carbonate aquifers are an important source of groundwater in the
Township. Vernon relies on a clean supply of subsurface water to
protect and promote the public health, welfare and economic and
social development. Therefore, the purposes of enacting this
section are to protect and preserve sensitive and valuable potable
groundwater resources and to reduce the frequency of structural
damage to public and private improvements by sinkhole collapse or
subsidence in areas of limestone geology, thus protecting the public
health, safety and welfare and insuring orderly development within
the Township.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply. In the absence of a definition herein, a term shall be defined
as provided in Article II.
BEDDING — The arrangement of a sedimentary rock in layers of
varying thickness and character.
BEDROCK — Rock that underlies soil or other unconsolidated material.
§ 330-83 VERNON CODE § 330-84
1:482
CARBONATE AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT (CAOD) — The overlay zoning
district comprising of carbonate rock areas and the carbonate drainage
areas.
CARBONATE DRAINAGE AREA — A watershed area which directly
drains into a Carbonate Rock Overlay District.
CARBONATE ROCK — Rock consisting chiefly of calcium and
magnesium carbonates.
CAVE — A natural opening of a size permitting human exploration and
extending into a region of little or no natural light.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — A shallow, dish-shaped hollow on the land
surface which, in areas of limestone geology, may be indicative of old
sinkholes or incipient collapse.
COLLAPSE SINKHOLE — A sinkhole caused by the collapse of the roof
of a bedrock cavern.
DISAPPEARING STREAM — A stream that enters the subsurface
through a sinkhole or other entrance.
DISSOLUTION — A space or cavity in or between rocks, formed by the
solution of part of the rock material.
DOLINE — See "sinkhole."
FAULT — A surface or zone of rock fracture along which there has been
noticeable differential movement.
FISSURE — An extensive crack, break, or fracture in the rock.
GEOTECHNICAL INVESTIGATION PROGRAM — A program which
identifies the geologic nature of the bedrock materials underlying the
site and provides solutions directed at preserving water quality and
assuring the safety of any planned facility or improvement built over
carbonate rocks.
JOINT — A fracture in rock generally more or less vertical or transverse
to bedding, along which no appreciable movement has occurred.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone or
dolomite by dissolving or solution of the carbonate rocks, characterized
by sinkholes, closed depressions, caves, solution channels, internal
drainage, and irregular bedrock surfaces.
LIMESTONE — A carbonate sedimentary rock consisting chiefly of
calcium carbonate. Limestone is commonly used as a general term for
that class of rocks which consists of at least 80% calcium or magnesium
carbonate. In this section the term "limestone" shall be used generically
to refer to carbonate rocks, limestone formations and Precambrian
marbles.
LINEATION — Any straight line or alignment of natural features seen
on an aerial photograph or any geographically referenced source.
Although some lineations may be geologically controlled, ground-based
§ 330-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-84
1:483
geologic investigations are necessary to define their existence and
significance.
MARBLE — A metamorphic rock consisting chiefly of crystallized
limestone or dolomite.
OUTCROP — An exposure of bedrock projecting through the ground
surface.
PINNACLE — An irregular rock projection often buried beneath the
ground surface.
SHEAR ZONE — A zone in which shearing has occurred on a large scale
so that the rock is crushed and brecciated (broken).
SINKHOLE (DOLINE) — A localized land subsidence, generally a
funnel-shaped or steep-sided depression, caused by the dissolution of
underlying carbonate rocks or the subsidence of the land surface into
a subterranean passage, cavity or cave. Sinkholes are formed by the
underground removal of soil and rock material.
SOIL — The material found in the surface layer of the earth's crust
which may be moved by a space or shovel.
SOLUTIONED CARBONATES — Carbonate rocks that have had cavities
formed, fractures widened, and passages in the rock created through
the dissolution of the rock by the passage of surface water.
SOLUTION CHANNEL — A tubular or planar channel formed by
solution in carbonate rock terrains, usually along joints and bedding
planes. Such openings are the main water carrier in carbonate rocks.
SOLUTION SINKHOLE — A depression formed from the slow
dissolution of bedrock.
SPRING — A place where water naturally flows from rock or soil upon
the land or body of surface water.
SUBSIDENCE SINKHOLE — Sinkhole formed by the downward
settlement of unconsolidated overburden into openings in the
underlying, soluble bedrock.
SURFACE RUNOFF — The part of the precipitation that passes over the
surface of the soil.
VOID — An opening in the soil or rock materials.
C. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to
development activities in the Carbonate Area Overlay District
requiring, pursuant to this chapter, subdivision or site plan approval,
building permits, zoning permits, and related septic systems and
wastewater disposal systems requiring state permits or treatment
works approvals. This section shall also be applicable to the installation
of wells, site improvements, pond construction (except for agricultural
purposes), filling of any sinkhole, or any other activity which could be
affected by the presence of limestone geology on or near the site, and
which is associated with development pursuant to this chapter.
§ 330-84 VERNON CODE § 330-84
1:484
D. Carbonate Area Overlay District (CAOD).
(1) The Carbonate Area Overlay District shall be and is hereby
identified as such upon the Vernon Township Zoning Map as and
where deemed appropriate by the governing body. The district is
constituted as an overlay to the zoning districts heretofore
established by the Zoning Map and may encompass all or portions
of more than one existing zoning district. Regulation of the CAOD
shall be in addition to those requirements regulating the existing
zoning district.
(2) The Carbonate Area Overlay District contains areas known as the
"carbonate rock area" and the "carbonate drainage area." The
carbonate rock area (CRA) is composed of those areas of the
municipality underlain by limestone or carbonate rocks. The
geologic mapping utilized to prepare the CRD overlay boundary is
derived from New Jersey Geologic Survey and United States
Geological Survey maps. These maps are interpretations developed
from available field observations and subsurface data; additional
unmapped areas of limestone rocks may exist in the Township of
Vernon. Therefore, the provisions of this section may be applied to
any development which, in the opinion of the approving authority,
is located in an area underlain by limestone. The CRA map shall be
updated as information is developed through the application of this
section.
(3) A carbonate drainage area (CDA) consists of all lands which drain
surface water into a carbonate rock area (CRA). Changes in the
quantity, quality and rate of discharge of surface water runoff from
lands upslope of carbonate rock areas can adversely affect the
CRA. Therefore, development activities in the CDA which may alter
the surface drainage patterns or affect the water quality or
increase runoff into a CRA shall be subject to the requirements of
this section.
E. Design and performance standards for CRA. The following standards
shall be applicable to development activities occurring in a CRA:
(1) The location of all sinkholes, disappearing streams, or other karst
features identified during the geotechnical investigation program
and shown on documents submitted under the Phase I and/or Phase
II checklist shall be drawn on all final plans or plats. The plans or
plats shall also note any site remediation techniques utilized to
stabilize any solution channels or subsidence karst features. All
subdivision deeds shall contain the following wording: "Block _____,
Lot _____ is underlain by limestone formations." Limestone
formations are susceptible to surface collapse (or sinkholes) and
subsidence caused by the physical erosion and chemical alteration
of the soil and bedrock.
§ 330-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-84
1:485
(2) The design and construction of the improvements listed in
Appendix _____ (Reserved) shall be accomplished so as to minimize,
to the greatest practicable extent, the development of future
sinkholes or other karst hazards and the pollution of surface water
and groundwater resources. The following guidelines shall be
observed:
(a) Carbonate formations present complex design and engineering
challenges. For example, design and engineering solutions
which may be appropriate for a single-family dwelling may not
work for an office building. As a result, the provisions of
Appendix _____ were developed to provide an outline of design
concerns which apply to different construction activities.
Appendix _____ also provides rudimentary suggestions as to
current engineering and geotechnical procedures and
minimum standards that might be useful to those applying this
section. None of the items is intended to preclude the
application of judgment, innovation and experience. Appendix
_____ represents the best technical judgment available at this
time. As the Township gains experience with this section and
local geologic conditions, both the level of review and the
scope of Appendix _____ should be evaluated.
(b) A number of testing procedures are presented in Appendix
_____.
[1] These include direct methods, such as site reconnaissance,
test pits, test probes and test borings. Direct methods are
essentially those procedures which allow the investigator
to physically see or sample some of the geotechnical
parameters of the site. Direct methods can provide an
accurate picture of known site locations. It is then
necessary to extrapolate these known data points to the
entire site.
[2] Indirect methods include the use of such items as aerial
photography, satellite imagery and geophysical
procedures. With geophysical procedures one records
some earth properties and attempts to correlate each
property with more specific site characteristics, such as
rock properties or depths. Indirect methods must be used
with great care because of the complex nature of karst
sites. Indirect methods may not detect small variations in
the carbonate bedrock features which may be of great
significance to the project design.
(c) Direct methods testing involves the following:
[1] Site reconnaissance. An on-site reconnaissance, by a
person with knowledge of local geology, is important to
develop an understanding of the site constraints. Prior to
§ 330-84 VERNON CODE § 330-84
1:486
conducting on-site reconnaissance, field personnel should
review aerial photography to look for the presence of such
features as photo lineaments, vegetation changes and
depression areas. Black and white aerial photographs,
when viewed in a stereo image, can reveal such features
as sinkholes, closed surface depressions, lineaments and
bedrock pinnacles. Older aerial photographs are a
valuable resource to document changes in the land forms
or karst features which have occurred on the site over
time.
[2] Test pits. Test pits are a simple, inexpensive way to view
the overburden materials and the condition and variability
of the carbonate rock surface. Test pits are backhoe
excavations generally to the depth of the bedrock or
limitation of backhoe.
[3] Test probes. These generally consist of advancing a steel
bit into the ground by an air-percussion machine.
Essentially a large, mobile jack-hammer is used. Depth of
normal penetration is usually less than 50 feet. The
cuttings are blown out of the hole and examined. Although
quite disturbed, these cuttings yield a sample of the
materials penetrated. The amount of air injected and
return of cuttings at the surface can indicate the presence
of fractures and cavities. The rate of speed of the advance
of the probe provides a qualitative estimate of the
competency of the material encountered. Backfilling with
a fluid cement grout and recording the volume of materials
placed in the drill hole (of known dimension) can also yield
a measure of the size of openings encountered in the
subsurface during the downward progress of the probe.
[4] Test borings. Test borings can yield virtually complete and
undisturbed soil and rock samples. These provide visual
evidence of fractures, weathering, fracture fillings and
even the vertical dimensions of cavities. A measure of the
drilling fluid losses can also indicate the volume and
nature of any soil or rock cavities encountered. Backfilling
with a fluid cement grout and recording the volume of
materials placed in the drill hole (of known dimension) can
also yield a measure of the size of openings encountered in
the subsurface during the downward progress of the
probe.
(d) Indirect methods testing involves the following:
[1] Aerial photography. This is the simplest indirect technique,
particularly when photos taken over a long time period are
analyzed. Open depressions, bedrock exposures,
vegetation and moisture changes over time can be
§ 330-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-84
1:487
detected on either black and white or color photographs.
Piles of rock or small groups of brush or trees in otherwise
open fields can indicate active sinkholes or rock pinnacles
breaking the ground surface. Images defined at wave
lengths over than visible light can be as useful as, or even
more useful than, conventional aerial photographs. These
images are generally available from satellite mapping
work.
[2] Geophysical procedures.
[a] Various geophysical investigation techniques which
can be used in karst terrains include groundpenetrating
radar, electrical conductivity, electrical
resistivity, magnetic field, very low frequency
measurement (ELF), gravity field recording and
seismic velocity measurements. In general, none of
these methods has the ability to discriminate all
fractures and small cavities. The data provides
information on the variation in underground
conditions which should be interpreted by a person
trained in geophysics.
[b] These procedures are used to identify zones of
variation across a site. Areas showing variation are
then targeted for additional direct testing procedures.
Geophysical procedures should not be used as the only
method of verifying underground conditions.
Information gathered with geophysical procedures is
useful when extrapolating directly measured data.
[c] The variability in physical properties and the
solutioned nature of most carbonate rock sites require
an increase in the number of sites analyzed and the
use of several investigation methods to provide a
reliable interpretation of the subsurface conditions.
F. Procedures and submission requirements for development in the
Carbonate Area Overlay Districts.
(1) All applicants for development approval shall undertake a
geotechnical investigation program. Projects located in a CDA or
CRA shall complete the Phase I checklist. Submission of a Phase II
checklist shall be subject to the recommendation of the municipal
geotechnical consultant (GTC).
(2) The geotechnical investigation program shall be prepared by a
professional engineer or geologist with experience in karst
terrains. The municipality's geotechnical consultant (GTC) shall be
similarly qualified.
§ 330-84 VERNON CODE § 330-84
1:488
(3) The geotechnical investigation program shall identify the geologic
nature of the materials underlying the site.
(4) The geologic investigation report shall evaluate site information
gathered during the geotechnical investigation and provide
recommendations for the planning, engineering design, and
construction techniques to be utilized. All design recommendations
shall minimize, to the greatest extent practical, impacts upon water
quality and structural hazards associated with limestone
formations.
(5) In the case of applications for site plans or subdivisions located in a
Carbonate Area Overlay District., the geologic investigation
program may be completed and filed prior to a formal application
for preliminary approval.
(6) After the submission of the information required in the Phase I
checklist, the authorized approval authority may grant a waiver
from the requirement of part or all of the geotechnical investigation
and report requirements under this section upon appropriate
recommendation of the municipal geotechnical consultant.
G. Geotechnical investigation program process. For all properties located
in the CAOD, a comprehensive geologic investigation program shall be
conducted by the applicant. The purpose of this program is to provide
the approving authority with sufficient data to define the nature of
existing geologic conditions that may affect or be affected by
construction and land use activities on the site. Specifically, the
investigations shall yield information which shall demonstrate that the
proposed development will identify any existing geologic conditions for
which appropriate site design and/or engineering solutions may be
necessary to minimize any adverse environmental impacts caused by
the project. A geotechnical investigation program involves the
following:
(1) Completion of the Phase I checklist by the applicant and review by
the municipal GTC; action on completeness by approving authority.
(2) Completion of the Phase II checklist and proposed geotechnical
investigation program by the applicant; review by the municipal
GTC and action on completeness by approving authority; issuance
of permit to undertake on-site testing.
(3) Applicant undertakes on-site geotechnical investigation program
under observation by the municipal GTC.
(4) Submission of a geologic investigation report and site
recommendation by the applicant.
(5) GTC review, report and final recommendation forwarded to the
approving authority.
§ 330-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-84
1:489
(6) Approving authority acts on the geotechnical aspects of the
proposed project.
H. Geotechnical investigation program time limitations.
(1) An investigation program shall be commenced by completing the
Phase I checklist. The Phase I checklist shall be submitted to the
approval authority and shall be reviewed by the GTC. A report from
the GTC shall be rendered to the approving authority within 30
days of the submission by the applicant of the Phase I checklist. The
approving authority shall rule on the completeness of the checklist
within 30 days of the receipt of the GTC completeness report. The
GTC's report shall either recommend that the Phase II checklist be
prepared and submitted, or in the alternative, that portions or all of
the requirements of the Phase II checklist be waived.
(2) If the Phase II checklist is required, it shall be submitted to the
approving authority and shall be reviewed by the GTC for
completeness. A completeness report shall be made to the
approving authority within 30 days of the submission by applicant
of the Phase II checklist. The approving authority shall rule on the
completeness of the checklist within 30 days of the receipt of the
GTC's completeness report. The GTC's completeness report shall
also advise the applicant as to whether any proposed testing
methodology is prohibited because of the potential danger the
methodology may pose to the integrity of the site or the health,
safety and welfare of the community. If the GTC recommends the
disapproval of the testing program, the recommendation shall
include suggestions on alternate methodology which would provide
the requisite data. The GTC may also recommend waiver of some or
all of the required investigation in appropriate cases pursuant to
this section.
(3) At the applicant's option, both the Phase I and/or the Phase II
checklist may be submitted simultaneously, in which case the GTC
shall submit a completeness report to the approving authority
within 30 days of submission of the checklists by the applicant. The
approving authority shall act on the completeness report within 30
days of submission of the GTC's report.
(4) After the Phase I and Phase II checklists have been deemed
complete by the approving authority and the GTC has advised that
the testing methodology poses no danger to the integrity of the site
or to the health, safety and welfare of the community, a permit shall
be issued to the applicant authorizing the commencement of the
testing procedure.
I. On-site investigation protocol.
(1) Any on-site investigations and tests undertaken pursuant to this
section shall not begin until the applicant has received a permit
therefor. The applicant shall also be responsible for providing, at
§ 330-84 VERNON CODE § 330-84
1:490
least 15 days prior to commencement of any testing procedures,
written notice of same to the Township Clerk, which notice shall be
transmitted by certified mail, return receipt requested, or served
personally. All site investigations shall be properly closed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9-9.1 et seq.
(2) The proposed development site shall be subject to inspection by the
GTC or designated municipal inspectors at any time. All testing
data and results shall be made available to municipal officials and
inspectors on reasonable demand.
(3) All samples taken shall be properly preserved and shall be available
for examination by the Township upon request until final action is
taken by the approving authority on the application.
J. Geotechnical investigation report requirements.
(1) At the completion of the field investigation, a formal site
investigation report shall be submitted and shall include the
following information gathered during the testing protocol: logs of
all borings; test pits; probes, including evidence of cavities; loss of
drilling fluid circulation during drilling; voids and similar cavities
encountered; type of drilling or excavation technique employed;
drawings of monitoring or observation wells as installed; times and
dates of explorations and tests; reports of chemical analyzes; onsite
surface and ground water; names of individuals conducting
tests if other than the professional engineer referred to in the
checklist; analytical methods used on soils, water samples, and
rock samples; a one-inch equals 100 feet scale topographic map of
the site (at a contour interval of two feet) locating all test pits,
borings, wells, seismic or electromagnetic conductivity or other
geophysical surveys and analysis of the groundwater, including any
potentiometric maps constructed from site data or aquifer tests
with rate and direction of flow; a geologic interpretation of the
observed subsurface conditions, including soil and rock type,
jointing (size and spacing), faulting, voids, fracturing, grain size,
and sinkhole formation.
(2) The report shall define the extent of geotechnical findings at the
site in relation to the planning development or land use. The
engineering solutions proposed to minimize environmental and
structural impacts for the useful life of the project, as well as
during construction, must be clearly detailed.
K. Municipal review of geotechnical investigation report.
(1) Within 45 days of submission of the geotechnical investigation
report by the applicant, the GTC shall review and prepare a
completeness report for submission to the approving authority.
During the GTC's review of the geotechnical investigation report
for proposed development, the GTC shall consider the data, formal
reports, maps, drawings and related submission materials and shall
§ 330-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-84
1:491
advise the approving authority whether or not the applicant has
provided the Township with:
(a) Sufficient design, construction and operational information to
insure that the proposed development of the tract or site will
not have an adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of
the community;
(b) Proof that the proposed method of development of the tract
will minimize any adverse effects on the quality of surface or
subsurface water, and will not alter the character of surface
and/or subsurface water flow in a manner detrimental to
known on-site or off-site conditions;
(c) Specific details insuring that design concepts and construction
and operational procedures intended to protect surface and
subsurface waters will be properly implemented;
(d) Specific details on inspection procedures to be followed during
construction and after project completion.
(2) The approving authority shall, within 45 days of the receipt of the
report from the geotechnical consultant, approve or disapprove the
proposed geotechnical aspects of the development plan and
associated construction techniques. In the event the approving
authority denies the proposed development plan and associated
construction procedures, the approving authority shall state in the
resolution its reasons for disapproval.
L. Reevaluation. In certain situations, a specific geologic hazard may not
be identified while the geologic investigation program is underway and
may be discovered during or after construction. In such cases the
applicant shall:
(1) Report the occurrence of the hazard to the Township Clerk within
24 hours of discovery;
(2) Halt construction activities which would impact the geologic
hazard;
(3) Prepare a report on the geologic hazard which analyzes the impact
of the hazard and details a remediation plan for review and
approval by the GTC;
(4) After obtaining approval from the Township, perform necessary
remediation of the hazard to prevent or minimize damage to
buildings, structures, utilities, driveways, parking areas, roadways,
and other site improvements, and to minimize pollution of the
groundwater;
(5) Repair any damage to improvements and restore ground cover and
landscaping;
§ 330-84 VERNON CODE § 330-84
1:492
§ 330-85. Analysis and design concerning environmental and
community impact; environmental impact statements.
(6) In those cases where the hazard cannot be repaired without
adversely affecting the site plan or subdivision, the applicant shall
file an amended application for a site plan or subdivision approval
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
M. Compliance and enforcement.
(1) Compliance with this section is required prior to the granting of
development approval, unless the applicant is exempted from the
provisions of this section requirements in this chapter have been
waived.
(2) Failure to comply with any of the requirements in this section may
result in the issuance of a stop-work order, revocation of building
permits, or denial of certificates of occupancy. Remedial and
corrective measures may be mandated if the appropriate
construction and site planning techniques, as outlined in the
applicant's approved geotechnical report, are not followed and
result in actions which adversely impact karst features.
N. Carbonate Area Overlay District data distribution. On-site geologic
information collected through the provisions of this chapter represents
important resource data. Copies of the final geologic investigation
report and all maps and accompanying data shall be submitted to the
Department of Health and Human Services, the Township Clerk, and
the Planning Board Secretary. The Township shall develop a catalogue
system of all available municipally generated geologic reports. This file
shall be accessible to the public during normal working hours.
O. Application and escrow review fees. For any project in the CAOD
requiring a submission, there shall be an application fee and a review
deposit pursuant to Article IX.
A. Rationale and purpose.
(1) Vernon's natural environment is its most important physical
resource. Appreciation of the environment's natural features is a
matter of vital interest and attraction to the Township's citizenry
and visitors, and the impact of development on the environment
must therefore be accorded close scrutiny. Moreover, since
Vernon's economic base is heavily dependent upon outdoor
recreation and related tourism, environmental impact analysis is
intrinsic to broad community impact, including fiscal impact.
(2) The 1995 Master Plan, particularly in its Conservation Plan
Element, contemplates improved standards for analysis of
environmental impact. It is the purpose of this section to implement
the same.
§ 330-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-85
1:493
B. Procedure and methodology.
(1) Except in connection with applications classified as minor, the
effect of every development proposal on the natural and built (or
otherwise man-made) environment shall be studied by a qualified
expert or experts engaged by the applicant, who shall prepare a
report of findings, analysis and conclusions to be known as an
"environmental impact statement" (hereinafter "EIS") for
submission to the Planning Board and the Environmental
Commission. The Environmental Commission shall have 30 days in
which to review the same, make a report thereon and submit its
report to the Planning Board, with a copy to be supplied
simultaneously to the applicant. The Commission's report shall
consider the sufficiency of the EIS with particularity and advise the
Planning Board as to which elements of the EIS, if any, are deficient
in information and/or proposed mitigation. The Planning Board
shall consider such report when deciding which elements of an EIS,
if any, should be waived at the request of the applicant, or which
elements should be further studied and explained. At a minimum,
the Commission's report shall comprise a checklist of the
submission requirements and standards of this section. Each such
submission requirement shall be subject to the following
assessment code:
"S" Sufficient
"D" Deficient
"O" Omitted
"X" Not applicable
(2) If time and resources available to the Commission permit, the
Commission shall provide a summary statement as to why one or
more submissions, if any, are deficient. The Commission shall
similarly indicate which items found to be omitted, if any, are
acceptably omitted given the scope and/or nature of the application
notwithstanding its classification. The Planning Board shall
consider the Commission's report in these respects when
considering the merits of a requested waiver in any such respect.
C. Waiver criteria. No submission requirement in the form of a required
element of an EIS shall be waived in the absence of a written, sitespecific
justification therefor, so certified by the preparer(s). A separate
justification shall be articulated for each element or subject of waiver
request; provided, however, that a justification for more than one
element or subject of waiver request may be made in a summary
manner if and to the extent appearing appropriate. Such justification
shall include the reason(s) why, in the opinion of the preparer based
upon the particulars of the specific property and/or the scope or nature
of the application, submission of one or more required elements would
be unnecessary, inappropriate, or inapplicable to an informed decision
§ 330-85 VERNON CODE § 330-85
1:494
concerning the projected environmental impact of the development. No
waiver shall be granted without a showing that the environment would
not be at significant risk as a result of such waiver. No waiver shall
be unreasonably withheld when it is apparent, evident or obvious that
the subject(s) of the proposed waiver need not be examined under this
section in order to reach an informed decision.
D. Content and quality of submission.
(1) Every EIS shall contain a complete project description, including
property location and general characteristics, purpose and scope of
development, proposed improvements and facilities, and a
summary statement of site or tract conditions concerning the
natural and man-made environments, together with a summary
analysis of projected project impact on the same.
(2) Every EIS shall be a product of site specific findings, analysis and
conclusions. All sources, authorities, maps, reports, plans,
documents, studies and similar materials on which the EIS relies
shall be current, of recognized value and quality, and fully
disclosed. Whenever practicable, a copy of such materials shall be
supplied as an appendix. The preparer(s) of the EIS shall be a
recognized and qualified person(s) to make such reports, such as a
professional engineer with environmental training and experience,
or an environmental scientist. No preparer shall purport to offer
findings, analysis or conclusions as to matters, subjects or elements
as to which the preparer is unqualified except to summarize and
distill the findings, analysis and conclusions of qualified persons or
source materials to the extent of the preparer's qualifications.
Utilization of expert analysis in special disciplines such as soil
science, geology and cultural resources is distinctly favored.
E. Required elements of consideration. Every EIS shall be based upon
affirmative study of the following elements:
(1) The natural environment.
(a) Prevailing subsurface water supplies and quality;
hydrogeology; surface water and natural drainage patterns;
watercourses and open waters (including man-made
impoundments); aquifer recharge and discharge areas.
(b) Prevailing soils and geology, including but not limited to
erodible soils, carbonate rock formations, topography,
wetlands and floodplains.
(c) Prevailing woodlands, mature forests, specimen trees, and
other vegetation.
(d) Terrestrial and aquatic wildlife presence, habitats and
patterns, including (and particularly) those of rare and
endangered species.
§ 330-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-85
1:495
(e) Open space conditions.
(2) The built or man-made environment.
(a) Historic landmarks, artifacts and other cultural and social
resources.
(b) Scenic vistas and aesthetic values, including visual resource
lands.
(c) Prevailing architecture.
(d) Local farms and farmlands; established fields, farm roads,
stone rows, and other linear features.
(e) Water supply and sanitary sewage facilities; stormwater
drainage structures.
(f) Lighting levels.
(g) Prevailing air quality.
(h) Prevailing noise levels.
(i) Prevailing traffic conditions.
(j) Community facilities and infrastructure, including the
condition of affected public streets.
(k) Community services.
(l) Prevailing fiscal affairs and property tax revenues of municipal
government.
(m) Prevailing economic and employment conditions.
(n) Affected Township communities, neighborhoods, and land use
patterns.
(o) Affected subdivision and development sites which are adjacent
or proximate to the subject property and awaiting
development.
(p) Population patterns and distribution.
(q) Fire and police protection.
(r) Local businesses and industries.
(s) School impact.
(3) Planning guides.
(a) Township Master Plan.
(b) County and Regional Plans.
§ 330-85 VERNON CODE § 330-85
1:496
(c) State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
(d) Master Plans of adjacent municipalities (where and to the
extent implicated).
(e) This chapter.
F. Required impact analysis. Upon consideration of all elements described
in Subsection E of this section, the preparer shall analyze and report,
on an objective basis, the projected adverse or beneficial impacts of the
proposed development on each such element, which analysis and report
shall include but, wherever appropriate, not be limited to the following:
(1) As to the natural environment. The manner by and extent to which
the project is anticipated to diminish, compromise, jeopardize,
destroy, displace, disturb or, alternatively, protect, preserve,
conserve, enhance, harmonize or be reconciled with or otherwise
affect or implicate each particular feature or element of study
required under Subsection E(1)(a) through (e) of this section.
(2) As to the built or man-made environment. The manner by and
extent to which the proposed project is anticipated to diminish,
compromise, jeopardize, destroy, displace, disturb or, alternatively,
protect, preserve, conserve, enhance, harmonize or be reconciled
with, or otherwise affect or implicate each particular feature or
element of study required under Subsection E(2)(a) through (o) of
this section.
G. Implications; performance and mitigation measures. After having
undertaken the requirements of Subsections E and F of this section, the
preparer(s) shall interpret, assess and explain the implications of
projected development impacts as contemplated in Subsection F of this
section. The preparer(s) shall then offer and explain such performance
or mitigation measures, covenants or assurances as are necessary or
appropriate, in the objective opinion of the preparer(s), to prevent or
mitigate against any substantial negative impact of development, and to
protect, preserve, conserve or enhance respective features of the
natural or built environment. In so doing, the preparer shall give due
consideration to the regulations, requirements, standards, guidelines,
and techniques provided in this chapter and, particularly, this article.
The preparer shall then assess which of the same have application to
environmental impact as contemplated in this section and shall perform
an analysis and reconciliation as and to the extent appearing
appropriate. It shall be incumbent upon the applicant to cause the
preparation, offer, delivery, performance and assurance of any
environmental engineering, planning or legal device appearing
necessary to insure that the mitigation or other measures contemplated
in this subsection, once and to the extent approved by the Board,
become effective.
H. Alternatives.
§ 330-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-85
1:497
(1) In order to provide an objective and empirical analysis of the
features and elements of Subsections E and F of this section
pursuant to Subsection G of this section, the preparer shall
consider and report the alternatives to the proposed project,
including:
(a) That of no project.
(b) That of one or more alternative projects, layouts or designs
that would or might have resulted in less negative
environmental impacts;
(c) That of conventional versus cluster development where
residential development is proposed.
(2) The rationale for rejection of any alternative plan shall be clearly
and objectively expressed in the EIS.
I. Licenses, permits and other approvals. Every EIS shall contain a list of
all licenses, permits and other approvals known or believed to be
required for the disturbance, improvement, construction and operation
of the subject site or tract. The list shall include but not be limited to
those approvals required by any local, county, state or federal agency. A
copy of any approval obtained as of the date of the EIS shall be
appended thereto. A statement of status shall be supplied as to all other
approvals.
J. References and supporting authority. Every EIS shall contain a list and
explanatory statement as to opinions, publications, studies, reports and
other resources relied upon by the preparer. All resources shall be
footnoted where appropriate throughout the text of the EIS. Meetings
and conferences involving other sources, resources and/or agencies
shall be disclosed.
K. Community impact. Without limitation to the requirements of any other
subsection of this section, every EIS shall contain a component analysis
of the anticipated impact of the proposed development on the Township
community with respect to municipal finances (including estimated
changes in tax receipts, fiscal outlay for municipal services, and
anticipated additional demands on existing municipal services and
facilities); estimated number and types of jobs to be created; and
calculation of the number of school-age children anticipated to be
associated with the project.
L. Analysis of water supply, sewerage and stormwater. The following
information shall be provided as a component of or in a companion
document with an EIS:
(1) Water supply.
(a) If supply is from on-site sources: location of water supply
sources; description of water supply facilities, including type,
§ 330-85 VERNON CODE § 330-85
1:498
depth, and pumping rates; location and depth of private and
public water supplies and septic systems within 500 feet of
the proposed water sources; geologic evaluation of subsurface
conditions, including statements on the following:
[1] Long-term evaluation of adequacy of supply to serve the
project by quantitative and qualitative analysis;
[2] Evaluation of possible interference of and with existing
private and public water supplies;
[3] Evaluation of water table conditions and aquifer recharge
capability.
(b) If supply is to be from public facilities off-site:
[1] Name of public facility;
[2] Point(s) of interconnection and description of
interconnecting facilities;
[3] Pressure requirements;
[4] Projected water usage stated in average daily usage
(gallons per day);
[5] Peak daily usage (gallons per day) and peak hourly usage
(gallons per hour).
(2) Sewerage facilities. A description of the sewerage facilities that
will be utilized, including the following:
(a) If disposal is to be on-site: data on underlying geology, water
table, depth of rock, soils, analysis, soil stratigraphy,
percolation tests for each sewage dispose site, topography,
location and depth of aquifers, depth, capacity and type of
construction and location of all wells which have been
recorded or which information can be obtained from inquiries
to adjacent property owners within 500 feet of site; soil logs
and percolation tests for each disposal site as witnessed by the
Department of Health and Human Services, and other
pertinent data made appropriate by the nature and scope of
the project.
(b) If disposal is off-site: projected sewer discharges stated in
average daily flows (gallons per day) for initial phase and fiveand
ten-year projections. A description shall be provided as to
the type of process; projected daily flows; physical
characteristics, including temperature, biological
characteristics, and chemical characteristics, including
description of any toxic components.
§ 330-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-85
1:499
§ 330-86. Traffic impact study.
(c) If treatment is to be by public facilities: name of public facility
and point of connection and description of interconnecting
facilities.
(d) If project is to include treatment facilities discharging into a
stream or watercourse: location of treatment facilities;
receiving stream and data on stream classification, water
quality, seven-day low-flow at ten-year frequency; description
of treatment facilities and proposed effluent quality; evaluation
of initial and future deleterious effects on use of stream for
water supply, recreation and aquatic and terrestrial wildlife.
Evaluation shall include effects of nutrients on downstream
ponds and lakes.
(3) Stormwater.
(a) Peak rates and volume of stormwater runoff expected from
undeveloped site and to be generated by proposed project;
include rates for ten-, fifteen-, twenty-five-, fifty- and onehundred-
year storm frequencies having durations equal to the
time of concentration.
(b) Comparison of existing vegetative cover with that which is
proposed.
(c) Analysis of changes in peak rates and volume of stormwater
runoff and runoff coefficients caused by changes in land use,
and analysis of whether any increased incidents of flooding
caused by increased stormwater runoff due to the proposed
project are anticipated.
(d) Submission of plans for disposition of stormwater and attempts
to delay the time of concentration by the use of detention
basins or other acceptable methods.
(e) Submission of soil erosion and sediment control plan in
accordance with Sussex County Soil Conservation District
requirements.
A. When required. The Board may require a traffic impact study in
connection with any application for preliminary approval if, in the
opinion of the Board, the development could have an adverse impact on
the off-site or off-tract roadway network, ingress/egress, or on-site
circulation. All applications involving more than a projected trip
generation of 50 trips or more per day shall be accompanied by a traffic
impact statement.
B. General provisions.
§ 330-85 VERNON CODE § 330-86
1:500
§ 330-87. Adaptive designs concerning former farmlands, open
fields, watercourses, hills, ridgelines and scenic vistas (visual
resource lands).
(1) The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer having appropriate training and experience.
(2) All relevant sources of information used in the preparation of such
statement shall be identified.
C. Submission requirements. All traffic impact studies shall provide a
description of the impact and effect of the proposed land development
upon all roads which are adjacent to or immediately affected by the
projected traffic and shall specifically address the following items:
(1) Existing conditions in the vicinity of the proposed project,
including:
(a) Roadway network.
(b) Representative traffic counts, excluding holidays, summer
periods or other known periods of lower use.
(c) Traffic accident statistics.
(d) Availability of public transportation.
(e) Level of service of adjacent roadways.
(2) Traffic projected to be generated by the proposed development,
including:
(a) Trip generation.
(b) Trip distribution.
(c) Modal split.
(d) Trip assignment.
(e) Level of service under proposed conditions.
(3) Traffic impacts expected from the proposed development as a
result of change in existing conditions.
(4) Explanation of traffic reduction/traffic management plans
necessary or appropriate pursuant to any current state or county
requirements, and, where applicable, reconciliation with
appropriate county transportation management areas (TMA).
(5) Recommendations for alleviating or diminishing any possible
congestion or disruption to the established traffic pattern.
(6) Any other information requested by the Board reasonably required
to make an informed assessment of potential traffic impacts.
§ 330-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-87
1:501
A. Rationale. Vernon's expansive valley and substantial mountains make
its scenic vistas unique among New Jersey's municipalities. However,
the unique views provided both from the valley floor toward plateaus
and ridges, and from plateaus and ridges toward the valley floor, are
threatened by continuing development patterns which establish
building sites that destroy the visual resources of open fields, mountain
profiles, watercourses and woodlands. Left unchecked, such
development would afford views mainly of buildings in repeated,
monotonous patterns akin to those found in suburban sprawl. Sprawl
development in Vernon threatens to transform the character and
quality of this community more acutely than in other communities
because of the expansive views and many vantage points found
throughout the Township, particularly along the scenic corridors. The
effects of sprawl are insidious enough in suburban communities where
vantage points are limited; in Vernon, sprawl threatens to destroy the
dramatic visual attributes that have proved so inviting to the
Township's citizens and visitors, and so essential to community
character. Sprawl and the appearance of sprawl threaten to defeat
Vernon's substantial economic interest in outdoor recreation and
tourism. Unless Vernon can remain a place of distinctive natural beauty,
it is at risk of losing its identity as a place of destination.
B. Purpose. This section is designed to protect Vernon's remaining open
spaces from conventional development patterns and measures which
tend to compromise the intrinsic value of farmlands, fields, woodlands,
mountain profiles or ridgelines, ridge faces, plateaus, and watercourses
and water bodies (hereinafter "visual resource lands").
C. Authority. This section is specifically derived from and designed to be
consistent with § 330-2, the contents of this article, Article XI, the 1995
Master Plan, and the New Jersey State Development and
Redevelopment Plan (Preliminary). All passages of such authorities
which bear on the objectives, goals and standards contained in this
section are relied upon and specifically incorporated herein.
D. Standards.
(1) Building locations. The establishment of building envelopes and
building sites in open fields shall be avoided. Building envelopes
and sites shall be adaptively located on and along the edges of
fields to the greatest practicable extent. Existing tree lines and
woodlands which frame open fields shall be preserved and used to
effectively screen new buildings from view or blend them with, in
or among wooded background environs.
(2) Driveways. Driveways and roads shall follow existing farm lanes,
tree lines or stone rows wherever possible. Common driveways and
rural lanes are encouraged in order to reduce improvements and
impervious coverage of visual resource lands and to avoid
unnecessary disturbance. Maximum driveway width shall be 12
feet. Maximum length of a common driveway shall be 1,000 feet. All
§ 330-87 VERNON CODE § 330-87
1:502
driveways in excess of 500 feet shall provide a suitable turnout. No
more than four units shall be served by a common driveway.
(3) Extent of disturbance. Total tract disturbance of visual resource
lands shall not exceed 7% of gross tract area for purposes of
improvements, including but not limited to streets, stormwater
management facilities, grading, vegetation removal, cartway and
basins. Total lot disturbance shall not exceed 60% of lot area or
20,000 square feet, whichever is less. "Disturbance" of lots shall be
construed to include grading for lawn areas.
(4) Scenic vistas. Intense development of visual resource lands shall be
prohibited. Only such development as is compatible with and
respectful of the provisions and spirit of this section shall be
permitted. Disturbed and improved lands shall, to the greatest
practicable extent, be or remain predominately invisible from
public ways and trails, including but not limited to the Appalachian
Trail and the scenic corridors of the Township, such as but not
limited to those in the AET districts.
(5) Ridgelines. Except as otherwise provided herein, no lot or site shall
be designed or developed which significantly disturbs an existing
mountain profile represented by a tree line along a ridgeline; nor
shall the face of any ridge be disturbed, clear-cut or developed in
such a way as to significantly compromise the natural features and
appearance of such ridge face for the sake of creating "view lots" or
similar private interests. Any tree removal on a readily visible
sloped plateau or ridge face shall be subject to a tree management
plan approved by the Planning Board. No building envelope shall
be established nor any building or structure erected which would
lie atop the crest of an unwooded hill or plateau. Building
envelopes may be established, and buildings or structures erected
on hilltops or plateaus only when such hills or plateaus are
substantially wooded by trees of at least 35 feet in height, and
would remain so by an approved tree management plan and
suitable conservation restriction. The general provisions of this
subsection to the contrary notwithstanding, an owner or operator
of a ski area or ski resort who shall have submitted and obtained
approval of a tree management plan may make application to the
Planning Board by site plan application or by other procedure
pursuant to an approved comprehensive plan, developer's
agreement or general development plan, to disturb, selectively cut
and otherwise reasonably improve ridges, slopes or mountains for
purposes of creating or improving ski trails. [Amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(6) Farmlands proposed for other land use.
(a) No former, active or capable farmland shall be reduced to
other land use in the absence of an analysis pursuant to
§ 330-85 concerning the potential application of § 330-198 and
§ 330-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-87
1:503
the preservation of such lands pursuant to such section and the
Agriculture Retention and Development Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-11
et seq. ("Farmland Preservation Law").
(b) Where farmlands are ineligible or unsuitable for preservation
pursuant to § 330-198, the subsections of this section shall
apply, and the following additional requirements shall apply:
[1] All residential developments shall be clustered in
accordance with this chapter.
[2] The visual appearance of the farm and farmlands shall be
preserved to the greatest practicable extent by adaptive
use or reuse of farm buildings and features, together with
the preservation of contiguous open space adjacent to
such buildings of at least five acres where a tract
comprises less than 50 acres and the lesser of 10% of the
tract area or 10 acres where a tract comprises 50 acres or
more. Such land shall remain as open space and,
preferably, be put to agricultural, educational, cultural,
recreational or neighborhood use, or some combination of
such uses; provided, however, that in such event, a onehundred-
foot buffer shall be provided to protect residential
sites from agriculture-related nuisances. The Planning
Board may also require other reasonable mitigation
measures.
[3] Once subdivided in accordance with this section, farmland
shall not be further subdivided, and a restrictive covenant
to that effect may be required by the Planning Board.
(7) Roadways. Traffic circulation in and over visual resource lands
shall be by rural lanes to minimize disturbance. Right-of-way width
shall be 50 feet, but cartway width shall be 20 feet. Not more than
10 units shall be served by a single dead-end lane. Roadways shall
follow existing grade contours to minimize the extent of cuts and
fill. However, no part of any roadway shall exceed a grade of 16%.
Roadways shall, to the greatest practicable extent, follow existing
linear features of the tract or site, including existing farm or other
lanes, trails, stone rows and tree or hedge lines. Roadways shall not
be located in nor traverse open fields. In the event the provisions of
this subsection are in conflict with Article VIII, the applicant shall
seek such waivers or exceptions therefrom as are necessary to
satisfy this subsection, but shall be relieved of these requirements
in the absence of a grant of such waivers or exceptions.
(8) Curbing. Curbing shall be installed only if, where, and to the extent
necessary to provide for stormwater management. When so
required, only granite block curbing shall be installed.
(9) Stormwater management. Stormwater management (as well as all
other lands in the Township in the absence of good cause to the
§ 330-87 VERNON CODE § 330-87
1:504
contrary) shall be designed to make minimal changes to natural
drainage patterns and systems. Where stormwater management
facilities are required, they shall be designed to occupy as small
an area and involve as little disturbance as possible. A retention
basin's normal ratio of area to volume may be reasonably reduced
to satisfy this subsection. Retention basins shall be utilized where
a basin is needed or appropriate, and such basin shall be designed
to resemble and function as a natural pond with a view toward the
creation of wildlife habitat.
(10) Lawns. Extensive residential lawns shall be avoided in favor of
existing indigenous tall or other native grasses, wildflower patterns
and woodlands or individual trees and ground covers. Existing
vegetation shall be preserved in areas where disturbance is
unnecessary, discouraged or impermissible pursuant to this
section. Lawn areas shall be included in the total lot disturbance
calculation. The creation of lawn areas of greater than 10,000
square feet shall be prohibited, except that seeding of former
croplands shall be permitted to the extent of such lands.
(11) Adaptive measures. To the greatest practicable extent, adaptive
reuse, renovation, preservation or other protection or
enhancement shall be required where a tract or site contains
structures or features of historic or architectural significance, and,
where one or more structures are involved, when such structures
are suitable for rehabilitation.
(12) Guide rails. In the event guide rails are required due to site or tract
conditions, they shall be predominately of wood or stone
construction, or some combination thereof.
(13) Conservation easements. Conservation easements and restrictive
covenants may be reasonably required by the Planning Board to
enforce this section.
(14) Appalachian Trail. ("AT").
(a) All wooded lands within 100 feet of the AT shall be left
undisturbed in order to maintain a buffer between the AT and
developed lands. Where development of any lot or site
necessarily requires the disturbance of such lands for
reasonable construction or other temporary measures, an
evergreen screen shall be established upon completion of
construction at a planting height of at least six feet, arranged
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter to create
an effective screen having a naturally occurring appearance.
(b) Any proposed development of open fields adjacent or
proximate to the AT shall be subject to strict application of
Subsection D(1), (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (11) and (13) of this
section.
§ 330-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-87
1:505
§ 330-88. Improvement standards.
(c) The construction of any new building, or any other new
construction for which a construction permit is required, which
is or appears likely to be highly visible from the AT, shall be
subject to the requirement that natural materials of low visual
impact be used in any such construction. The paint, stain or
other finish or siding material to be applied to any such
building shall be selected and applied to blend in color and
characteristics with surrounding natural features and cause
such building to become as invisible as possible when observed
from the AT.
(d) No building or structure shall be constructed or erected within
500 feet of the AT at a height greater than 35 feet.
(e) Operation of motorized vehicles such as ATVs, motorcycles and
off-road vehicles on the AT or within 200 feet thereof is
prohibited. No lands adjacent to the AT shall be disturbed or
improved in such a way as to allow such vehicles to gain access
to the AT.
(f) Without limitation to § 330-80C(11), the illumination of sites,
streets and parking areas within 500 feet of the AT shall be
prohibited except where public safety would reasonably
require illumination. In such event, lighting shall be carefully
designed to prevent or minimize off-site illumination and glare.
High-luminosity vapor lamps and other highly illuminating
fixtures shall be prohibited on residential and nonresidential
properties adjacent to the AT.
(g) For purposes of construing these provisions, it is intended that
these protections shall primarily serve to protect and heighten
the outdoor experience of those who hike along the AT.
E. This section shall supersede all other sections or provisions of this
chapter with which it may be in apparent conflict. In no event shall a
developer rely upon projected density or tract yield pursuant to Article
XI and Schedule B74 to defeat the operation of this section.
A. Unless otherwise specifically required pursuant to this section, the
regulations contained in Article VIII of this chapter shall be applied to
all residential development.
B. The title of Article VIII, being "Residential Development,"
notwithstanding, the provisions of the said article may be applied to
nonresidential sites and development as and where appropriate in the
reasonable opinion of the design engineer, subject to concurrence of
the Planning Board Engineer; provided, however, that the following
74.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 330-87 VERNON CODE § 330-88
1:506
§ 330-89. Transfer of development density and uses to conserve
open space.
(Reserved)
§ 330-90. Fire prevention - fire suppression systems. [Added
7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 01-15]
preemptive standards shall apply in the following circumstances:
(Reserved).
A. General. All major subdivisions of 10 or more dwellings and all major
site plans as defined by this chapter shall provide for an adequate and
reliable water supply. By definition, it is a water supply, in the form of
on-site cistern or dry hydrant system, that is sufficient every day of the
year to control and extinguish anticipated fires in the municipality,
particular building, or building group served by the water supply,
approved by the Township of Vernon Fire Official, herein known as the
"authority having jurisdiction." The authority having jurisdiction is the
organization, office or individual responsible for approving equipment,
an installation or a procedure, and in accordance with the criteria
identified herein.
B. Existing public or private central water supply. Where an existing
public or private central water supply is available and has been
approved by the Vernon Township Fire Department for minimum firefighting
purposes, fire hydrants shall be installed at appropriate
locations as recommended by the authority having jurisdiction.
(1) Distances between hydrants along streets shall not exceed 1,000
feet.
(2) The maximum distance from each building or structure of a site
plan to the nearest fire hydrant shall not exceed 500 feet by way of
a hard surfaced and maintained road, drive or designated fire lane
access.
(3) The entire existing central water supply system and each new
hydrant shall have a capacity to provide a minimum flow rate of
1,500 gallons per minute (gpm) at 20 pounds per square inch (psi)
residual pressure for a minimum duration of two hours.
(4) Hydrants shall be installed in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C502,
"Dry Barrel Fire Hydrants," latest edition; painted as directed by
the authority having jurisdiction; and tested in accordance with
NFPA 291, "Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and
Marking of Hydrants," latest edition, to ensure compliance with fire
flow requirements. Acceptance test data shall be provided to the
authority having jurisdiction for review and approval.
(5) All central fire suppression systems shall conform to all applicable
standards of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA),
§ 330-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-90
1:507
American Water Works Associations (AWWA), N.J.A.C. 7:10-7
through 7:10-11.3 (commonly known as the "Safe Drinking Water
Act Regulations").
(6) In areas where public or private central water supply is available,
but such water supply does not have the capacity to satisfy the
minimum standards established in Subsection B(3) herein, such
central water supply system shall be supplemented with additional
measures to satisfy the minimum fire suppression requirements of
the Township in that particular area being served. Such additional
measures may involve any one or a combination of the following:
installation of booster pumps with appurtenances, installation of
underground water storage tanks with appurtenances, installation
of dry hydrant connections to streams or ponds with
appurtenances, creation of drafting points with appurtenances, or
such other means of increasing fire-fighting capability as may be
recommended and approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
C. Fire suppression system. Where a public or private central water supply
is not available, an adequate and reliable water supply, as detailed in
Subsection A, shall be installed to provide a source of water for fire
fighting. The locations of all fire suppression systems and
appurtenances shall be approved by the authority having jurisdiction
and be in compliance with this section as well as based on the
engineering standards set forth by the NFPA Standard 1231 1993.
Unless an equivalent alternate fire suppression system is authorized by
the Planning Board and the authority having jurisdiction, fire
suppression systems shall consist of the installation of underground
water storage tank systems (cisterns) with appurtenances or the
installation of dry hydrant connections to streams or ponds with
appurtenances. They shall be constructed and installed in accordance
with this chapter and in accordance with the Township of Vernon
Standard Construction Details for such systems, as engineering
standards set forth by the NFPA Standard 1231 1993:
(1) In all cases where a fire suppression system is required, no
construction permit shall be issued for a dwelling or principal
structure upon any lot within the subdivision or site plan until, to
the extent necessary to afford adequate and reliable water supply
to such dwelling or principal structure, such system is installed and
its operability tested and approved by the authority having
jurisdiction.
(2) All developments must be designed to allow for the access of
emergency vehicles, including fire apparatus, ambulances and
police cars. Fire lanes shall be provided for commercial and
industrial-type developments to provide access to adequate and
reliable water supply facilities.
(3) Minimum fire-fighting water supply requirements shall conform to
NFPA Standard 1231-93.
§ 330-90 VERNON CODE § 330-90
1:508
(4) Blocking suction standpipes and dry hydrant shall be considered
the same as blocking a fire hydrant on a street or roadway, and the
same penalties shall apply.
D. Underground water storage tank systems. This system shall comply
with the items set forth below, at a minimum, and where feasible but as
not to cause hardship, adhere to NFPA 1231-93 Appendix B, Section
4.2, whichever is more stringent. Such determination is to be made by
the Vernon Township Planning Board as well as the authority having
jurisdiction.
(1) For subdivisions in the residential zone districts, underground
water storage tanks shall be located and installed so that no
dwelling is farther than 2,000 linear feet from any such tank as
measured along the street, either public or private, and the access
driveway to the dwelling. In no event shall the distance between
tanks be greater than 2,000 linear feet. At least one tank shall be
installed for each 2,000 linear feet of street length or fraction
thereof.
(2) For site plans, underground water storage tanks shall be located
and installed not farther than 500 feet from any principal structure.
(3) The minimum capacity of every underground water storage tank
within residential zone districts shall be 30,000 usable gallons.
(4) Tank capacities for nonresidential developments shall be based on
the degree of hazard of the proposed structures to be protected as
reviewed and approved by the authority having jurisdiction, but
shall in no event be less than 30,000 usable gallons.
(5) All underground water storage tanks shall be constructed of
precast steel reinforced concrete or fiberglass and shall be sized to
provide the minimum capacity required pursuant to Subsection
D(3) and (4) herein.
(6) All tanks shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications for installation and shall be provided with all
necessary appurtenances and equipment which shall be readily
accessible to fire-fighting equipment. Shop drawings shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Vernon Township
Engineer and Fire Official.
(7) Each tank shall be equipped with a suction standpipe riser, an air
vent and two lockable access manholes.
(8) Suction standpipe riser connections shall be capable of producing
1,000 gpm for a minimum of 75% of the tank capacity.
(9) All underground tanks shall be equipped with means for preventing
accumulations of silt and debris.
§ 330-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-90
1:509
(10) The final design, location and installation of underground water
storage tanks shall be approved by the authority having
jurisdiction.
E. Dry hydrant systems. This system shall comply with the items set forth
below, at a minimum, and where feasible, but as not to cause hardship,
adhere to NFPA 1231-93 Appendix B, various sections as applicable to
this type system, whichever is more stringent. Such determination is to
be made by the Vernon Township Planning Board as well as the
authority having jurisdiction. If a stream or pond exists on or near a
property that requires an adequate and reliable water supply, the
stream or pond can be proposed to be developed into an adequate and
reliable water supply utilizing a dry hydrant system, subject to approval
by the authority having jurisdiction.
(1) A fire pond must be capable of providing a minimum of 100,000
gallons of pumpable water.
(2) A fire pond is subject to all the provisions specified for suction
points, suction standpipes and access roads.
(3) The suction point for any dry hydrant shall be of a depth below the
water surface of no less than 36 inches so as to prevent
whirlpooling from above and a minimum of 24 inches above the
water body bottom to prevent the intake of debris from below.
(4) Dry hydrants installed as part of any site plan approval shall be
maintained by the property owner. This includes the clearing of
snow and ice in the winter and keeping free of debris and
vegetation at other times of the year. Inspections of the dry
hydrants will be performed by the Fire Department and repairs
shall be performed by the property owner as deemed necessary by
the Fire Official.
F. Specifications of suction standpipes.
(1) Piping: PVC, schedule 40 minimum or steel well casing; size sixinch
diameter minimum; water source end shall be fitted with a
screening assembly to prevent the entry of fish, wildlife and
sediment, said screening assembly to be fabricated from PVC or
stainless steel.
(2) Threads: 4 1/2 inches national standard thread; cap and chain to be
provided to protect threads and prevent the entry of foreign matter.
(3) The suction standpipe riser with the threaded end shall not exceed
24 inches in height above ground level and shall be painted red in
color.
(4) A permanent sign reading "Fire Department Suction Point,"
approved by the authority having jurisdiction, shall be installed at
every suction riser location to show the existence of such fire
§ 330-90 VERNON CODE § 330-90
1:510
protection system. In addition, "no stopping or standing" zones
shall be delineated at each suction point location for a distance of
75 feet in each direction from such point on both sides of the street
or area located. Such delineation shall be appropriately identified
by signs meeting New Jersey Department of Transportation design
standards.
(5) Suction standpipe risers shall be located such that the street or
roadway or access drive will enable the fire apparatus to get within
10 feet of the standpipe.
(6) No suction point shall have a vertical distance between the water's
surface or tank bottom and the center of the apparatus' pump
greater than 17 feet.
G. Specifications and maintenance of access road.
(1) Roadbed specifications:
(a) Width: 12 feet minimum.
(b) Base: four-inch thick three-fourths-inch quarried process
crushed stone minimum.
(c) Top coat: two-inch thick FABC asphalt.
(2) Access roads shall be properly maintained by the property owner,
keeping clear of snow and ice in the winter and free of debris and
overgrown vegetation at all other times of the year.
(3) Access roads shall be clearly marked with a metal sign (eight
inches by 12 inches, with red letters on a white background) or
yellow letters (12 inches height minimum) painted on the roadway
with the words "No Parking — Fire Department Access Road."
(4) At locations of streams or ponds, a metal guardrail or other
approved vehicle restraint shall be installed at the end of the
access road to prevent the fire apparatus and other vehicles from
entering the water.
(5) If a chain or gate is to be installed, the Fire Department shall be so
notified, and, if locked, a copy of the key or combination shall be
made available to the Fire Department. The Fire Department shall
be notified 16 days before any lock changes are made, and keys or
combinations shall be made available to the Fire Department 16
days before the change is made.
(6) Whenever a suction point or suction standpipe can be reached from
an existing road, the roadbed specifications shall not apply. All
other requirements must be satisfied.
§ 330-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-91
1:511
§ 330-91. Mountain resort. [Added 11-15-2001 by Ord. No. 01-26]
The following standards shall apply to a mountain resort:
A. The design and development principles and standards contained in
Article VII shall apply to a mountain resort, except as herein modified.
In addition, this section shall establish additional standards for such
use.
B. The provisions of § 330-83 are predominantly designed to regulate
residential use, although they are applicable to commercial use through
§ 330-68D. It is recognized that a mountain retreat component of a
mountain resort will be located in relatively sleep and rocky terrain,
which is why concentrated but dispersed development is promoted by
this chapter. Such being the case, § 330-83 shall serve as a guide to be
followed where practicable, but not a standard to be strictly applied to a
mountain retreat.
C. The mass and length of building walls and rooflines shall avoid long,
monotonous, uninterrupted wall or rooflines.
D. The development shall make adequate accommodation for the flow of
traffic to be generated to and from the tract, as well as provide for safe
and efficient vehicular circulation within the development.
E. The developer shall design a streetscape in all portions of the
development that promotes a common theme.
F. Land disturbance shall be limited to the minimum required for the
improvements as determined by the Planning Board.
G. The lighting plan for the development shall be designed in a common
theme, with as little light intensity as is practicable.
H. A landscape plan shall be designed to enhance the particular identity
and character of the site, and in particular with reference to the resort
village, create an entry experience for vehicles and pedestrians by
means of street trees, lighting, buffers, walkways, street furniture, and
accessory structures designed to create and enhance the resort
atmosphere.
I. The developer shall design a pedestrian plan, which shall include
walkways and the aesthetic treatment of those areas, including links to
current and future public circulation elements. In addition, the
developer shall devise a plan for shuttle service between noncontiguous
portions of the development so as to minimize traffic impact of visitors
within the resort.
J. The architecture of the buildings and structures shall be thematic in
nature and in the resort village create a small town appearance.
§ 330-91 VERNON CODE § 330-91
1:512
K. The development shall be designed to preserve sunlight in major
pedestrian areas for much of the day, and ensure that public plazas and
shopping areas receive maximum sunlight throughout the year.
L. Disturbance of vegetation shall be mitigated to the greatest extent
practicable.
M. Buildings, structures and trails shall be designed so that they blend in
with the surrounding landscape.
N. The developer shall devise a plan to keep pedestrians off of roadways to
the greatest extent possible.
O. A plan for snow removal shall be designed and approved by the
Planning Board.
P. In submitting site plan applications, the developer shall provide match
lines so that the Planning Board will be able to determine the impact of
one phase of development with another. In this regard, the developer
may seek to establish condominium division lines through subdivision
on condition an overall deed restriction be placed of record to establish
that all lots creating the tract upon which the mountain resort is located
must be maintained in common ownership for purposes of complying
with the requirement there be a single entity use in a common theme.
The deed restriction shall prevent the sale of lots, except in a sale of the
entire resort.
Q. Open space management shall be in accordance with § 330-202 of this
chapter.
R. The developer shall establish a master property owners' association,
and such other building or neighborhood associations as are necessary
to maintain or otherwise provide for architectural review, common
areas, trash removal, snow removal, pedestrianways, driveways and
parking areas, and related elements. In this regard, no component of a
mountain resort or any building or use may be established on a lot
separate and apart from the single entity mountain resort. All uses shall
be subordinate to the owner and operator of the mountain resort, and
appropriate documents shall be established by the developer, subject to
the approval of the Township, to assure that buildings, structures and
uses shall be and remain under the ultimate authority of the single
entity which shall be responsible for the operation of the mountain
resort. It is recognized that certain elements within the components of
the resort may be owned by individual companies or persons, including
but not limited to hotels and resort units. Pursuant to this requirement,
all such sales shall be subject to deed restrictions or other requirements
approved by the Township in order to make certain the entire mountain
resort use operates as a single entity.
S. All site plans submitted in connection with the mountain resort shall
indicate existing wooded areas and individual specimen trees of a
§ 330-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-91
1:513
caliper of 12 inches or greater located within the areas to be disturbed
by the development of buildings and structures.
T. Development on steep slopes may occur in areas of up to 25% slopes,
provided adequate precautions are taken in design and construction to
prevent soil erosion and any risks to public safety. Under such
circumstances no buffer need be maintained.
U. Evidence shall be established by the developer that buffer requirements
as well as the protection of rivers, streams, brooks, lakes, ponds and
open waters are in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
V. Hotel or lodge units, even though they may be separately owned under
the condominium form of ownership, shall not be considered residential
uses subject to the requirements of Article VIII of this chapter
incorporating N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq., as they are not designed for
permanent residency and are commercial in nature. The townhouses,
duplexes, and/or other vacation-type units are designed as resort
accommodations for vacation use as part of a planned commercial
development, and shall not be subject to the provisions of Article VIII of
this chapter incorporating N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
W. The provisions of § 330-76E of the chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, parking spaces may have direct access to a public
street if and to the extent such spaces are designed for and approved by
the Planning Board to be appropriate to a main street element of a
resort village.
X. In submission of a general development plan application, the applicant
shall comply with the requirements of the statute, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 et
seq. Upon submission of such an application, the Planning Board shall
not be bound to approve the application unless and until it is satisfied
that the requirements of this chapter are satisfied. In this respect, the
applicant, in meeting certain specific and general specifications, is
given wide latitude to design a project contemplated to satisfy the
purpose and intent of creating a major resort facility. This chapter is
designed to allow such flexibility, and as a result, is not as specific in
terms of standards and specifications which may unnecessarily restrain
innovation and the creation of unique planning and development. The
flexibility afforded to the developer, however, is not unconstrained in
that, in order to gain general development plan approval, the developer
must satisfy the Planning Board of its compliance with the general and
specific terms of this chapter. The specific design of the general
development plan shall, upon approval, be memorialized by way of a
written agreement as contemplated by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.2L which
shall then become the specific standard against which site details shall
be evaluated at the time of site plan review.
§ 330-91 VERNON CODE § 330-92
1:514
§ 330-92. Flag lots. [Added 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-30]
Flag lots are prohibited in all residential zones.
§ 330-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-92
1:515

ARTICLE VIII
Residential Development75
§ 330-93. Scope and applicability.
A. These regulations shall govern any site improvements carried out or
intended to be carried out or required to be carried out in connection
with any application for residential subdivision, site plan approval, or
variance before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
B. Except as is otherwise specifically provided, these regulations shall
control all matters concerning the construction, alteration, addition,
repair, removal, demolition, maintenance, and use of any site
improvements constructed by a developer in connection with
residential development.
C. These rules shall apply to all site improvement work and appurtenant
construction, including streets, roads, parking facilities, sidewalks,
drainage structures, grading, and utilities which are undertaken by a
developer in connection with residential development or use.
(1) Where both residential and commercial development are planned
in a mixed-use development, these regulations shall apply to the
residential part or parts of such development where such
residential part or parts are discrete and separate from planned
commercial parts as evidenced by, for example, separate
building(s), separate parking, and separate access features.
(2) These regulations shall apply to all utilities created by or deriving
their authority from municipal ordinance to operate within the
Township of Vernon.
(3) Choice among options and contained in these regulations shall be
the applicant's unless otherwise specified in these regulations.
D. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed to limit the
powers of the Township to enforce separate requirements concerning:
(1) Layout, arrangement, and location of improvements, shade trees,
landscaping, or reservation of areas for public use, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38;
(2) Preservation of existing natural resources; arrangement of physical
elements for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
parking, and loading; screening, landscaping, and location of
structures; or conservation of energy and use of renewable
resources; pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41; or
75.Editor's Note: The provisions of this article are mandatory pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et
seq., effective June 3, 1997. All options of the said rules which allow preservation of rural
character at local discretion have been elected herein.
§ 330-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-93
1:517
§ 330-94. Development over limestone geologic formations.
Development of sites underlain by carbonate bedrock shall be designed in
accordance with § 330-84.
§ 330-95. Administration; enforcement.
(3) Use, bulk, height, number of stories, orientation, and size of
buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot or
development area that may be occupied by structures, lot sizes and
dimensions, floor area ratios, or other measures to control
development intensity; or the provision of adequate light and air
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.
E. The provisions of these regulations shall not preempt or in any way
affect the exercise of any authority by the state or other county
government with respect to site improvements conferred by any state
law or any regulation promulgated thereunder. It is the intent of these
regulations to be consistent with all other applicable laws, rules and
regulations. Where these regulations and any other state or county
laws, rules or regulations establish differing requirements, then the
requirements of these regulations shall govern, except where any such
differing requirement is more restrictive.
F. These regulations shall not apply to driveways on private property held
in fee-simple as individual residential lots outside of the public right-ofway,
including common driveways established by easements shared by
more than one dwelling unit on private property.
G. These regulations are intended to ensure the public health, safety, and
welfare insofar as they are affected by site improvement work, and shall
be so construed.
A. The Planning Board shall ensure that the plans and plats for any
residential development subject to review under this article complies
with the requirements of these regulations before issuing a preliminary
or final approval.
B. Whenever the Zoning Board of Adjustment grants subdivision or site
plan approval pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76(b), then
that Board shall ensure that any plans and plats comply with the
requirements of these regulations before issuing a preliminary or final
approval.
C. All materials, equipment and devices required to be approved by a
board or official pursuant to Subsections A and B shall be constructed
and installed in accordance with such approval.
D. The standards referenced in these regulations shall be considered a
part of the requirements of these regulations to the prescribed extent of
each reference. Where deficiencies occur between provisions of these
§ 330-93 VERNON CODE § 330-95
1:518
§ 330-96. Violations.
§ 330-97. Operative date.
regulations and referenced standards, the provisions of these
regulations shall apply, except as may be otherwise provided.
A. Where any site improvement is required to meet any part of these
regulations pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, then the
failure of any person to construct such site improvements in accordance
with the requirements of these regulations shall constitute a violation of
the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). Any person
responsible for such failure shall be subject to such penalties and
enforcement procedures as are provided by that law and by any valid
ordinance adopted pursuant thereto which may be initiated by the
administrative officer designated by this chapter (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-18).
B. In addition to any remedy provided by Subsection A above, any failure
to comply with the requirements of these regulations, where
compliance is required, shall constitute a failure to meet the conditions
of the construction permit and/or certificate of occupancy issued
pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.). Notification from the approving authority or from
the Township Engineer acting on behalf of the approving authority that
any of the requirements of these regulations that are conditions of the
construction permit and/or certificate of occupancy have not been met
shall subject any person responsible for such failure to the remedies
provided under the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
A. Any project for which preliminary subdivision or site plan approval has
been given prior to June 3, 1996, shall continue to be subject to the
design standards under which it was approved.
B. Any project for which application is made after June 3, 1997, shall be
governed by these regulations.
C. These regulations shall not be construed as requiring the revision or
amendment of any application for site plan or subdivision approval
which is pending on June 3, 1997. Such pending applications may,
however, be amended, provided that any such amendments shall meet
the requirements of these regulations.
(1) For any project for which a completed application has been
submitted on or before the operative date of these regulations, but
which has not yet received preliminary approval, the applicant
shall have the option of amending the application in its entirety to
comply with these regulations or requesting that the Board
continue to review the application under the ordinances in effect at
the time of application.
§ 330-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-98
1:519
§ 330-98. Validity.
If any provision of these regulations or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of the regulations which can be given effect, and
to this end the provisions of the regulations are severable.
§ 330-99. Exceptions.
A. The Board may grant such de minimis exceptions from the
requirements of these standards as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the standards if the literal enforcement of
one or more provisions of the standards is impracticable or will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
development in question.
B. An application for an exception pursuant to this section shall be filed in
writing with the Board and shall include:
(1) A statement of the requirements of the standards from which an
exception is sought;
(2) A statement of the manner by which strict compliance with said
provisions would result in practical difficulties; and
(3) A statement of the nature and extent of such practical difficulties.
C. Exceptions shall become a part of the construction documents and shall
be retained by the Board.
D. Within 30 days of granting a de minimis exception request, the Board
shall send a copy of the document(s) constituting the de minimis
exception resolution to the New Jersey Department of Community
affairs, Division of Codes and Standards, 101 South Broad Street, CN
802, Trenton, N.J. 08625-0802. Such notice shall be clearly marked
"Site Improvement Exception(s)."
E. An application for an exception may also be made by an officer or
agency of the Township.
F. Examples of de minimis exceptions include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Reducing the minimum number of parking spaces and the
minimum size of parking stalls;
(2) Reducing the minimum geometrics of street design, such as curb
radii, horizontal and vertical curves, intersection angles, center
line radii, and others;
(3) Reducing cartway width; and
(4) Any changes in standards necessary to implement traffic calming
devices.
§ 330-98 VERNON CODE § 330-99
1:520
§ 330-100. Special area designation.
In the event that the governing body, Board, and/or a developer, nonprofit
organization, or other agency shall determine that a special area (within, or
both within and without, the Township) exhibits or will exhibit a distinctive
character or environmental feature worthy of preservation and
enhancement (such as, but not limited to, redevelopment areas, special
improvement districts, historic districts, villages, hamlets, centers,
ecosystems, scenic corridors, farmland and rural landscapes), a special area
proposal or ordinance shall be prepared and introduced for the governing
body's consideration as well as the consideration of other governing bodies
in affected municipalities. Such proposal shall be proceeded upon pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.5.
§ 330-101. Street hierarchy.
G. The Board's granting of a request for a de minimis exception shall be
based on a finding that the requested exception meets the following
criteria:
(1) It is consistent with the intent of the Site Improvement Act;
(2) It is reasonable, limited, and not unduly burdensome;
(3) It meets the needs of public health and safety; and
(4) It takes into account existing infrastructure and possible
surrounding future development.
A. Streets shall be classified in a hierarchy with design tailored to
function. The street hierarchy definitions contained in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.1
et seq. are applicable only to local residential streets and are not to be
considered related to the US Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration's Functional Classification of Highways.
B. The street hierarchy system shall be defined by road function and
average daily traffic (ADT), calculated by trip generation rates from the
current edition of Trip Generation by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers, as indicated in Table 4 in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21. Trip
generation rates from other sources may be used if the applicant
demonstrates to the appropriate approving authority that these sources
better reflect local conditions. In addition, the applicant shall
investigate the opportunities for, and availability of, transit facilities
and, if appropriate, consider their impact(s) on motor vehicle traffic trip
generation rates per dwelling unit.
C. Each residential street shall be classified and designed to meet the
standards for one of the street types defined in Table 4.2 in N.J.A.C. Title
5, Chapter 21.
§ 330-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-101
1:521
§ 330-102. Cartway width.
§ 330-103. Curbs or curbs and gutters.
D. The Board and the developer shall determine the highest order street
required to be used in a given residential development, considering all
of the following:
(1) The size of the development (number and type of units). For
example, using size to determine the highest order of street
required, a development of up to 150 single-family detached units
would not require any minor collectors or streets of a higher order;
(2) The actual or potential development of adjacent sites (whether
there is likely to be traffic passing through from neighboring
developments). A "potential" development means a development
having approvals granted, applications pending, or undergoing
preliminary review; and
(3) The streets proposed for that area, if any, as contained in the
Township Master Plan.
A. Cartway width for each street classification shall be determined by
parking and curbing requirements that are based on intensity of
development.
B. Intensity of development shall be based on dwelling units per gross
acre as follows:
Intensity
Dwelling Units
Per Gross Acrea
Low Less than or equal to 4
Medium More than 4 and less than
or equal to 15
High More than 15
NOTE:
a In determining the intensity of development, the gross acreage shall
not include dedicated common open space or other such areas
restricted from future development.
C. Cartway widths for each street classification are as shown in N.J.A.C.
Title 5, Chapter 21.
D. Cartway width also shall be based upon consideration of possible
limitations imposed by sight distances, climate, terrain, and
maintenance needs.
§ 330-101 VERNON CODE § 330-103
1:522
§ 330-104. Shoulders.
A. Curbs or curbs and gutters shall be used for drainage purposes, safety,
and delineation and protection of pavement edge. Where, based on
stormwater management system design, there is determined to be a
problem with runoff, curbs or curbs and gutters shall be used.
B. Curb requirements shall vary according to street hierarchy and
intensity of development, in accordance with the requirements set forth
in Table 4.3 in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.2. Generally, curbs shall be required on
streets with on-street parking.
C. Where curbing is not required, edge definition and stabilization shall be
furnished for safety reasons, and to prevent pavement unraveling.
Curbing may be required for stormwater management, road
stabilization, delineation of parking areas, 10 feet on each side of
drainage inlets, intersections, corners, and tight radii.
D. Curb requirements may be waived by the Board, and shoulders and/or
drainage swales used, when it can be shown that soil and/or topography
make the use of shoulders and/or drainage swales preferable; and/or
the Township or Board desires to preserve community rural character
by using shoulders and/or drainage swales instead of curbs. In cases of
medium development intensity, the curbing requirement may be waived
where front setbacks exceed 40 feet and it can be demonstrated that
sufficient on-site parking exists.
E. Flexibility regarding curb type shall be permitted as long as the curb
type accommodates the system of drainage proposed. Generally, curbs
should be constructed of granite block. Curbing materials shall
accommodate the purposes set forth in Subsection C above.
F. Curbs shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.17.
G. Curbing shall be designed to provide a curb ramp in compliance with
the Americans with Disabilities Act or the Barrier Free Subcode of the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) at street
intersections, as applicable.
A. Shoulders and/or drainage swales should be used instead of curbs
when:
(1) Soil and/or topography make the use of shoulders and/or drainage
swales preferable; and/or
(2) To preserve rural character.
B. Shoulders shall be provided in accordance with the requirements in
Table 4.3 in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.2.
C. Shoulders shall be four feet wide, except for minor collector streets of
high intensity with off-street parking; and major collector streets of
§ 330-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-104
1:523
§ 330-105. Sidewalks and graded areas.
medium and high intensity shall be six feet and eight feet wide,
respectively, on each side for all streets, and located within the right-ofway
as shown in the street illustrations in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21.
D. Shoulders shall be constructed of materials such as stabilized earth,
gravel, crushed stone, bituminous treatment, or other forms of
pavement which provide for vehicle load support.
A. Sidewalks and/or graded areas shall be required, depending on road
classification and intensity of development, in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Table 4.5 in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.2.
B. Sidewalks shall be provided where graded areas are specified in Table
4.3 in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21, when the conditions described in
Subsection B(1) or (2) below exist:
(1) The net density of the development or project exceeds one dwelling
unit per acre; and
(a) The development or project is located within 2,500 feet of a
train station, public or school bus route; or
(b) The development or project is located within 2,500 feet of an
existing recreational, business or retail use or a site where
such use is permitted by existing zoning; or
(c) Where the proposed streets connect to or extend existing
streets which have sidewalks on both sides.
(2) The net density of the development exceeds 0.5 dwelling unit per
acre and the development is located within two miles of a school.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection B(1) and (2) above, sidewalks shall only be
required on one side of rural streets or rural lanes and shall not be
required in alleys.
D. Sidewalks shall be placed parallel to the street, as shown in the street
profile figures, unless an exception has been permitted to preserve
topographical or natural features, or if required to provide visual
interest, or unless the applicant shows that an alternative pedestrian
system provides safe and convenient circulation (e.g., in planned
development).
E. Pedestrianway easements at least 10 feet wide may be required by the
Board through the center of blocks more than 600 feet long. In
providing circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping,
adjoining residential areas, or other community facilities, the Board
shall consider and may require pedestrianway easements.
F. Sidewalk width shall be four feet; wider widths may be necessary near
pedestrian generators and employment centers. Where sidewalks abut
§ 330-104 VERNON CODE § 330-105
1:524
§ 330-106. Bikeways.
§ 330-107. Utility areas.
§ 330-108. Right-of-way and cartway.
§ 330-109. Street grade and intersections.
Street grade and intersection design shall be constructed according to the
specifications set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.19.
the curb and cars overhang the sidewalk, widths shall be six feet.
In high-density residential areas when sidewalks abut the curb, a
sidewalk/graded area of at least six feet in width shall be required.
G. Sidewalks and graded areas shall be constructed according to the
specifications set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.18.
A. Separate bicycle paths and lanes shall be required only if such paths
and lanes have been specified as part of the Township's Master Plan
and/or Official Map, as amended.
B. Bicycle lanes, where provided, shall be placed in the outside lane of a
roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is
permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking lane and the
outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated with markings,
preferably striping. Raised reflectors or curbs shall not be used.
C. The construction of bikeways shall comply with the specifications set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.18.
A. Utilities shall be located within the right-of-way on both sides of and
parallel to the cartway or within utility easements outside the right-ofway.
B. Utility areas shall be planted with grass, ground cover, or treated with
other suitable cover material.
A. The right-of-way shall be measured from lot line to lot line. Right-of-way
requirements are shown in Table 4.3 in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.2 and displayed
graphically in the street illustrations in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.5.
B. The Board may require the right-of-way and cartway widths of a new
street that is a continuation of an existing street to be at least the same
widths as the existing street.
C. The right-of-way shall be of sufficient width to accommodate future
development, as indicated by the Township Master Plan.
D. Where turning lanes are needed based on safety or capacity, additional
right-of-way width, not to exceed the width and length of the turning
lanes, may be required.
§ 330-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-110
1:525
§ 330-110. Pavement.
§ 330-111. Street and site lighting.
Street and site lighting designs shall be subject to the requirements of
§§ 330-80 and 330-112.
§ 330-112. Underground wiring.
§ 330-113. Street and traffic signs.
A. Street pavement thickness shall vary by street hierarchy, subgrade
properties, and pavement type.
B. Pavement design for rural, residential access, neighborhood, minor
collector, and major collector streets shall conform to the specifications
in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.19.
A. All electric, telephone, television, and other communication facilities,
both main and service lines serving new developments, shall be
provided by underground wiring within easements of dedicated public
rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and
practices of the utility or other companies providing such services.
B. Lots that abut existing easements or public rights-of-way, where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have heretofore been installed, may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed
underground.
C. Overhead lines may be permitted as an exception by the approving
authority in areas of severe geological conditions. The placement and
alignment of the poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of
overhead lines.
A. Design and placement of traffic signs included in the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways shall follow
the requirements specified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways, published by the US Department of
Transportation and adopted by the NJ Department of Transportation.
B. At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way street
intersection and one at each T-intersection. Signs shall be placed so as
not to obstruct sight distances and under light standards, if present, so
that they are clearly visible. The design of street name signs shall be
consistent, of a style appropriate to the community, of a uniform size
and color, and erected in accordance with Township standards.
C. At signalized intersections, street signs shall be located on the
overhead arm supporting the traffic signal, or otherwise suitably
suspended over the intersection. Roadway clearance shall be a
§ 330-110 VERNON CODE § 330-113
1:526
§ 330-114. Parking; number of spaces.
§ 330-115. Parking space size.
Each off-street parking space shall measure nine feet in width by 18 feet
in length. Parking spaces for people with disabilities shall be in accordance
with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) or the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as applicable.
§ 330-116. Parking areas.
minimum of 15 feet from the bottom of any sign or supporting
equipment and the top of the paved surface.
A. An adequate number of on-street and off-street parking spaces shall be
required in all developments to accommodate residents and visitors.
For projects containing dwelling units required by the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code Barrier Free Subcode (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) to be
accessible, accessible parking spaces for people with disabilities shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode and shall be considered part of the total number of required
spaces.
B. For residential developments, parking shall be provided as set forth in
Table 4.4 in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14. If the applicant does not specify the
number of bedrooms per unit, note "c" for each category in Table 4.4
shall apply for the parking requirement.
C. Alternative parking standards to those shown in Table 4.4 shall be
accepted if the applicant demonstrates that these standards better
reflect local conditions. Factors affecting minimum number of parking
spaces include household characteristics, availability of mass transit,
and available off-street parking resources.
D. A one-car garage and driveway combination shall count as 2.0 off-street
parking spaces, provided the driveway measures a minimum of 18 feet
in length between the face of the garage door and the right-of-way. A
two-car garage and driveway combination shall count as 3.5 off-street
parking spaces, provided a minimum parking area width of 20 feet is
provided for a minimum length of 18 feet as specified for a one-car
garage and driveway combination.
E. When housing is included in mixed-use development, a shared parking
approach to the provision of parking shall be permitted.
F. When, in the judgment of the Board, on-street parking is available, then
only that proportion of the parking requirement which is not available
on the street shall be provided in off-street parking facilities. A length of
23 feet per on-street parking space shall be used in calculating the
number of available on-street parking spaces.
§ 330-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-116
1:527
§ 330-117. Curb construction standards.
§ 330-118. Sidewalks and bikeways construction standards.
A. Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to, and within a reasonable
walking distance of, the buildings they are designed to serve.
B. Access to parking lots shall be designed so as not to induce queues on
travel ways, and to provide adequate pedestrian circulation and safety.
There shall be adequate provision for ingress to and egress from all
parking spaces to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearance, and safety
of vehicles and pedestrians.
C. The width of all aisles providing direct access to individual parking
stalls shall be in accordance with the requirements specified in N.J.A.C.
5:21-4.6. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles serving
single-row parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90°.
D. Where sidewalks occur in parking areas, parked vehicles shall not
overhang or extend over the sidewalk unless an additional two feet of
sidewalk width are provided to accommodate such overhang.
A. Construction specifications for acceptable curb types of granite block
and concrete are shown in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21.
B. The standard concrete curb section used shall be a maximum of 20 feet
in length, with a scored joint every 10 feet. All concrete used for curbs
or combination curbs and gutters shall be prepared in accordance with
the requirements, by class of concrete, of the New Jersey Department
of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction effective at the time of preparation. Where bituminous
concrete pavement is used for the road surface, the curb and/or gutter
shall be constructed first.
C. Where drainage inlets are constructed but curbs are not required,
curbing must be provided at least 10 feet on each side of the inlet, set
back one foot from the extension of the pavement edge.
A. The following apply to sidewalks and graded areas:
(1) Sidewalks of concrete shall be four inches thick except at points of
vehicular crossing, where they shall be at least six inches thick. At
vehicular crossings, concrete sidewalks shall be reinforced with
welded wire fabric mesh or an equivalent.
(2) Concrete air-entrained sidewalks shall be Class C concrete, having
a twenty-eight-day verification strength of 4,000 psi. Other
materials may be permitted, depending on the design of the
development.
§ 330-116 VERNON CODE § 330-118
1:528
§ 330-119. Street grade, intersections, pavement and lighting
construction standards.
(3) Graded areas shall be planted with grass or treated with other
suitable ground cover, and their width and cross slope shall
correspond to that of sidewalks.
B. The following apply to bikeways:
(1) The paved width of the bicycle path shall be established by the
Township Master Plan.
(a) Choice of surface materials, including bituminous mixes,
concrete, compacted gravel, soil cement, stabilized earth, and
wood planking, shall depend on use and users of the path.
(b) Gradients of bike paths should generally not exceed 5%.
(2) Bicycle-safe drainage grates shall be used in construction of all
residential streets.
A. The following apply to street grade:
(1) Minimum street grade permitted for all streets shall be 0.5%.
(2) Maximum street grade shall vary by road hierarchy with flatter
grades required for roads with higher ADTs, in accordance with the
requirements shown in Table 4.6. Where terrain makes it
necessary, the allowable maximum grade may be increased by up to
2%, but shall not exceed a maximum grade of 16%.
B. The following apply to intersections:
(1) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible
and in no case shall be less than 75°.
(2) New intersections along one side of an existing street shall, if
possible, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite
side of each street. Use of T-intersections in subdivisions shall be
encouraged. To avoid corner-cutting when inadequate offsets exist
between adjacent intersections, offsets shall be at least 150 feet
between right-of-way center lines.
(3) Intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with the street
having the highest radius requirement, as shown in Table 4.6 in
N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21, determining the minimum standard for
all curblines.
(4) Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical.
(5) The minimum center line radius, minimum tangent length between
reverse curves, and curb radii shall be as shown in Table 4.6 in
N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21.
§ 330-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-119
1:529
§ 330-120. Curves.
§ 330-121. Water supply system standards.
Water supply systems, where installed, shall conform to the standards
contained in the following §§ 330-122 through 330-124.
§ 330-122. Capacity of water supply system.
(6) Sight triangles shall be in accordance with 1990 AASHTO's "A
Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets" standards
and based on the speed limits established by the government
agency having jurisdiction. Sight triangle easements shall be
required and shall include the area on each street corner that is
bounded by the line which connects the sight or "connecting"
points located on each of the right-of-way lines of the intersecting
street. The planting of trees or other plantings, or the location of
structures exceeding 30 inches in height that would obstruct the
clear sight across the area of the easements, shall be prohibited;
and a public right-of-entry shall be reserved for the purpose of
removing any object, material or otherwise, that obstructs the clear
sight.
C. Pavement design for residential access, neighborhood, rural, parking
loop, minor collector, and major collector shall follow the specifications
shown in Figures 4.2 and 4.3 in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21. Subgrade
categories are shown in Table 4.7.
D. Alternative pavement design shall be allowed, provided it conforms
with one of the following: AASHTO Method of Flexible Pavement
Design, Caltrans Method of Flexible Pavement Design, Asphalt Institute
Method, AASHTO Method of Rigid Pavement Design, Fatigue Strength
Method of Design, Multilayer Elastic Analysis, or the National Crushed
Stone Association Design, incorporated herein by reference.
E. Lighting shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of
Articles VII and XI.
A. Vertical and horizontal curves shall be designed in accordance with
1990 AASHTO's "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highway and Streets"
standards, incorporated herein by reference.
B. Sight easements on vertical and horizontal curves shall be required and
determined based on the sight distance requirements contained in the
1990 AASHTO's "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets" standards, taking into consideration the speed limits
established by the government agency having jurisdiction. Residential
access, residential neighborhood, and rural street design should be
based on a speed limit of 25 miles per hour. Minor and major collector
street design should be based on a speed limit of 30 miles per hour.
§ 330-119 VERNON CODE § 330-122
1:530
§ 330-123. Water system design and placement.
A. The water supply system shall be adequate to handle the necessary
flow, based on complete development of the tract.
B. When plans for future development necessitate oversizing of the water
supply system, the Township or utility authority may enter into an
agreement with the developer to address the fair share of the costs.
C. The demand rates for all uses shall be considered in computing the total
system demand. Where fire protection is provided in accordance with
Subsection E below, the system shall be capable of providing the
required fire demand plus the required average daily residential
demand as indicated in Table 5.1 in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21, or the
peak hour flows indicated in Table 5.2 therein, whichever is greater.
D. Average daily residential consumption shall be computed in accordance
with the housing unit type and size data shown in Table 5.1. The peak
daily flows shall be computed by applying a peaking factor of three
times the average daily residential consumption. The Township may
require deviations in the peaking factor value, provided appropriate
documentation and justification for the deviation from the standards is
provided.
E. The design of the on-site water distribution system shall be adequate to
provide fire protection as per ISO standard, Fire Suppression Rating
Schedule, or per AWWA M31, "Manual of Water Supply Practices —
Distribution System Requirements for Fire Protection," ISO method on
pages 3-9, incorporated herein by reference.
A. System design and placement shall comply with the following
construction specifications, incorporated herein by reference; all
applicable NJ Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) rules,
and the American Water Works Association (AWWA) standards, with the
strictest standards governing.
B. Distribution mains of the overall system shall be connected into loops so
that the supply may be brought to the consumer from more than one
direction. In balancing loops in a design, the Hardy-Cross, or an
equivalent, method shall be used (see subchapter Appendix,
incorporated herein by reference). Manning roughness coefficients
listed in Table 7.1 in N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.1 may be used in these calculations.
Dead-end lines shall be permitted within the design of a looped system,
provided that there are no more than 20 dwelling units permanently, or
no more than 50 dwelling units temporarily, on a dead-end line. When
dead-end lines are used, they shall be provided with a hydrant or blowoff
at the terminus as a means of flushing.
C. Valves, except on a permitted dead end, shall be located on distribution
mains so that no more than one hydrant would be out of service as a
result of a single water main break. They shall be located in all small
§ 330-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-123
1:531
branches off larger mains; and where eight-inch or larger main lines
intersect, a valve shall be located in each branch. At street
intersections, valves shall be located near pipe intersections for ease in
finding in the event of a water main break.
D. In addition to the above requirements, water mains shall be valved so
that not more than one-quarter of a mile would be affected by a single
water main break. Geared valves on sixteen-inch mains or larger shall
be furnished.
E. No pipe shall be placed on private property unless the owner of the land
is to own or operate the pipe, or an easement deeded to the Township or
utility authority is obtained. All easements shall be a minimum of 20
feet wide unless depth of pipe, soil conditions, or additional utilities
require wider.
F. A building service connection shall be comprised of a corporation stop
at the main, a curb stop and a water meter. When the meter is located
outside a building, an additional shutoff valve shall be installed on the
discharge side of the meter. When the meter is located inside a building,
valving shall be in accordance with the Plumbing Subcode of the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.15). Curb stops and water
meters shall be located as specified by the public or private water
supplier.
(1) Separate water service connections for each unit shall be utilized
for detached housing where maintenance is the responsibility of
the individual homeowner.
(2) Common water service connections shall be allowed for multifamily
housing where there is an entity, such as a homeowners'
association, that is responsible for the maintenance of the common
water laterals. Where common laterals are utilized, individual
water shutoffs and meters shall be provided for each unit.
G. Where water system extensions are constructed by developers and
meter fees are not paid by the developer, the water meter(s) shall be
furnished by the developer and shall be of a manufacture and type
approved by the Township or utility authority. The meter(s) shall be
read in "gallons" or "cubic feet" as determined by the Township or
utility authority. Where meter fees are paid by the developer, the
meter(s) shall be furnished by the Township or utility authority.
H. Pipe size shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Water mains shall be a minimum diameter of eight inches except at
the end of a permanent cul-de-sac, unless another size is required
for fire flow and other criteria. A six-inch main may be used when it
serves not more than 20 dwelling units and only one fire hydrant.
(2) Building service connection pipe shall be a minimum diameter of 3/
4 inch.
§ 330-123 VERNON CODE § 330-123
1:532
(3) Design capacity of water mains shall be such as to maintain a
minimum pressure of 20 pounds per square inch (psi) at street level
under all flow conditions.
I. Pipe materials used in the construction of water mains shall be cementlined
ductile iron, prestressed concrete cylinder pipe, or PVC pipe. All
pipe and appurtenances shall comply with the applicable AWWA
standards in effect at the time of application. All standards referenced
in this subsection are incorporated herein by reference.
(1) Ductile iron pipe, appurtenances, and fittings shall comply with
ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10 (fittings), C111/A2., 11 (gasket joints),
C115/A21.15 (flanged joints), and C151/A21.51 (pipe). Thickness
shall be designed in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C150/A21.50
and shall be a minimum of Class 52. It shall be cement-mortar lined
in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4. Joints shall be
gasketed push-on joints in conformance with ANSI/AWWA C111/
A21.11. The exterior of the ductile iron pipe shall be covered with a
coal-tar, epoxy-type coating. In aggressive soils, ductile iron pipe
wrapped in polyethylene, in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C115/
A21.15, shall be used.
(2) Prestressed concrete cylinder pipe with rubber and steal joints
shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C301.
(3) PVC pipe, appurtenances, and fittings shall conform to ANSI/
AWWA C90 for pipe sizes four inches to 12 inches, and joints shall
be elastomeric-gasket couplings of a corresponding size.
Laboratory performance requirements, as specified in ASTM
D3139, shall be met. Solvent-cement couplings shall not be
permitted.
(4) Where transitions to flanged fittings are made, adapters approved
by the Township or water purveyor shall be used.
(5) Gate valves shall be cast-iron body with double-disc gates, bronzemounted
or resilient-seated wedge, nonrising stem mechanical
joint as specified by the municipality or utility authority. Valves
shall be full size, and those on sixteen-inch mains or larger shall be
geared and have suitable bypasses. Valve boxes shall be of the
adjustable type with the cover marked "water" and direction of
valve operation indicated.
(6) Building service connection pipe shall be type K copper or
polyethylene (PE) pressure pipe that complies with ANSI/AWWA
C901.
J. Pipe bedding and backfill shall be installed in accordance with the pipe
manufacturer's recommendations.
(1) The Township or the authority may require the developer to provide
an opinion of a professional engineer relative to the suitability of
§ 330-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-123
1:533
§ 330-124. Fire hydrants.
§ 330-125. Sanitary sewer system.
the on-site material to be used as backfill. The Township or
authority shall rely on this opinion.
(2) Where the on-site material is deemed suitable, the opinion shall
specify the appropriate installation methods for the material.
Where the on-site material is deemed not suitable, the opinion shall
specify modification or replacement of the material and the
appropriate installation for the specified material.
A. Hydrants shall be spaced to provide necessary fire flow. The average
building area served per hydrant shall not exceed 120,000 square feet.
In addition, the distance between any dwelling and a hydrant shall not
exceed 400 feet when measured along the street right-of-way.
B. Size, type and installation of hydrants shall conform to the following
specifications, incorporated herein by reference, as appropriate:
(1) Size, type, and installation of hydrants shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the Township or the water purveyor or shall
conform to the AWWA Standard for Dry-Barrel Fire Hydrants,
ANSI/AWWA C502. Hydrants shall have at least three outlets; one
outlet shall be a pumper outlet, and other outlets shall be at least
2 1/2 inches nominal size. Street main connections shall not be less
than six inches in diameter. Hose threads on outlets shall be
compatible with existing municipal equipment and shall either
conform to NFPA 1963 or shall match existing municipal
requirements. A valve shall be provided on connections between
hydrants and street mains. All pipe, fittings, and appurtenances
supplying fire hydrants shall be AWWA or ASTM approved.
(2) All fire hydrants shall conform to NFPA Standard 291.
A. Sanitary sewer systems, where installed, shall conform to the standards
contained in this article.
B. When plans for future development necessitate oversizing or grade
changes, the Township or utility authority may enter into an agreement
with the developer to address the fair share of the costs of
improvements not required for the proposed development.
C. If a public sanitary sewer system will be provided to the area within a
six-year period as indicated in the municipal sewer master plan, official
map, or other official document, the Township may require installation
of a capped system within the road right-of-way or existing utility
authority easements to service the approved lots; or, alternatively, the
Township may require a performance guaranty in lieu of the
improvement. Capped sanitary sewers shall be allowed only in areas
indicated for sewer service in the State of New Jersey Statewide Water
§ 330-123 VERNON CODE § 330-125
1:534
§ 330-126. System planning, design and placement.
Quality Management (WQM) Plans and where permitted by NJDEP
through sewer connection approval.
D. Individual subsurface disposal systems shall comply with N.J.A.C.
7:9A-3.2 and 3.16.
E. The applicant shall submit to the Township or utility authority for
review for compliance with this article details of the planned pipes,
joints, mains, laterals and appurtenances. All materials used for
sanitary sewer systems shall be manufactured in the United States,
wherever available, as governed by P.L. 1982, c. 107, effective date
October 3, 1982.76 The details shall comply with all standards and
specifications listed in this chapter.
A. The planning, design, construction, installation, modification and
operation of any treatment works or sanitary system shall be in
accordance with the applicable NJDEP rules implementing the New
Jersey Water Pollution Control Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.) and the
New Jersey Water Quality Planning Act (N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.) and,
for items not covered by NJDEP rules, with ASCE Manual on
Engineering Practice No. 37, incorporated herein by reference.
B. Sanitary sewer pumping stations shall be considered where gravity
system design leads to excessive sewer depths which are not
economically justifiable and shall comply with N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.10,
23.11 and 23.12.
C. System design and placement shall comply with the following
specifications:
(1) Except where otherwise specified by the Township or utility
authority, sanitary sewer manholes, when located within the
municipal right-of-way, shall be at or near the center line of the
paved cartway, but at a five-foot minimum from the edge of the
pavement. Sanitary sewer mains shall be a minimum of 10 feet
from the right-of-way line.
(2) Easements shall be in a form approved by the utility authority or
the Municipal Engineer and Municipal Attorney. Easements shall
be required for all sanitary sewer lines which are not within a
public right-of-way. Easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide
for sanitary sewers that are not more than 15 feet deep. For sewers
that are more than 15 feet deep, easements shall be a minimum of
30 feet wide. The depth of the sewer shall be measured from the
design invert of the pipe to the surface of the proposed final
grading.
76.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-18.
§ 330-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-126
1:535
(3) As with water lines, common sanitary sewer service may be
permitted for multifamily housing where there is an entity such as a
homeowners' association that is responsible for the maintenance of
the common laterals.
(4) All sewers shall be designed to meet the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection's slope standards at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-23.6(b).
(5) Pipe materials used in the construction of sanitary sewers,
including gravity sewers, shall be reinforced concrete, ductile iron,
PVC, or clay pipe. All pipe and appurtenances shall comply with
AWWA and ASTM standards referenced in this section, which are
incorporated herein by reference.
(a) Reinforced concrete pipe shall be used only in sizes 24 inches
and larger and shall meet all the requirements of ASTM C76.
All pipe shall be Class III strength installed with Class C
ordinary bedding, except in the following conditions where
stronger pipe may be required:
[1] For depths less than three feet, measured from the top of
the pipe, installed under traffic areas, Marston Class IV
pipe shall be required.
[2] The presence of clay soils, poor bedding conditions, or
other unusual loading conditions shall be given special
consideration, and the developer shall submit an
engineering analysis to the Township or authority for
approval.
(b) PVC sewer pipe shall have bell and spigot ends and O-ring
rubber gasketed joints. PVC pipe and fittings shall conform to
ASTM D3034, with a minimum wall thickness designation of
SDR 35.
[1] The plastic material from which the pipe and fittings are
extruded shall be impact types of PVC, unplasticized,
having high mechanical strength and maximum chemical
resistance conforming to Type 1, Grade 1 of the
specification for rigid polyvinyl chloride compounds, STM
D1784.
[2] Pipe shall be free from defects, such as bubbles or other
imperfections, in accordance with accepted commercial
practice. Test results demonstrating that the pipe meets
ASTM D2444 for impact and ASTM D2321 for deflection
and pipe stiffness shall be provided when requested by the
municipality or utility authority.
§ 330-126 VERNON CODE § 330-126
1:536
[3] Joints shall conform to ASTM D3212. Rubber ring gaskets
shall conform to ASTM F477. The gasket shall be the sole
element depended upon to make the joint watertight.
[4] The pipe shall be installed as specified in ASTM D2321. In
no case shall less than a Class III material be used for
bedding and haunching material, unless approved in
writing by the Municipal Engineer or utility authority
engineer. When installing pipe in unstable soil or excessive
groundwater, a determination regarding special
precautions, such as poured concrete slabs, shall be made
by the Municipal Engineer or utility authority engineer.
(c) Ductile iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast in metal or sandlined
molds to ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51. The joint shall be of a
type that employs a single, elongated, grooved gasket to effect
the joint seal. Pipe should be furnished with flanges where
connections to flange fittings are required. Pipe shall be a
minimum of Class 50. The outside of the pipe shall be coated
with a uniform thickness of hot applied coal tar coating; the
inside shall be lined with cement in accordance with ANSI/
AWWA C104/A21.4. Ductile iron pipe shall be installed with
Class C, Ordinary Bedding, when site conditions allow. In
corrosive soils or on sewers that receive discharge from a force
main where hydrogen sulfide is present, ductile iron pipe with
polyethylene coating, which protects the interior and exterior
of the pipe, shall be used.
(d) Clay pipe shall comply with ASTM C700.
(6) Inverted siphons, force mains, and outfalls shall be constructed of
ductile iron pipe or PVC pipe, as specified above. Inverted siphons
shall consist of two pipes with provisions for flushing. Flow control
gates shall be provided in the chambers.
(7) In addition to the pipe materials at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.6(b)5, PVC
pipe shall be considered a suitable material.
(8) For other than PVC pipe, pipe and manhole bedding and backfill
shall be provided as specified in "Design and Construction of
Sanitary and Storm Sewers, ASCE Manual on Engineering Practice
No. 37," prepared by the Joint Committee on the American Society
of Civil Engineers and the Water Pollution Control Federation, New
York, 1969. Any pipe material not covered by this manual shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
(a) The Township or the authority may require the developer to
provide an opinion of a professional engineer regarding the
suitability of the on-site material to be used as backfill. The
Township or authority shall rely on this opinion.
§ 330-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-126
1:537
(b) Where the on-site material is deemed suitable, the opinion
shall specify the appropriate installation methods for the
material. Where the on-site material is deemed not suitable,
the opinion shall specify modification or replacement of the
material and the appropriate installation methods for the
specified material.
(9) Manholes shall comply with the standards in ASCE Manual on
Engineering Practice No. 37, and shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Manholes shall be precast concrete or concrete block.
Concrete block shall be coated with two coats of Portland
cement mortar. Precast concrete or concrete block shall be
sealed with two coats of an acceptable waterproofing tar,
asphalt, or polyplastic alloy, with enough time allowed to bond
between the sealed coats.
(b) Masonry brick, concrete block, or half rings may be used to
make vertical adjustments to rims.
(c) Where pipe size varies, crowns of pipes shall be matched,
except in special conditions, as required by applicable NJDEP
rules.
(d) If precast manhole barrels and cones are used, they shall
conform to ASTM C478, with round rubber gasketed joints
conforming to ASTM C361 and ASTM C443. Maximum
absorption shall be 9%, in accordance with ASTM C478,
Method A. The entire outside surface of the manhole shall be
coated with a bituminous waterproofing material acceptable to
the Municipal Engineer or utility authority. Cracked manholes
shall not be used. The top riser section of precast manholes
shall terminate less than one foot below the finished grade to
provide for proper adjustment.
(e) Manhole frames and covers shall be of cast iron and shall
conform to ASTM A48, Class 30, and shall be suitable for H-20
loading capacity. All manhole covers in unpaved rights-of-way
or in remote areas shall be provided with a locking device, as
specified by the municipality or utility authority. The word
"SEWER" shall be cast integrally into the manhole cover.
(f) Where watertight and low profile frames and covers are
utilized, they shall conform to ASTM C923. Manholes shall be
supplied with flexible, watertight adaptors, such as inserts or
gaskets, suitable for the pipe materials used.
(10) Laterals and cleanouts shall comply with the following:
(a) The house connection or lateral from the street main to the
cleanout shall be considered an integral part of the sanitary
§ 330-126 VERNON CODE § 330-126
1:538
§ 330-127. Stormwater management; general system strategy.
sewer system. The type of material used for the house
connection shall be as follows: four-inch cast iron soil pipe,
extra heavy; four-inch PVC pipe, Schedule 40; four-inch ABS
plastic pipe, SDR 35; or four-inch ductile iron pipe. Common
laterals for multifamily units shall be designed to have
adequate conveyance capacity.
(b) Wye connections shall be the same material as the sewer main.
Saddles shall be used only for connection to an existing main.
(c) Bends in house connection lines shall be made using standard
fittings. A riser with a cleanout shall be provided in the lateral
between the edge of the pavement and property line or within
a designated easement as determined by the municipality.
(d) Inspection cleanouts or observation tees within the easement
or right-of-way shall be fitted with either a metallic cap or a
nonmetal cap fitted with a metallic plug that is suitable for
locating the cleanout. Caps shall have a depressed or inverted
nut. The inspection cleanout or observation tee shall be placed
between the curb or edge of pavement and property line or
within a designated easement.
(e) Connections beyond the cleanout are under the jurisdiction of
the Plumbing Subcode of the Uniform Construction Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.15) through the Plumbing Subcode Official.
The pipe size and specifications shall comply with the
regulations and requirements of the Plumbing Subcode of the
Uniform Construction Code.
(f) As-built drawings that include the location of plumbing wyes,
as supplied by the contractor, shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer.
A. Stormwater management systems prepared by design engineers shall
emphasize a natural, as opposed to an engineered, drainage strategy.
B. The applicability of a natural approach depends on such factors as site
storage capacity, open channel hydraulic capacity, and maintenance
needs and resources. N.J.A.C. 7.6(c)4 references authoritative sources
on natural and nonstructural approaches. Applicability of a stormwater
approach also can be limited by regulatory constraints that govern
certain structures (e.g., dams) or areas (e.g., development in a
floodplain or wetland). See N.J.A.C. 5:231-7.5(c).
C. Construction practices shall conform to Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90-1, as administered by the
New Jersey Department of Agriculture.
§ 330-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-127
1:539
D. Design engineers shall determine hydraulic capacity for open-channel
or closed-conduit flow based on the Manning equation, or charts/
nomographs based on this equation. The hydraulic capacity is term "Q"
and is expressed as discharge in cubic feet per second as follows:
Q = (1.486/n) A R 2/3 S 1/2
Where
n = Manning's roughness coefficient
A = Cross-section area of flow in square feet
R = Hydraulic radius in feet, R = A/P, where P is equal to
the wetted perimeter, measured in feet and defined as
the length of the line of contact between the flowing
water and the channel
S = Slope of energy grade line in feet per foot
E. The Manning roughness coefficients used by design engineers appear
in Table 7.1 in N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.2.
(1) A direct application of Manning's equation may be used for piped
stormwater systems. As an option, design engineers can use a
standard step backwater calculation for storm sewer systems if the
use of this approach is deemed appropriate by the designer. For
other than pipe storm sewer systems, design engineers shall apply
Manning's equation only when the bottom slope of the channel,
energy grade line, and water surface (hydraulic grade line) are
parallel, where the flow regime is in the turbulent range of
Reynolds number and where the boundaries of the cross section of
the channel do not move.
F. Velocities in open channels, excluding water quality swales, at design
flow shall not be less than 0.05 of a foot per second and no greater than
a velocity that will begin to cause erosion or scouring of the channel.
Design engineers shall determine permissible velocities for swales,
open channels, and ditches using methods presented in Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90, New
Jersey State Soil Conservation Committee, Division of Rural Resources,
New Jersey Department of Agriculture, revised to date.
G. Velocities in closed conduits at design flow shall be at least two feet per
second but not more than the velocity that will cause erosion damages
to the conduit, as per the manufacturer's specifications. Minimum
allowable pipe slopes shall produce velocity of at least two feet per
second when the flow depth is full or half of the pipe diameter.
H. Design engineers shall base culvert capacity on inlet/out analysis, as
specified in Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts, Hydraulic Design
Series (HDS) No. 5, Report No. FHWA-IP-85-15, US Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, September 1985,
incorporated herein by reference.
§ 330-127 VERNON CODE § 330-128
1:540
§ 330-128. Runoff estimation techniques.
A. Watershed stormwater management requires the determination of a
watershed runoff hydrograph that displays and compares the peak
discharge rate and volume. Both parameters shall compare pre- and
post-development conditions. The design engineer shall determine the
status of the drainage area. All significant land features such as ponds,
depressions, or hedgerows that increase ponding factors shall be
considered by the design engineer to compute pre-development runoff.
If the design engineer is able to verify that a given hydrologic condition
has existed on the site for a period of at least five years prior to the time
of computation, then this existing condition may be used by the design
engineer to determine runoff coefficients. As an alternative, however,
the design engineer should assume the drainage area in the predevelopment
condition to be in good hydrologic condition (if the lands
are pastures, lawns, or parks), to have good cover (if the lands are
woods), or to have had conservation treatment (if the lands are
cultivated).
B. Design engineers shall use the runoff hydrograph peak rate to
determine the configuration and sizes of pipes, channels, and other
routing or flow-control structures. They shall use runoff volume
calculations generated by the hydrograph to determine the necessity
for, and sizing of, detention and retention facilities.
C. For the runoff peak rate of discharge calculation, design engineers shall
have the option to choose the methodology to estimate peak rate of
discharge. For relatively small drainage areas of up to 1/2 square mile
(320 acres), the peak rate of runoff may be calculated by the Rational
Method, its derivatives, or the referenced methods that follow:
(1) For areas greater than 320 acres, design engineers shall calculate
peak rate of runoff in accordance with the following procedures
and methods, incorporated herein by reference:
(a) Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No.
55 (Tr-55) US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, Engineering Division, as supplemented or amended to
date;
(b) Computer Program for Project Formulation — Hydrology,
Technical Release No. 20 (TR-20), US Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Engineering Division,
as supplemented or amended to date; or
(c) The New HEC-1 Flood Hydrograph Package, Technical Paper
No. 82, Hydraulic Engineering Center, US Army Corps of
Engineers, used in appropriate conditions with appropriate
values.
(2) The equation for the Rational Method is:
§ 330-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-128
1:541
Qp = C I A
Where
Qp = The peak runoff area in cubic feet per second
C = The runoff coefficient
I = The average rainfall intensity in inches per hour
occurring at the time of concentration tc
A = The size of the drainage area in acres
(a) Typical C values for one-hundred-year frequency storm events
appear in Table 7.2 in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21. Coefficients
for recurrence intervals more frequent than the one-hundredyear
storm should be reduced in accordance with Table 7.3 in
N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21.
(b) The Rational Method is most accurate when dealing with
uniform drainage areas. Design engineers may divide
nonuniform drainage areas into uniform subdrainage areas
and calculate the runoff from each of these areas separately, or
they may use the weighted average technique for a composite
drainage area. Design engineers also may use runoff
coefficients from the following sources, incorporated herein by
reference:
[1] Design of Roadside Drainage Channels — Hydraulic
Design Series No. 4, Report No. FHWA-EPD-86-103, May
1965, US Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, as supplemented or amended to date; and
[2] Airport Drainage, AC 150/532-5B, US Department of
Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, July
1970, as supplemented or amended to date.
(3) Design engineers may estimate time of concentration (tc) with
Figure 7.1 in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21, Time of Concentration
nomograph from Design Manual — Roadway, New Jersey
Department of Transportation, Division of Roadway Design, Bureau
of Roadway Design Standards, May 1992. Use of this figure is
limited to the design of storm sewer systems. For other purposes,
design engineers shall use the procedures outlined in Chapter 3 of
Technical Release No. 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
(TR-55) US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Engineering Division, as supplemented or amended to date.
(4) When using the Rational Method, rainfall intensity as a function of
duration and storm frequency shall be based upon Figure 7.2 in
N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21, Rainfall Intensity Curves and/or local
rainfall frequency data, where available. A copy of Figure 7.2 in
N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21, appears in the New Jersey Department
of Transportation's Design Manual — Roadway, May 1992. In all
§ 330-128 VERNON CODE § 330-128
1:542
§ 330-129. Runoff collection system design.
instances, design engineers shall use a minimum time of
concentration of 10 minutes. For storm sewer design, a ten-year
to twenty-five-year storm frequency consistent with localized
circumstances should be considered as a minimum, unless special
circumstances are involved such as inadequate downstream
stormwater facilities, lack of positive overland relief, or evidence
of local flooding. In such special circumstances, design engineers
shall design facilities to accommodate, as a minimum, the following
storm frequencies:
(a) Ten-year storm for storm drain systems where excess flow can
continue downgrade in the street and not exceed the gutter
capacity. Also, ten-year storms shall be used at low points in
storm drain systems with overland relief.
(b) Twenty-five-year storm where flow in a storm drain is totally
carried by pipe when conditions under Subsection C(4)(a)
above do not apply.
(c) Twenty-five-year storm for culvert design where the culvert
will be located in streams shown as a blue line on the New
Jersey State Atlas or the United States Coast and Geodetic
survey maps. Culverts with an upstream drainage area of 50
acres or more shall be designed to accommodate a onehundred-
year frequency storm in accordance with Flood
Hazard Area Control Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.16.
(d) Twenty-five-year storms for open channels where the upstream
drainage area is less than 50 acres. When the upstream
drainage area is 50 acres or more, design engineers shall
design open channels to accommodate the one-hundred-year
storm, in accordance with Flood Hazard Area Control
Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.16.
(5) The size of the drainage area shall include on-site and off-site lands
contributing to the design point.
(6) Computer software adaptations of the Rational Method or the
S.C.S. TR-55 are acceptable, provided their data and graphic
printout allow review and evaluation.
D. Design engineers shall use a consistent method to calculate peak rate of
runoff and volume. If either TR-55, TR-20, or HEC-1 is used to calculate
peak rate of runoff, then the same method shall be used to determine
volume. If the Rational Method is used for peak flow calculations,
design engineers shall use the Modified Rational Method to calculate
peak volume to be used for basin routing. A maximum drainage area of
20 acres all be used for the Modified Rational Method.
§ 330-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-129
1:543
A. Design engineers shall determine pipe size based on design runoff,
conduit entrance conditions, and hydraulic capacity.
B. In general, no pipe size in the storm drainage system shall be less than
15 inches in diameter. Design engineers may use a twelve-inch
diameter pipe as a cross-drain to a single inlet. Design engineers shall
use the Manning equation to determine hydraulic capacity of pipes.
C. All discharge pipes shall terminate with an appropriate precast
concrete or flared-end section or concrete headwall with or without
wingwalls, as conditions require. Design engineers shall consider such
site conditions as slope, soil stability, vegetation, grade, and size of
conduit to determine whether or not to use wingwalls.
D. Materials used in the construction of storm sewers shall be constructed
of reinforced concrete, ductile iron, or corrugated polyethylene, or,
when approved by the Township Engineer, corrugated metal. The most
cost-effective materials shall be permitted that conform to local site
conditions and reflect the relevant operations, maintenance, and
system character of the municipal stormwater system. Specifications
referred to, such as ASTM or AWWA, etc., should be the latest revision
in effect at the time of application.
(1) The following apply to reinforced concrete pipe:
(a) Circular reinforced concrete pipe and fittings shall meet the
requirements of ASTM C76.
(b) Elliptical reinforced concrete pipe shall meet the requirements
of ASTM C507.
(c) Joint design and joint material for circular pipe shall conform
to ASTM C443.
(d) Joints for elliptical pipe shall be bell and spigot or tongue and
groove sealed with butyl, rubber tape, rubber ring gaskets, or
external sealing bands conforming to ASTM C877.
(e) All pipe shall be Class III, minimum unless loading conditions
call for stronger pipe (i.e., higher class).
(f) The minimum depth of cover over the concrete pipe shall be as
designated by the American Concrete Pipe Association that
follows:
(g) Minimum depth of cover standards for ductile iron and
corrugated polyethylene pipe shall conform to manufacturer
standards.
(2) Ductile iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast in metal or sand-lined
molds to ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51. The joints shall conform to
ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11. Pipe shall be furnished with flanges
where connections to flange fittings are required. Pipe should be
§ 330-129 VERNON CODE § 330-129
1:544
§ 330-130. Stormwater management system design.
Class 50 (minimum). The outside of the pipe should be coated with
a uniform thickness of hot applied coal-tar coating and the inside
lined with cement, in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4.
Ductile iron pipe shall be installed with Class C Ordinary Bedding,
unless soil conditions dictate otherwise.
(3) Corrugated polyethylene pipe shall be high density, smooth interior
pipe and shall conform to AASHTO M294, "Specifications for
Corrugated Pipe," twelve- to thirty-six-inch diameter. Materials
shall conform to ASTM D3350, "Standard Specification for
Polyethylene Plastics Pipe and Fittings Materials." Pipe joints and
fittings shall be compatible with the pipe material and shall
conform to the same standards and specifications as the pipe
material. Pipe couplers shall not cover less than one full
corrugation on each section of pipe. Installation shall be in
accordance with ASTM D2321, "Practice for Underground
Installation of Themoplastic Pipe for Sewers and Other Gravity-
Flow Applications." Backfill material shall be placed in six-inch lifts
and compacted to 95% minimum dry density, per AASHTO T99. In
areas of high groundwater tables, design engineers shall check for
flotation.
(4) Corrugated metal pipe, when approved by the Municipal Engineer,
shall meet the requirements and be installed in the manner
specified in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21.
E. Pipe bedding and backfill shall be provided as specified in Design and
Construction of Urban Stormwater Management Systems, ASCE
Manuals and Reports of Engineering Practice No. 77, 1993,
incorporated herein by reference. Bedding and backfill for any pipe
material not covered by this manual shall be installed in accordance
with manufacturer's recommendations. The Township Engineer may
require the developer to provide professional certification as to the
suitability of backfill material and where such suitability does not exist,
any modifications needed to use on-site material and the appropriate
methods to install this material. The Township and/or utility engineer
shall rely on this certification.
F. Maintenance easements shall be provided around stormwater facilities
located outside of the public right-of-way. The size of the easement shall
be dictated by working needs.
A. Design engineers shall design inlets, catch basins, and manholes in
accordance with the New Jersey Department of Transportation's
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (1989).
Design engineers shall use bicycle-safe grates. For Type A inlets, they
should use a frame and single grate. Type B inlets require a frame,
grate, and curb-type inlet with back piece. Type E inlets require a frame
and double grate.
§ 330-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-130
1:545
§ 330-131. Stormwater detention facilities.
B. Inlet spacing depends on the inlet capacity. Maximum distance between
inlets is 400 feet. The maximum capacity of a curb inlet shall be six
cubic feet per second. Area inlets in parking lots should be limited to
three cubic feet per second.
C. Manholes shall be precast concrete or concrete block coated with two
coats of portland cement mortar outside the manhole. Masonry brick
may be used to make vertical adjustment to rims, as long as the
adjustments are 12 inches or less. In acidic soils, all manholes shall
have two coats of black bitumastic waterproofing applied per
manufacturer's instruction.
D. If precast manhole barrels and cones are used, they shall conform to
ASTM Specification C478, with round rubber gasketed joints,
conforming to ASTM Specification C923. Both ASTM specifications are
incorporated herein by reference. Maximum absorption shall be 8% in
accordance with ASTM Specification C 478, Method A.
E. If precast manholes are used, the top riser section shall terminate less
than one foot below the finished grade, and the manhole cover shall be
flush with the finished grade.
F. Manhole frames and covers shall be of cast iron, conforming to ASTM
Specification A48, Class 30 incorporated herein by reference, and be
suitable for H-20 loading capacity. Manhole covers in remote locations
may have a locking device.
G. Outlet grates, fences and other safety features for stormwater
management facilities shall conform with New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection's Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:8. Safety requirements for detention basin and other stormwater
facilities are incorporated in N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.5(f)7.
H. The channel should be, insofar as possible, a smooth continuation of the
pipe. The pipe may be laid through the manhole and top half removed
by saw cut. The completed channel should be U-shaped. The channel
height shall be 3/4 of the diameter of the pipe. The bench should
provide good footing for a workman and a place where minor tools and
equipment can be laid. It must have a slope of 4% to 8%.
A. Development shall use the best available technology to accommodate
stormwater management by natural drainage strategies where possible
and practicable. Detention facilities, when required or selected, shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained according to the following
standards.
B. Design engineers shall coordinate structural detention requirements
with nonstructural practices, such as cluster land use development,
open space acquisition, stream encroachment and flood hazard
controls.
§ 330-130 VERNON CODE § 330-131
1:546
C. Detention and all other stormwater facilities shall conform to the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's Stormwater
Management Rules, at N.J.A.C. 7:8-3.4. Design engineers shall also
adhere to, when applicable, the stormwater design requirements in the
following rules:
(1) Dam Safety Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:20;
(2) Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Standards, N.J.A.C. 2:90-1;
(3) Flood Hazard Area Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:13-1.1;
(4) Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A.
D. Where detention facilities are deemed necessary, they shall
accommodate site runoff generated from two-year, ten-year, and onehundred-
year storms as routed to the basin, considered individually,
unless the detention basin is classified as a dam, in which case the
facility also must comply with the Dam Safety Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:20.
(1) These design storms shall be defined as either a twenty-four-hour
storm using Type III rainfall distribution when using US Soil
Conservation Service procedures (such as TR-20 or TR-55 tabular
method), or the design storm resulting in the greatest storage
volume to achieve the required outflow using a design method such
as the Modified Rational Method. Runoff greater than that
occurring from the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm will
be passed over an emergency spillway.
(a) A map of approximate geographic boundaries for SCS rainfall
distributions presented on page B-2 of the June 1986 Edition of
TR-55 shows all of New Jersey in the Type III region. Although
the May 1982 version of TR-20 does not include a standard
SCS twenty-four-hour, cumulative Type III distribution rainfall
table like it does for Type I, IA and II, there is a version
(Version 2.04 TEST) of the program available from the SCS
which does. The Type III distribution also can be manually
added to a TR-20 model by using a RAINFL table.
(2) Detention facilities shall be designed to accommodate runoff from
the development of the site for the one-, ten- and one-hundred-year
storm events so that predevelopment peak flow rates that impact
on down stream properties, watercourses, and/or drainage systems
are not increased.
(3) If there is not a regional stormwater plan, then the design engineer
shall design detention facilities such that the post-project
construction peak runoff for the two-year storm event is 50% of the
pre-project construction peak runoff rate. The post-project
construction peak runoff rates for the ten- and one-hundred-year
storm events shall be 75% and 80%, respectively, of the pre-project
construction peak runoff rates. It should be noted that these
§ 330-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-131
1:547
percentages only apply to the portion of the post-project runoff
from the site under development. Off-site runoff may be computed
at 100% of the pre-project rate.
(4) If a Phase II stormwater management plan for the region or
watershed exists, consistent with stormwater rules administered
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
N.J.A.C. 7:8, then the design engineer may design stormwater
management systems to conform to that plan. For some parts of the
watershed, this may mean a detention basin is unnecessary.
(5) If the development site is not part of a Phase II regional or
watershed stormwater management plan, then the design engineer
may model the watershed, consistent with regulations
administered by the Department of Environmental Protection, and
design stormwater management facilities to conform to that plan.
This analysis shall include impacts of existing development and all
potential future development in the drainage area. For some parts
of the watershed, this may mean detention is unnecessary.
E. Design engineers shall locate detention facilities (either "wet" or "dry")
so as not to interfere or adversely affect existing surface waters on the
site or adjacent to the site. Excavation for detention facilities shall be
designed to be the maximum practical distance above seasonally high
groundwater elevation. In the case of wet detention facilities, storage
may only be presumed to be available above the elevation of the
seasonal high groundwater. If the facility is designed as an infiltration
basin, the bottom of the basin shall be a minimum of two feet above the
elevation of the seasonally high water table.
F. The following list of general structural criteria shall be used to design
stormwater detention basins:
(1) Detention components: principal basin control structure (quantity
control), as follows:
(a) Principal basin control structures will consist of orifice and/or
weir control devices. Design engineers shall design orifices
based upon the following equation:
Q = C A (2gH)0.5
Where
Q = The flow rate in cubic feet per second
C = 0.6 (The orifice flow coefficient "C" may vary,
depending on entrance conditions. Design
engineers may also use other coefficients with
appropriate references.)
A = Cross section area of flow in square feet
§ 330-131 VERNON CODE § 330-131
1:548
H = The vertical distance in feet between the center
of the orifice and the water surface
2g = 64.4 feet per second
To minimize the chance of clogging, orifices intended solely
for runoff quantity control will be at least six inches in
diameter (or its equivalent). All joints are to be watertight. In
addition, trash racks and/or anti-vortex devices shall be
required. When weirs are used alone or in conjunction with
orifices, design engineers shall use the following equation:
Q = CwL(h)3/2
Where
Q = The flow rate in cubic feet per second
Cw = 3.2 (design engineers may use other
coefficients with appropriate references)
L = Length of the weir in feet
H = The vertical distance in feet between water
surface and elevation and the crest of the weir
All weirs shall be constructed as part of a reinforced concrete
structure with appropriate grates.
(b) Eight-inch thick, antiseep collars are to be installed along
outlet pipes. Reinforcement steel shall be No. 5 bars at 12
inches both ways, with two inches of cover on both faces
(minimum).
(c) Where necessary for stability of the outlet pipe, a concrete
cradle shall be provided.
(d) All principal basin control structures shall be precast or
reinforced concrete. All joints are to be watertight.
(e) Suitable lining shall be placed upstream and downstream of
principal basin control structures, as necessary, to prevent
scour and erosion. Such lining shall conform to Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90,
promulgated by the NJ State Soil Conservation Committee.
(2) Detention components; emergency spillways, as follows:
(a) Vegetated emergency spillways shall have side slopes not
exceeding three horizontal to one vertical.
(b) Maximum velocities in emergency spillways shall be checked
based on the velocity of the peak flow in the spillway resulting
from the routed emergency spillway hydrograph. The design of
the emergency spillway will be based on the one-hundred-year
inflow to the basin, except for Class IV dams, which shall
§ 330-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-131
1:549
comply with the Dam Safety Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:20. The
design of the emergency spillway assumes the principal
spillway is malfunctioning and will not allow any discharge
or flow. Where maximum velocities exceed those contained in
Table 7.5 in N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.5, suitable lining shall be provided.
(c) Where maximum velocities exceed the allowable velocities for
soil stability as determined in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90,
promulgated by the NJ State Soil Conservation Committee,
suitable lining should be provided. Design engineers also may
check maximum velocities in emergency spillways based on
the velocity of the peak flow in the spillway resulting from the
routed emergency spillway hydrograph. Where maximum
velocities exceed those contained in Table 7.5 in N.J.A.C.
5:21-7.5, suitable lining shall be provided. Linings shall meet
specifications required in Hydraulic Engineering Circular No.
15 - Design of Stable Channels with Flexible Linings, published
by the US Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration or Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90, promulgated by the State
Soil Conservation Committee, New Jersey Department of
Agriculture.
(3) Detention components; dams, as follows:
(a) "Dam" refers to any artificial dike, levee, or other barrier with
appurtenant work that is constructed to impound water on a
permanent or temporary basis and raises the water level five
feet or more above the usual, mean, low-water height when
measured from the downstream toe-of-dam to the emergency
spillway crest, or, in the absence of an emergency spillway, the
top of the dam.
(b) Design engineers shall design all dams in accordance with
Dam Safety Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:20, administered by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(4) Detention basin berms and embankment ponds, as follows:
(a) A detention basin berm is a water impoundment made by
either constructing an embankment (a facility referred to as an
"embankment pond") or excavating a pit or dugout that does
not qualify as a dam. Detention basin berms constructed by the
second method are referred to as "excavated ponds."
(b) Site conditions shall be such that runoff from the design storm
can safely pass through; a natural or constructed emergency
spillway designed to accept the entire one-hundred-year flow;
a combination of a principal spillway and the emergency
spillway designed to ensure passage of the one-hundred-year
flow when either the principal spillway and/or the emergency
§ 330-131 VERNON CODE § 330-131
1:550
spillway flows are impeded by debris; or a principal spillway
designed so as to allow it to continue to function reliably,
passing the one-hundred-year flow, when impeded by debris.
[1] Drainage area of the pond shall be protected against
erosion so that expected sediment does not shorten the
planned effectiveness of the structure.
[2] When necessary, embankment ponds shall have foundation
cutoff walls of relatively impervious material under the
berm. The cutoff walls shall extend up to abutments as
required and be deep enough to extend into a relatively
impervious layer, or provide for a stable structure when
combined with seepage control. The cutoff trench shall
have a bottom width adequate to accommodate the
equipment used for excavation, backfill and compaction
operations. Cutoff wall side slopes shall not be steeper
than one horizontal to one vertical. The cutoff walls shall
extend up to the normal water line, and the minimum
depth shall be at least three feet.
[3] Design engineers shall include seepage controls if
previous layers are not intercepted by the cutoff, seepage
creates swamping downstream, such control is needed to
insure a stable embankment, or special problems may
require drainage for a stable berm. Seepage may be
controlled by foundation, abutment, or embankment
drains; reservoir blanketing; or a combination of these
measures.
[4] The minimum top width for a berm shall be six feet. The
minimum top width of dams should be 10 feet.
[5] All slopes must be designed to be stable. If needed to
protect the slopes of the berm, special measures such as
rock riprap, sand gravel, fabrics, geofabrics,
geomembranes, or special vegetation shall be provided as
specified by the standards in Guide for Design and Layout
of Vegetative Wave Protection for Earth Dam
Embankments, Technical Release No. 56 and Riprap for
Slope Protection Against Wave Action, Technical Release
No. 69. Both reports are published by the US Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, and are
incorporated herein by reference.
[6] The minimum elevation of the top of the settled
embankment shall be one foot above the water surface in
the detention basin, with the emergency spillway flowing
at the design depth. The minimum difference in elevation
between the crest of the emergency spillway and the
settled top width of the structure shall be two feet for all
§ 330-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-131
1:551
berms having more than a twenty-acre drainage area or
more than 20 feet in effective height. Design engineers
shall increase the design height of the structure by the
amount needed to insure that after settlement the height
of the berms equals or exceeds the design height. This
increase shall not be less than 5%, except where detailed
soil testing and laboratory analysis shows that a lesser
amount is adequate.
[7] Design engineers shall place a pipe conduit with needed
appurtenances under or through the berm except where
rock, concrete, or other types of mechanical spillways are
used or where the rate and duration of flow can be safely
handled by vegetated or earth spillway.
(c) The design elevation of the top of all embankments and berms
shall be one foot or greater than the maximum water surface
elevation in the basin, when stormwater from the one-hundredyear
flood passes over the emergency spillway. The "design
height," defined as the vertical distance from the top to the
bottom of the deepest cut, shall be constructed to insure that
the top elevation will be maintained following all settlement.
[1] When the design discharge of the principal spillway is
considered in calculating peak outflow through the
emergency spillway, the crest elevation of the inlet shall be
such that the full flow will be generated in the conduit
before there is discharge through the emergency spillway.
The inlets and outlets of the principal spillway shall be
designed to function satisfactorily for the full range of flow
and hydraulic head anticipated. The capacity of the pipe
conduit shall be adequate to discharge long-duration,
continuous or frequent flows without flow through the
emergency spillways. The pipe diameter shall be no less
than six inches. If the pipe conduit diameter is larger than
10 inches, its design discharge may be considered when
calculating the peak outflow rate through the emergency
spillway.
[2] Pipe conduits under or through the berm shall be capable
of withstanding external loading without yielding,
buckling, or cracking. Flexible pipe strength shall not be
less than that necessary to support the design load with
the maximum of 5% deflection. The inlets and outlets shall
be structurally sound and made of materials compatible
with those of pipe. All pipe joints shall be made watertight
by the use of couplings, gaskets, or caulking.
(d) Acceptable pipe materials are corrugated polythylene,
reinforced concrete, and ductile iron. When necessary for
stability, concrete and ductile pipe shall be laid in a concrete
§ 330-131 VERNON CODE § 330-131
1:552
bedding. Corrugated polythylene pipe exposed to direct
sunlight shall be made of ultraviolet-resistant materials and
protected by coating or shielding, or provisions for
replacement should be made as necessary. Connections of
corrugated polythylene pipe to less flexible pipe or structure
must be designed to avoid stress concentrations that could
rupture the plastic.
[1] Design engineers shall follow specifications in Table 7.6 in
N.J.A.C. 5:21-7 for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
[2] Design engineers shall provide for seepage control if the
conduit is of smooth pipe larger than eight inches in
diameter.
(e) Seepage control along pipes extending through embankments
shall be controlled by use of a filter and drainage diaphragm,
unless it is determined that antiseep collars will adequately
serve the purpose.
[1] The drain is to consist of sand meeting fine concrete
aggregate requirements (at least 15% passing through the
No. 40 sieve, but no more than 10% passing through the
No. 100 sieve). If unusual soil conditions exist, design
engineers shall make a special design analysis. The drain
shall be a minimum of two feet thick and extend vertically
upward and horizontally at least three times to the pipe
diameter, and vertically downward at least 18 inches
beneath the conduit invert. The drain diaphragm shall be
located approximately parallel to the center line of the
embankment. The drain shall be outletted at the
embankment downstream toe, preferably using a drain
backfill envelope continuously along the pipe where it
exists in the embankment. Protecting drain fill from the
surface erosion will be necessary.
[2] When antiseep collars are used in lieu of a drainage
diaphragm, they shall have a watertight connection to the
pipe. Maximum spacing shall be approximately 14 times
the minimum projection of the collar measured
perpendicular to the pipe. Collar material shall be
compatible with the pipe materials. The antiseep collar(s)
shall increase by 15% the seepage path along the pipe.
When the antiseep collars are used in lieu of a drainage
diaphragm, the design engineers shall use the following
criteria to determine the size and number of antiseep
collars:
§ 330-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-131
1:553
Let V = Vertical projection and minimum horizontal
projection of the antiseep collar in feet.
Let L = Length in feet of the conduit within the zone
of saturation, measured from the
downstream side of the riser to the toe
drain or point where the phraetic line
intercepts the conduit, whichever is shorter.
Let n = Number of antiseep collars.
The ratio of the length of the seepage (L + 2nV) is to be
at least 1.15. Antiseep collars should be equally spaced
along part of the barrel within the saturated zone at
distances of not more than 25 feet.
(f) Closed circuit spillways designed for pressure flow must have
adequate antivortex devices. To prevent clogging of the
conduit, an appropriate trash guard shall be installed at the
inlet or rise.
(g) Emergency spillways convey the design flow safely past earth
embankments when the principal or auxiliary spillway is
disabled. Design engineers shall provide for an emergency
spillway for each basin.
[1] Emergency spillways shall provide for passage of the
design flow at a safe velocity to a point downstream where
the berm will not be endangered. The maximum
permissible velocity in the exit channel shall be four feet
per second, where only sparse vegetative cover can be
expected; where excellent vegetative cover and a vigorous
sod can be expected and maintained, the maximum
permissible velocity is six feet per second.
[2] If chutes or drops are used for the principal or emergency
spillways, they shall be designed according to standards in
the US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service's Engineering Manual for Conservation Practices
(1984), or the US Department of Agriculture's National
Engineering Handbook, Section 5, Hydraulics; Section 11,
Drop Spillways; and Section 14, Chute Spillways;
incorporated herein by reference. The minimum capacity
of a structural spillway shall be that required to pass the
peak flow expected from the design storm.
(h) For excavated basin, provisions shall be made where needed
for a principal spillway, emergency spillway, and embankment
in accordance with the embankment and berm criteria
described in this section.
§ 330-131 VERNON CODE § 330-131
1:554
[1] Where soil conditions and safe maintenance practices
allow, side slopes of the excavated basin shall be stable
and no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
(i) The material placed in the fill shall be free of detrimental
amounts of sod, roots, frozen soil, stones more than six inches
in diameter (except rock fills), and other objectionable
material.
[1] Drainfill shall be kept from being contaminated by
adjacent soil materials during placement by either placing
it in a cleanly excavated trench, or by keeping the drain a
least one foot above the adjacent earthfill.
[2] Selected drainfill and backfill material shall be placed
around structure, pipe conduits, and antiseep collars at
about the same rate on all sides to prevent damage from
unequal loading. Fill material shall be placed and spread
beginning at the lowest point in the foundation and then
bringing it up in continuous horizontal layers thick enough
that the required compaction can be obtained. The fill shall
be constructed in continuous horizontal layers. If openings
or sectionalized fills are required, the slope of the bonding
surfaces between the embankment in place and the
embankment to be placed shall not be steeper than the
ratio of three horizontal to one vertical. The bonding
surface shall be treated the same as that specified for the
foundation to insure a good bond with the new fill.
[3] The distribution and gradation of materials shall be such
that no lenses, pockets, streaks, or layers of material shall
differ substantially in texture of gradation from the
surrounding material. If it is necessary to use materials of
varying texture and gradation, the more impervious
material shall be placed in the center and up stream parts
of the fill. If the zoned fills of substantially differing
materials are specified, the zones shall be placed
according to lines and grades shown on the drawings. The
complete work shall conform to the lines, grades and
elevations shown in the drawings or as staked in the field.
[4] The moisture content of the fill material shall be adequate
for obtaining the required compaction. Material that is too
wet shall be dried to meet this requirement, and material
that is too dry shall be wetted and mixed until the
requirement is met. Construction equipment shall be
operated over each layer of fill to insure that the required
compaction is obtained. Special equipment shall be used if
needed to obtain the required compaction. If a minimum
required density is specified, each layer of fill shall be
compacted as necessary to obtain that density.
§ 330-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-131
1:555
[5] Fill adjacent to structures, pipe conduits, and drainfill or
antiseep collars shall be compacted to a density equivalent
to that of the surrounding fill by hand tamping or by using
manually directed power tampers or plate vibrators. Fill
adjacent to concrete structures shall not be compacted
until the concrete has had time to gain enough strength to
support the load.
(j) All permanent and temporary stabilization shall be applied
pursuant to the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.
(k) In a principal spillway, pipe materials shall conform to the
appropriate specifications. Antiseep collars shall be made of
materials compatible with that of the pipe and shall be
installed according to the manufacturer's instructions. It may
be firmly and uniformly bedded throughout its length, and shall
be installed to the line and grade shown on the drawings.
(l) The mix design and testing of concrete shall be consistent with
the size requirements of the job. Mix requirements or
necessary strength shall be specified. The type of cement, air
entrainment, slump, aggregate, or other properties shall be
specified as necessary. All concrete is to consist of a workable
mix that can be placed and finished in an acceptable manner.
Necessary curing shall be specified. Reinforcing steel shall be
placed as indicated on the plans and shall be held securely in
place during concrete placement. Subgrades and forms shall
be installed to line and grade, and the forms shall be mortar
tight and unyielding as the concrete is placed.
(m) Foundation and embankment drains, if required, shall be
placed to the line and grade shown on the drawings. Detailed
requirements for drain material and any required pipe shall be
shown in the drawing and specifications for the job.
(n) Concerning excavated basins, the compacted excavation shall
conform to the lines, grades and elevations shown on the
drawing or as staked in the field.
(o) Concerning embankment and excavated berms, construction
operations shall be carried out so that erosion and air and
water pollution are minimized, and held within legal limits. All
work shall be conducted in a skillful manner. The completed
job shall present a workmanlike appearance.
[1] Measures and construction methods that enhance fish and
wildlife values shall be incorporated as needed and
practical. Ground cover to control erosion shall be
established as needed and practical. Fencing shall be
provided as needed.
§ 330-131 VERNON CODE § 330-131
1:556
(5) Detention facilities in flood hazard areas, as follows:
(a) Detention development must comply with all applicable
regulations under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:16A-50 et seq.
(6) The following safety provisions shall apply to stormwater
management basins and parts thereof:
(a) Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet from
the stormwater management basin if the intake has a diameter
of 12 inches or greater.
(b) Trash racks shall be designed to have parallel bars with no
greater than six-inch spacing. The spacing shall be designed so
as not to adversely affect the hydraulic performance of the
outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) Any outlet structure with an overflow grate must have the
grate secured but removable for emergencies and
maintenance. Grate spacing shall be no greater than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
(e) Trash racks and overflow grates shall be constructed and
installed to be rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant and shall
be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
lbs/ft. sq.
(f) Every outlet structure of a basin shall have escape provisions
in or on the structure. Freestanding outlet structures may be
excluded at the discretion of the approving authority.
(g) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
retention basins with a permanent pool of water deeper than
2 1/2 feet. Ledges shall be comprised of two steps, each four to
six feet in width, one located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second located 1 1/2 feet
above the permanent water surface.
(h) In new stormwater management basins, maximum interior
slopes for earthen dams, embankments, or berms shall not
exceed three horizontal to one vertical.
(i) Municipalities or other specified agencies may grant a
variance or exception from these safety standards if they
determine in writing that such variance or exception will not
constitute a threat to the public safety.
§ 330-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-131
1:557
§ 330-132. Stormwater management water quality.
(7) Stormwater management facilities shall be regularly maintained to
insure they function at design capacity and to prevent health
hazards associated with debris buildup and stagnant water.
(a) Maintenance and upkeep responsibility depend on ownership
of the facilities. If the drains, basins, and/or other features of
the stormwater system in the residential development are part
of a public drainage system, then the Township or an
appropriate public entity is responsible for maintenance and
upkeep. If part or all of the residential stormwater
management system is privately owned, then the privately
owned portion of the system must be privately maintained,
unless the municipality or other appropriate public agency
agrees to assume responsibility for the facilities. The terms of
the agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the Municipal
Attorney and may include but are not limited to maintenance
easements, personal guaranties, deed restrictions, covenants
and bonds.
(b) In cases where there is common ownership of property that is
not part of a public-owned drainage system, a homeowners'
association or similar permanent entity may be established as
the agent responsible for upkeep, absent an agreement with
the Township or other appropriate public entity.
A. In addition to addressing water quantity generated by development, a
stormwater management system shall also prevent, to the greatest
extent feasible, an increase in nonpoint pollution.
B. Stormwater management shall provide for the control of a water quality
design storm. The "water quality design storm" shall be defined as the
one-year frequency S.C.S. Type III, twenty-four-hour storm of 1.25
inches of rain falling uniformly in two hours.
(1) In dry detention basins, provisions shall be made to ensure that the
runoff from the water quality design storm is retained, such that
not more than 90% will be evacuated prior to 18 hours. The
retention time shall be considered a brim-drawdown time and
therefore shall begin at the time of peak storage. The retention
time shall be reduced in any case that would require an outlet size
diameter of three inches or less. Therefore, three-inch-diameter
orifices shall be the minimum allowed. This minimum is only for
water quality outlets. If this minimum outlet sizes does not allow
for the detention times required, then additional techniques shall
be used to remove total suspended solids.
(2) In permanent ponds or wet basins, the water quality requirements
of these rules shall be satisfied where the volume of permanent
§ 330-131 VERNON CODE § 330-132
1:558
water is at least three times the volume of runoff produced by the
water quality design storm.
(3) Infiltration practices such as dry wells, infiltration basins,
infiltration trenches, buffer strips, etc., may be used to satisfy this
requirement, provided they produce zero runoff from the water
quality design storm and allow for complete infiltration within 72
hours.
(4) Suitable best management practices can be found in the following
documents:
(a) New Jersey Stormwater Quantity/Quality Management
Manual, State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental
Protection, February 1981.
(b) Stormwater and Nonpoint Source Pollution Control, Best
Management Practices Manual, State of New Jersey,
Department of Environmental Protection, Office of Land and
Water Planning.
(c) Technical Manual for Land Use Regulation Program, Bureaus
of Inland and Coastal Regulations, Stream Encroachment
Permits, Revised September 1995, State of New Jersey,
Department of Environmental Protection.
(d) Ocean County Demonstration Study, Stormwater Management
Facilities Maintenance Manual, June 1989, State of New Jersey,
Department of Environmental protection, Office of Land and
Water Planning.
(e) Any Phase II regional stormwater management plan.
§ 330-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-132
1:559

ARTICLE IX
Off-Tract Improvements; Guaranties, Deposits and Fees
§ 330-133. Off-tract improvements.
A. Purpose. This section is intended to ensure a pro rata share allocation
of the costs for off-tract improvements necessitated by new
development.
B. Definitions and principles. As a condition of subdivision or site plan
approval, the Planning Board may require an applicant to pay his/her
pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary
circulation improvements, and water, sewerage, and drainage facilities,
including land and easements, located off-tract of the property limits of
the subdivision or development but necessitated or required by the
development. "Necessary" improvements are those clearly, directly, and
substantially related to the development in question. The Planning
Board shall provide in its resolution of approval the basis of the
required improvements. The capacity and design of proposed
improvements shall be based upon the circulation plan element and
utility service plan element of the adopted Master Plan. The
proportionate or pro rata amount of the cost of such facilities within a
related or common area shall be based on the following criteria.
C. Cost allocation.
(1) Full allocation. In cases where off-tract improvements are
necessitated by the proposed development, and where no other
property owner(s) receive(s) a special benefit thereby, the
applicant may be required, at his sole expense and as a condition of
approval, to provide and install such improvements.
(2) Proportionate allocation.
(a) Where it is determined that properties outside the
development will also be benefitted by the off-tract
improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized in
determining the proportionate share of the cost of such
improvements to the developer.
(b) Allocation formula.
[1] Sanitary sewers. The applicant's proportionate share of
distribution facilities, including the installation, relocation
or replacement of collector, trunk and interceptor sewers,
and appurtenances associated therewith, shall be
computed as follows:
[a] The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer
system shall be based on the standards specified in
Article VI and/or Article VIII of this chapter;
§ 330-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-133
1:561
[b] The Board or Township Engineer shall provide the
applicant with the existing and reasonably anticipated
peak hour flows as well as capacity limits of the
affected sewer system;
[c] If the existing system does not have adequate capacity
to accommodate the applicant's flow given existing
and reasonably anticipated peak hour flows, the pro
rata share shall be computed as follows:
Total cost of
enlargement
or improvement
cost
Developer's cost
=
Capacity of enlargement
or improvement
(gallons per day-gpd)
Development-generated
gallons per day to be
accommodated by the
enlargement or improvement
[2] Water supply. The applicant's proportionate share of water
distribution facilities, including the installation, relocation,
or replacement of water mains, hydrants, valves and
appurtenances associated therewith, shall be computed as
follows:
[a] The capacity and the design of the water supply
system shall be based on the standards specified in
Article VI and/or Article VIII of this chapter;
[b] The Board or Township Engineer shall provide the
applicant with the existing and reasonably anticipated
capacity limits of the affected water supply system in
terms of average demand, peak demand, and fire
demand;
[c] If the existing system does not have adequate capacity
as defined above to accommodate the applicant's
needs, the pro rata share shall be computed as
follows:
Total cost of
enlargement
or improvement
cost
Developer's cost
=
Capacity of enlargement
or improvement
(gallons per day-gpd)
Development-generated
gallons per day to be
accommodated by the
enlargement or improvement
§ 330-133 VERNON CODE § 330-133
1:562
[3] Roadways. The applicant's proportionate share of street
improvements, alignment, channelization, barriers, new or
improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks,
trees, utility improvements uncovered elsewhere; the
construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets,
and other associated street or traffic improvements shall
be as follows:
[a] The Board or Township Engineer shall provide the
applicant with the existing and reasonably anticipated
future peak hour-flows for the off-tract improvement;
[b] The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed offtract
improvement which shall include the estimated
peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed
development and the proportion thereof which is to be
accommodated by the proposed off-tract
improvement. The ratio of the peak hour traffic
generated by the proposed development which is to be
accommodated by the off-tract improvement to the
future additional peak-hour traffic anticipated to
impact the proposed off-tract improvement shall form
the basis of the proportionate share. The
proportionate share shall be computed as follows:
Total cost of
enlargement
or improvement
cost
Developer's cost
=
Capacity of enlargement
or improvement
(peak-hour traffic)
Development peak-hour traffic
to be accommodated by the
enlargement or improvement
[4] Drainage improvements. The applicant's proportionate
share of stormwater and drainage improvements,
including the installation, relocation or replacement of
storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap,
improved drainage ditches and appurtenances thereto,
and relocation or replacement of other storm drainage
facilities or appurtenances associated therewith, shall be
determined as follows:
[a] The capacity and the design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on the
standards specified in Article VI and/or Article VIII of
this chapter, computed by the developer's engineer
and approved by the Board or Township Engineer.
[b] The capacity of the enlarged, extended, or improved
system required for the subdivision and areas outside
§ 330-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-133
1:563
of the developer's tributary to the drainage system
shall be determined by the developer's engineer
subject to approval of the Board or Township
Engineer. The plans for the improved system shall
be prepared by the developer's engineer and the
estimated cost of the enlarged system calculated by
the Board or Township Engineer. The prorated share
for the proposed improvement shall be computed as
follows:
Total cost of
enlargement
or improvement
cost
Developer's cost
=
Capacity of enlargement
or improvement
(total capacity expressed
in cubic feet per second)
Development-generated peak
rate of runoff expressed in
cubic feet per second to be
accommodated by the
enlargement or improvement
[5] Town Center roadways. In addition to any other municipal
roadway improvement for which contribution may be
required by § 330-133C(2)(b)[3], certain developments
shall be responsible for a contribution to anticipated
municipal roadway improvements in the Town Center. The
criteria for a establishing the amount of contribution shall
be as follows: [Added 8-26-2002 by Ord. No. 02-28]
[a] All development on properties located within the
following zone districts: the entire Town Center (TC);
that portion of Office Professional (C-3) adjacent to
Route 94; that portion of Commercial Recreation (CR)
adjacent to Route 94; and that portion of General
Business/Shopping Center (C-2) adjacent to and north
of Route 94, as shown on the attached map entitled
"Portion of Zone Map Showing Town Center Traffic
Control Improvement Area," shall be required to make
a pro rata contribution to Town Center improvements
to be determined by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, at the time
of either general development plan, preliminary or
final approval of an application for development. The
MSCD Overlay Zone created by Ordinance No. 03-18
shall remain in full force and effect. [Amended
6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 03-18; 9-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-35]
§ 330-133 VERNON CODE § 330-133
1:564
[b] Pro rata shares. [Amended 6-9-2003 by Ord. No.
03-18]
[i] The pro rata share shall be calculated based upon
dollars per estimated vehicle trip, by taking the
Township's total construction cost (estimated at
the time of the adoption of this ordinance to be
$2,470,000), as may be adjusted from time to
time, divided by the total increase in future
volumes expressed in vehicle trips (estimated at
the time of the adoption of this ordinance to be
1,944 trips), as may be adjusted from time to time.
The computed dollars for estimated vehicle trip
shall be multiplied by the additional maximum
peak hour trips of the proposed development, and
then further multiplied by a factor of 60% or
100%. The 100% factor shall be applied to all
development on properties adjacent to the
contemplated Town Center roads, and the 60%
factor shall be applied to all other contributing
development. The formula shall be:
(Township's total
construction cost)
(Total increase in
traffic volumes)
= (Dollars per vehicle trip)
(Dollars per
vehicle trip)
x
(Additional
maximum peak
hour trips of
generator)
x (60% or 100%) =
(Amount of
contribution)
[ii] Schedule F, Vernon Town Center Main Street Core
District, Fair Share Contribution, is incorporated
herein and attached hereto.77 The pro rata shares
as shown shall apply only in the Vernon Town
Center Main Street Core District (MSCD). In the
MSCD the developer shall pay his pro rata share
based on the square footage cost rates for the
respective land use proposed as listed in Schedule
F, Item C. The Township Engineer shall make
recommendations to the governing body with
reference to any adjustments to be made in the
estimates of land use areas or traffic rates in
77.Editor's Note: Schedule F is on file in the Township offices.
§ 330-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-133
1:565
Schedule F, from time to time, which estimates
may be amended by resolution of the governing
body. Any such resolution shall be provided to the
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, and
any subsequent application for development on
properties which are subject to this provision.
[c] The initial estimates of construction cost and traffic
volumes are as appears in Schedule E incorporated
herein and attached hereto.78 The Township Engineer
shall make recommendations to the governing body
with reference to any adjustments to be made in the
estimates, from time to time, which estimates may be
amended by resolution of the governing body. Any
such resolution shall be provided to the Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, and any
subsequent applicant for development on properties
which are subject to this provision.
[d] The peak hour trips of the contributing development
shall be determined by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be. The total
number of trips per maximum peak hour shall be
determined by the use of the most current Trip
Generation Manual of the Institute of Traffic
Engineers (ITE), or successor study, and shall be
based on the weekday p.m. peak hour period. In the
event the ITE does not provide adequate information
on the proposed use, the Board may determine the
appropriate volume of traffic to be generated based
upon any competent information provided at the
hearing on the development application.
[e] Payment of the contribution shall be made prior to the
issuance of a construction permit. In the event the
development is to be constructed in stages, or involves
multiple buildings, the contribution shall be paid
proportionately prior to the issuance of each
construction permit.
D. Escrow accounts. Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be
undertaken at some future date, the monies required for the
improvement shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account to the
credit of the municipality in a separate account until such time as the
improvement is constructed.
78.Editor's Note: Schedule E, Estimated Total Municipal Construction Costs of Town Center
Roadway Improvements, and Estimated Total Increase in Future Traffic Volumes, is
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 330-133 VERNON CODE § 330-134
1:566
§ 330-134. Performance guaranty.
Before recording of a final subdivision plat, or as a condition of final
site plan approval, or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, the Board may require and shall accept,
for the purpose of assuring the installation of on-tract improvements, a
performance guaranty in accordance with § 330-57A(1) and subject to
§ 330-59.
§ 330-135. Maintenance guaranty.
Before recording of a final subdivision plat, or as a condition of final
site plan approval, or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, the Board may require and shall accept,
for the purpose of assuring the installation of on-tract improvements, a
maintenance guaranty in accordance with § 330-57A(2). The form and
amount of such guaranty shall be subject to the provisions of § 330-58.
§ 330-136. Restoration guaranty.
The Board and governing body may require a guaranty in the nature of a
restoration bond, or letter of credit for restoration purposes, in favor of the
Township, in an amount not to exceed 120% of the estimated cost of site
or tract restoration, to be determined by the Township Engineer, to assure
that a tract or site which has been disturbed is thereafter restored to its
original condition if and when a developer fails to perform the approved
development and when the governing body determines that the public
interest favors restoration of the tract or site rather than performance of
the development.
§ 330-137. Inspection fees.
Inspection fees attributable to the services of the Township Engineer in
connection with the provisions of §§ 330-134 through 330-136 and 330-57
shall be paid pursuant to and in accordance with § 330-57H. Inspection
fees attributable to the services of the Board Engineer for inspection of
improvements within the contemplation of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2 shall be
paid pursuant to and in accordance with § 330-139.
§ 330-138. Deposits; escrow; interest.
Whenever an amount of money in excess of $5,000 shall be deposited by
the applicant with the Township for professional services employed by the
Township to review applications for development, for municipal inspection
fees in accordance with Subsection h of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 or to satisfy the
guaranty requirements of Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, the money,
until repaid or applied to the purposes for which it is deposited, including
the applicant's portion of the interest earned thereon, except as otherwise
provided in this section shall continue to be the property of the applicant
and shall be held in trust by the Township. Money deposited shall be held
in escrow. The Township receiving the money shall deposit it in a banking
§ 330-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-138
1:567
institution or savings and loan association in this state insured by an agency
of the federal government, or in any other fund or depository approved for
such deposits by the state, in an account bearing interest at the minimum
rate currently paid by the institution or depository on time or savings
deposits. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing of the name and
address of the institution or depository in which the deposit is made and
the amount of the deposit. The Township shall not be required to refund an
amount of interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the
year. If the amount of interest exceeds $100, that entire amount shall belong
to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by the Township annually or
at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purposes for which it
was deposited, as the case may be; except that the Township may retain for
administrative expenses a sum equivalent to no more than 33 1/3% of that
entire amount which shall be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial
expenses.
§ 330-139. Escrow payments for professional services.
A. The Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall make all of the
payments to professionals for services rendered to the Township or
approving authority for review of applications for development, review
and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other
purposes under the provisions of this chapter. Such fees or charges
shall be as provided in Schedule _____. The application review and
inspection charges shall be limited only to professional charges for
review of applications, review and preparation of documents and
inspections of developments under construction and review by outside
consultants when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of the
expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the Township. The
only costs that shall be added to any such charges shall be actual out-ofpocket
expenses of any such professionals or consultants, including
normal and typical expenses incurred in processing applications and
inspecting improvements. The Township or approving authority shall
not bill the applicant, or charge any escrow account or deposit
authorized under Subsection B of this section, for any municipal clerical
or administrative functions, overhead expenses, meeting room charges,
or any other municipal costs and expenses except as provided for in this
section, nor shall a Township professional add any such charges to his
bill. If the salary, staff support and overhead for a Township professional
are provided by the Township, the charge shall not exceed 200% of the
sum of the products resulting from multiplying the hourly base salary,
which shall be established annually by ordinance, of each of the
professionals, by the number of hours spent by the respective
professional upon review of the application for development or
inspection of the developer's improvements, as the case may be. For
any professionals the charge shall be at the same rate as all other work
of the same nature by the professional for the Township when fees are
not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants or developments.
§ 330-138 VERNON CODE § 330-139
1:568
B. The Township requires of the developer a deposit toward anticipated
municipal expenses for these professional services. The deposit shall be
placed in an escrow account pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1 and this
article. The amount of the deposit required shall be reasonable in
regard to the scale and complexity of the development. The amount of
the initial deposit required shall be as provided in Chapter 250, Fees
and Escrows, Article II. For review of applications for development
proposing a site plan, the amount of the deposit is based on one or more
of the following: the area of the site to be developed, the square footage
of buildings to be constructed, or an additional factor for circulationintensive
sites such as those containing drive-through facilities.
Deposits for inspection fees are established in accordance with
Subsection h of Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53).79
C. Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications, review
and preparation of documents and inspection of improvements shall be
pursuant to a voucher from the professional, which voucher shall
identify the personnel performing the service, and for each date the
services performed, the hours spent to one-quarter-hour increments,
the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All professionals shall
submit vouchers to the Chief Financial Officer on a monthly basis in
accordance with schedules and procedures established by the Chief
Financial Officer. If the services are provided by a Township employee,
the employee shall prepare and submit to the Chief Financial Officer a
statement containing the same information as required on a voucher, on
a monthly basis. The professional shall send an information copy of all
vouchers or statements submitted to the Chief Financial Officer
simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial Officer shall
prepare and send to the applicant a statement which shall include an
accounting of funds listing all deposits, interest earnings,
disbursements, and the cumulative balance of the escrow account. This
information shall be provided on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges
are $1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis, if monthly charges exceed
$1,000. If an escrow account or deposit contains insufficient funds to
enable the Township or approving authority to perform required
application reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief Financial
Officer shall provide the applicant with a notice of the insufficient
escrow or deposit balance. In order for work to continue on the
development or the application, the applicant shall, within a reasonable
time period, post a deposit to the account in an amount to be agreed
upon by the Township or approving authority and the applicant. In the
interim, any required health and safety inspections shall be made and
charged back against the replenishment of funds.
D. The following close-out procedure shall apply to all deposits and escrow
accounts and shall commence after the approving authority has granted
final approval and signed the subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of
application review escrows and deposits, or after the improvements
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-139
1:569
have been approved as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, in the case of
improvement inspection escrows and deposits:
(1) The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the
Chief Financial Officer and the approving authority, and to the
relevant Township professionals, that the application or
improvements, as the case may be, are completed.
(2) After receipt of such notice, the professional shall render a final bill
to the Chief Financial Officer within 30 days and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant.
(3) The Chief Financial Officer shall render a written final accounting
to the applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within 45
days of receipt of the final bill.
(4) Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including
interest in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, shall be refunded
to the developer along with the final accounting.
E. All professional charges for review of an application for development,
review and preparation of documents or inspection of improvements
shall be reasonable and necessary, given the status and progress of the
application or construction. Review fees shall be charged only in
connection with an application for development presently pending
before the approving authority or upon review of compliance with
conditions of approval, or review of requests for modification or
amendment made by the applicant. A professional shall not review
items which are subject to approval by any state government agency
and not under municipal jurisdiction except to the extent consultation
with a state agency is necessary due to the effect of state approvals in
the subdivision or site plan. Inspection fees shall be charged only for
actual work shown on a subdivision or site plan or required by an
approving resolution. Professionals inspecting improvements under
construction shall charge only for inspections that are reasonably
necessary to check the progress and quality of the work and such
inspections shall be reasonably based on the approved development
plans and documents.
F. If the Township retains a different professional or consultant in the
place of the professional originally responsible for development,
application, review, or inspection of improvements, the Township or
approving authority shall be responsible for all time and expenses of the
new professional to become familiar with the application or the project,
and the Township or approving authority shall not bill the applicant or
charge the deposit or the escrow account for such services.
§ 330-139 VERNON CODE § 330-140
1:570
§ 330-140. Application fees. [Amended 11-8-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2280]
An application fee shall be paid at the time of filing an application for
development. The amount of fee shall be determined pursuant to the
categories and classifications contained in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows,
Article II. Consideration has been given to the relative and comparative
complexity of different categories and classifications of applications. Such
fees are designed to be reasonable and to recover the actual costs of
municipal operations attributable to the processing and disposition of
applications for development. Such operating costs include secretarial and
other administrative costs, attendance at regular meetings by Board and/
or municipal consultants, costs of preparation, publication and reproduction
of documents, and related items and matters. Application and filing fees
are to be paid over to the Township Treasurer and added to the Township's
funds. Any application fees received in connection with informal or concept
review by the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.1 shall be
credited against fees for a subsequent formal application for development.
Charitable, philanthropic, fraternal, and religious nonprofit organizations
holding a tax exempt status under the Federal Internal Revenue Code of
1954, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c) or (d), the Township of Vernon and the Board of
Education are exempt from application or filing fees, but shall be subject to
any escrow for review of any development application. Each organization,
other than the Township of Vernon and the Board of Education, shall file a
current federal tax exempt status letter as a checklist item.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-140
1:571

ARTICLE X
Historic Preservation
§ 330-141. Short title; incorporation as zoning regulation.
This article shall be known as and may be referred to by the short title
of the "Historic Preservation Ordinance of the Township of Vernon." As,
where and to the extent necessary and appropriate, this article shall be
construed as being part of and incorporated in the Zoning Ordinance of this
chapter, notwithstanding the format of this separate article for purposes of
convenience.
§ 330-142. Purposes.
§ 330-143. through § 330-147. (Reserved) [Repealed 2011 Ord. No.
11-21]
§ 330-148. Designation of historic landmarks.
A. By adopting this article, it is the intention of the governing body to
create an agency which will work with and advise the governing body,
Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment with respect to
historic landmarks within the Township of Vernon and the effect of
development applications thereon. Said agency is to be known as the
"Historic Preservation Commission."
B. The establishment of the Historic Preservation Commission and the
designation of historic landmarks and sites within the Township are
intended to foster the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of
especially noteworthy examples or elements of the Township's
environment in order to:
(1) Safeguard the heritage of Vernon by preserving resources within
the Township which reflect elements of its cultural, social,
economic and architectural history;
(2) Encourage the continued use of historic landmarks and to facilitate
their appropriate use;
(3) Promote appreciation of historic landmarks for education, pleasure
and the welfare of the local population;
(4) Discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources;
(5) Encourage the proper maintenance and preservation of historic
settings and landscapes;
(6) Encourage beautification and private reinvestment;
(7) Encourage the appropriate alteration of historic landmarks;
(8) Promote the conservation of historic sites and invite and encourage
voluntary compliance.
§ 330-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-148
1:573
A. The Commission, as part of the preparation of the Planning Board's
Historic Element of the Master Plan, shall consider for landmark
designation any buildings, structures, objects and sites within the
Township which merit landmark designation and protection, possessing
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship and
association, and being: [Amended 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 00-20]
(1) Of particular historical significance to the Township of Vernon by
reflecting or exemplifying the broad cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state or community; or
(2) Associated with historic personages important in national, state or
local history; or
(3) The site of an historic event which had a significant effect on the
development of the nation, state or community; or
(4) An embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period
or method of architecture or engineering; or
(5) Representative of the work of an important builder, designer, artist
or architect; or
(6) Significant for containing elements of design, detail, materials or
craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation; or
(7) Able or likely to yield information important in prehistory or
history.
B. As part of a periodic review of the Historic Element of the Master Plan,
the Commission may make a list of potential historic sites for landmark
designation. For each landmark there shall be a description of the
landmark, pursuant to this article to include a description of the
landmark's location and boundaries, and a map siting. The Commission
shall, by certified mail, return receipt requested, notify, in writing, the
property owner of a potential landmark designated site and provide the
landowner an opportunity to meet voluntarily and informally with the
Commission on such designation. [Amended 7-10-2000 by Ord. No.
00-20]
C. The list of potential landmarks, as well as the descriptions, significance,
location, boundaries and map siting of each, shall be subject to and
contained within the Historic Preservation Element of the Master Plan
as amended from time to time. The Commission shall provide its
recommendations for inclusion in the Historic Preservation Element of
the Master Plan to the Planning Board which shall hold hearings
pursuant to statute. [Amended 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 00-20]
(1) All hearings on historic landmark ordinances for historic sites as
designated in the appropriate element of the Master Plan shall be
conducted before the governing body according to law.
§ 330-148 VERNON CODE § 330-148
1:574
§ 330-149. Actions requiring review by Historic Preservation
Commission.
D. Copies of the designation list and historic site maps as adopted shall be
made public and distributed to all municipal agencies reviewing
development applications and building permits. A certificate of
designation shall be served by certified and regular mail upon each
owner and included on the list.
A. All permits and development applications involving all development
activities that affect an historical landmark shall be reviewed by the
Commission, except as set forth in Subsection B below. Such review
shall be required for but not be limited to the following actions:
(1) Demolition of an historic landmark.
(2) Relocation of an historic landmark.
(3) All changes in the exterior architectural appearance of any historic
landmark by addition, alteration, or replacement.
(4) Site plans or subdivisions affecting an historic landmark.
(5) Zoning variances affecting an historic landmark.
B. Before an applicant prepares his plans he may bring a tentative
proposal to the Commission for informal review and comment.
Discussions of such proposals shall be open to the public, but they will
not result in any definitive action by the Commission.
C. Review by the Commission is not required for the following:
(1) When an historic landmark requires immediate emergency repair
to preserve the continued habitability of the landmark and/or
health and safety of its occupants or others. Emergency repairs
may be performed in accordance with Township codes without the
necessity of first obtaining the Commission's review. Under such
circumstances the repairs performed shall only be such that are
necessary to maintain the habitability of the structure. A request
for the Commission's review shall be made as soon as possible, and
no additional work shall be performed upon the structure until an
appropriate request for approval is made and obtained in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this article. All work
done under this section shall conform to the criteria and guidelines
for review of applications as adopted by the Commission in
accordance with this article.
(2) For changes to the interior of structures.
(3) For ordinary repairs and maintenance which do not constitute a
change to the appearance of the structure. The following are the
only activities which do not require Commission review according
to these criteria:
§ 330-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-149
1:575
§ 330-150. Procedures for Commission's review of building permits
and alterations. [Amended 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 00-20]
(a) Repair of existing windows, doors and storm windows that are
compatible in style with the architectural period of design of
the subject structure.
(b) Maintenance and repair of existing roof material involving no
change in the design, scale or appearance of the structure.
(c) Repair of the existing roof structure such as cupolas, dormers,
and chimneys, using materials which will not alter the exterior
architectural appearance of the structure.
(d) Replacement or repair of existing shingles, clapboards, brick
or stone, using the same materials that are being repaired or
replaced, maintaining the architectural integrity of the
structure. Nevertheless, if, in the Commission's judgment, the
use of identical materials places too great an economic burden
on the applicant and the applicant has made a good-faith effort
to find outside sources of funding from public or private
historic preservation organizations without success, the
Commission's approval for the use of other materials that
conform in style to the original material shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
(e) Exterior painting of existing structures.
D. Any property owner and/or tenant of any property subject to this article
to which changes or alterations are proposed shall not be relieved of
any obligations under this article because no building and/or
development application is otherwise required.
E. The Commission shall hear such applications, employing its procedure
used for all other applications, and shall prepare a written report on the
application of this article's provisions concerning historic preservation
to any of those aspects of the change, activity or action proposed and
shall submit its report to the Planning Board in accordance with this
article. [Amended 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 00-20]
A. For historical sites designated by the appropriate element in the Master
Plan and which are subject to an historic landmark designation as
contained in the Zoning Ordinance, all applications for development
and all applications for the issuance of permits pertaining to historic
sites or landmarks shall be referred to the Historic Preservation
Commission for a written report on the application of the Zoning
Ordinance provisions concerning historic preservation to any of those
aspects of the change proposed, which aspects were not determined by
approval of an application for development pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law. In the case of an application for development, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall submit its report to the
§ 330-149 VERNON CODE § 330-150
1:576
§ 330-151. Criteria for review of application.
In reviewing an application for its effect on an historic landmark, the
following criteria shall be used by the Commission, Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment. The criteria set forth in Subsection A hereof
relates to all projects affecting an historical landmark. The criteria set forth
in Subsections B through D relate to specific types of undertakings and shall
be used in addition to the general criteria set forth in Subsection A.
Planning Board or Zoning Board as the case may be. In instances where
a permit is referred to the Commission, the Commission shall render
its report to the Planning Board which shall make a decision with
regard to the Commission's report and shall issue its own report to the
administrative officer in charge of issuing the appropriate permit. The
Historic Preservation Commission shall report to the Planning Board
and the Planning Board shall report to the administrative officer within
45 days of the administrative officer's referral of the permit application
to the Historic Preservation Commission. If, within the forty-five-day
period, the Planning Board, after recommendation from the Historic
Preservation Commission, recommends to the administrative officer
against the issuance of a permit or recommends conditions to the
permit to be issued, the administrative officer shall deny issuance of the
permit or include the conditions in the permit to be issued, as the case
may be. Failure to constitute a report within the forty-five-day period
shall be deemed to constitute a report in favor of the issuance of the
permit and without recommendation or conditions to the permit.
B. All appeals pursuant to this section shall be made to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
A. In regard to all applications affecting an historical landmark, the
following factors shall be considered:
(1) The impact of the proposed change on the historical and
architectural significance of the landmark.
(2) The landmark's importance to the public and the extent to which its
historical or architectural interests would be adversely affected to
the detriment of the public interest.
(3) The hardship to the property owner if the application were denied
or conditions were imposed.
B. In regard to an application for new construction, alterations, additions,
repairs or replacements affecting an historic landmark, the following
criteria shall be considered:
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) Proportions of the building's front facade. The relationship of the
width of the building to the height of the front elevations shall be
§ 330-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-151
1:577
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the
width of windows to the height of windows in a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(4) Relationship of materials, texture, and color. The relationship of
materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the building to which it is visually related.
(5) Exterior features. A structure's related exterior features, such as
lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, driveways and parking areas,
shall be compatible with the features of those structures to which it
is visually related and shall be appropriate for the historical period
for which the structure is significant.
C. In regard to an application to demolish an historic landmark, the
following matters shall be considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural, cultural, or scenic significance.
(2) Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted by the
Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of alternatives
to the proposal.
(4) Its importance to the community and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the public interest.
(5) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual, or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could be reproduced only
with great difficulty and expense or other hardship to the property
owner.
(6) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values,
generating business, attracting tourists, attracting new residents,
stimulating interest and study in architecture and design, or
making the municipality an attractive and desirable place in which
to live.
D. In regard to an application to move any historic landmark, the following
matters shall be considered:
(1) The historic loss to the site of the original location.
(2) The reasons for not retaining the landmark or structure at its
present site.
§ 330-151 VERNON CODE § 330-151
1:578
§ 330-152. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-10-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-20]
Any penalty for a violation of this article shall be determined in accordance
with the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and
penalties.
§ 330-153. Establishment of historic districts; limitations on powers
of Commission.
§ 330-153.1. Municipal historic designation of properties. [Added
4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-09]
The properties set forth below are hereby granted Municipal Historic
Designation.
(3) The compatibility, nature, and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the protection of
interests referred to in this article.
(4) The probability of significant damage to the landmark or structure
itself.
(5) The hardship to the property owner if the application were denied
or conditions were imposed.81
A. The establishment of an historic district in the Township of Vernon shall
be initiated and implemented in the same way as for historic landmarks.
B. No duties or powers of the Commission shall supersede or infringe on
the powers of other Township boards and committees.
A. (Reserved)
B. (Reserved)
C. [Added 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-22]
(1) The Baxter Homestead
Block 30 Lot 1.01
957 Route 517
Glenwood, NJ
D. (Reserved)
E. [Added 2-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(1) The Denton Wallace House
81.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 1013, Project approval, denial or appeal, which previously
followed this section, was repealed 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 00-20.
§ 330-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-153.1
1:579
Block 148 Lot 5
309 Route 94
Vernon, NJ
F. [Added 10-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-42]
(1) The Longwell Drew Cemetery
Block 141 Lot 2
Intersection of Vernon Crossing Road and Route 517
Vernon, NJ
G. [Added 9-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
(1) Board of Education Building and Property
Block 144.01 Lot 7 (formerly Block 144 Lot 31)
Vernon, NJ
H. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 11-26]
(1) Glenwood Baptist Cemetery
Block 20.01 Lot 8
(2) DeKay Cemetery #1
Block 41 Lot 7.01
(3) DeKay Cemetery #2
Block 32 Lot 9
(4) Episcopal Church Cemetery
Block 148 Lot 3
(5) Williamsville Cemetery
Block 201.01 Lot 29
I. [Added 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-17]
(1) Cedar Crest Farm
Block 195 Lot 36
483 Route 515
J. [Added 5-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13-05]
(1) Glenwood Cemetery
§ 330-153.1 VERNON CODE § 330-153.1
1:580
Block 31 Lot 8.01
(2) Edsall Farm
Block 32 Lot 7
(3) Edsall Slave Cemetery
Block 33.01 Lot 1
(4) McCamly Cemetery
Block 42 Lot 3.01
(5) Cherry Ridge Cemetery
Block 210 Lot 1
(6) Canistear Cemetery
Block 203 Lot 1
K. [Added 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
(1) The United Methodist Cemetery
Block 148 Lot 2
Editor's Note: Subsections A., B. and D. removed at the direction
of the Township Clerk to reconcile Ordinance Nos. 06-09, 06-15
and 06-40 which were not adopted.
§ 330-153.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-153.1
1:581

ARTICLE XI
Zoning
§ 330-154. Authority; purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 and in order to
effectuate the Vernon Township Master Plan dated December 1995. It has
been drawn with consideration to the character of each district and the
suitability of each district for particular uses, and to encourage the most
appropriate use of land. The regulations contained in this article are
intended to and shall be applied uniformly throughout each district for each
class or kind of buildings or other structures or uses of land.
§ 330-155. Delinquent taxes and assessments.
As a condition of any approval or permit which is required pursuant to this
article, no taxes or assessments for local improvements shall be due or
delinquent on the property for which any application is made pursuant to
this article.
§ 330-156. Prohibited uses.
Any use not specifically permitted in a zoning district established by this
article shall be and is hereby expressly prohibited from such district.
§ 330-157. Zoning districts. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-27; 6-26-2000 by Ord. No. 00-21; 3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04-04]
For purposes of this article, the Township of Vernon shall be and is hereby
divided into the following zoning districts:
R-1 Single-Family Residential
R-2 Single-Family Residential
R-3 Single-Family Residential
R-4 Single-Family Residential
PLC Private Lake Community Residential
PLLC Private Leasehold Lake Community
SR Seasonal Recreation
MR Mountain Resort [Amended 7-10-2006 by Ord. No.
06-21]
SBCZ Stream Buffer Conservation Overlay Zone
CR Commercial Recreation
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
C-2 General Business
C-3 Office - Commercial
TC Town Center Commercial
§ 330-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-157
1:583
LI Light Industry
AET Agri-Eco Tourism
CON Conservation
MTC Mountain Conservation
P Public Land
§ 330-158. Zoning Map. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27;
7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-21; 2-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04;
3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04; 7-14-14 by Ord. No. 2014-10; 10-16-14
by Ord. No. 2014-18; 3-23-15 by Ord. No. 2015-01; 6-27-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-14; 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
§ 330-159. Zone boundaries.
The zoning district boundary lines shown on the Zoning Map are intended
to coincide with property lines, the center lines of streets, easements,
railroads or drainage courses as they exist at the time of the adoption of
this article, or as they are designated on the Zoning Map by figures or
dimensions. In case of uncertainty as to the location of any zone boundary
line, the determination thereof shall be made by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 330-160. Schedule of Permitted, Conditional and Accessory Uses
and Structures.
The schedule entitled "Schedule A, Permitted, Conditional and Accessory
Uses, Township of Vernon, Sussex County, New Jersey," dated December
1, 1997, as amended, shall be and is hereby made part of this article.
(Editor's Note: Ordinance amendments for Schedule A may be found with
the schedule at the end of this chapter.)
Editor's Note: Schedule A, Permitted, Conditional and Accessory Uses, is
included at the end of this chapter.
A. The zoning map comprised of three pages as follows: page 1, entitled,
"Zoning Map," prepared by Vernon Township, dated March 23, 2015
and amended from time to time by ordinance of the Township Council;
page 2, entitled, "Highlands Preservation Area Overlay Zones" dated
May 15, 2014; and page 3, entitled, "Highlands Preservation Area Map
Insets" dated May 15, 2014; are hereby adopted as the Official Zoning
Map of the Township of Vernon, New Jersey, and the same shall be and
is hereby made a part of this article and may be found at the end of this
chapter. The Highlands Preservation Area regulations can be found at
Section 330, Article XIX, Highlands Preservation Area Land Use
Ordinance.
Editor's Note: See Appendix A for Redevelopment Plans;
Redevelopment Ordinances and Special Zoning Districts.
§ 330-157 VERNON CODE § 330-161
1:584
§ 330-161. Schedule of Zoning Requirements. [Amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
The schedule entitled "Schedule B, Zoning Requirements, Township of
Vernon, Sussex County, New Jersey," dated September 1, 1997, as amended,
shall be and is hereby made a part of this article.
Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 330-162. Enforcement; powers and duties of Zoning Officer.
A. This article shall be enforced by the administrative officer appointed by
the governing body to perform the duties of the Zoning Officer.
B. No land shall be occupied and no building or structure or part thereof
shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, structurally altered or
moved until a zoning permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer.
C. No zoning permit shall be issued for the erection, construction,
reconstruction, structural alteration or moving of any building or
structure or part thereof unless the plans and intended use for the same
indicate that such building or structure is designed and intended to
conform in all respects to the provisions of this article.
D. The Zoning Officer shall be and is hereby authorized to revoke any
zoning permit if it is found that actual conditions or construction do not
adhere either to the plans or specifications submitted to the Zoning
Officer or to any other applicable municipal, county or state laws or
regulations pertaining to the use or development of lands.
E. The zoning permit shall specify the use of land or a building in any
circumstances or conditions imposed by any public agency, code, or
regulations. Any change in use, including a change from one permitted
use to another kind of permitted use in the same zone, or any additional
use, shall be treated as a new use, and a new zoning permit shall be
required. Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for said change in use,
all provisions of this article shall be satisfied in the same manner as if
the proposed use were a new structure or a new use of land.
F. A record of all zoning permits shall be maintained on file in the office of
the Zoning Officer, and copies thereof shall be furnished upon request
to any person having a proprietary, contract or leasehold interest in the
building or land affected.
G. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to investigate any violations of
this article coming to such officer's attention whether by complaint or
arising from personal knowledge of the Zoning Officer. If a violation is
found to exist, the official shall take such action as appears appropriate
under the circumstances.
§ 330-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-163
1:585
§ 330-163. Applicability of regulations.
No land or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be
erected, raised, moved, extended, enlarged, expanded, altered or used for
any purpose other than a purpose expressly permitted herein for the zone
district in which such use is or is to be located, and all construction shall be
in conformity with the regulations provided for such zone district.
§ 330-164. Offensive uses prohibited.
No product shall be sold or displayed, nor shall any service be rendered in
any zone, which is offensive or abhorrent to prevailing concepts of morality
and decency in the context of a carefully zoned and planned community.
§ 330-165. Interpretations.
This article shall be interpreted with primary regard to the fundamental
purpose(s) for which the provisions herein were adopted. The sense of any
regulation contained herein is to be gathered from its object, the nature
of its subject matter, the context of its setting, the degree to which the
provision serves to implement the Master Plan, and the reading of the
provisions contained herein in pari materia. Where a literal reading will
lead to a result not in accord with the essential purpose and design of
this article, the spirit of this article will control the letter. Wherever it
is apparent that the drafters of this article or the governing body did
not consider or contemplate a specific situation, the circumstances shall
be interpreted consonant with the probable intent of the drafters and
governing body had they anticipated the situation at hand. Specific
provisions in this article shall take precedence over general provisions.
To the greatest practicable extent, the provisions contained herein,
particularly when dealing with the same subject matter, shall be read or
construed together as forming one regulation. This article is to receive a
reasonable construction and be liberally construed in favor of the Township
of Vernon. This article shall be given a reasonable construction and
application to serve the apparent purpose of the article, and the plain
meaning of the language contained herein shall be construed according to
the ordinary meanings of the words and phrases contained herein.
§ 330-166. Existing platted lots that are not in compliance with
minimum requirements.
Any lot or plat as recorded at the time of passage of this article that fails to
comply with the minimum requirements of this article may be used for any
use not otherwise prohibited in such district in which it lies, provided that:
A. Said lot is in single ownership as defined in this chapter;
B. All yard requirements are met, except that where the lot width is less
than the requirements for same within the zone district, side yards may
be reduced by the percentage that the lot width bears to the zone
§ 330-163 VERNON CODE § 330-166
1:586
§ 330-167. Subdivision of lots; lot to abut street.
When a new lot or lots are to be formed from part of a parcel of land,
the subdivision must be effected in such a manner as not to impair any
of the provisions of this article, without limitation, however, to any of
the requirements of Article VII or VIII. No permit for the erection of any
building or structure shall be issued unless the lot abuts a street giving
access to such proposed building or structure.
§ 330-168. Requirements as to lot and zone district.
Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, all yards, open space and offstreet
parking shall be contained on the lot and within the zone district in
which the use is located or proposed.
§ 330-169. Required area; reductions in area or dimension.
No lot, yard, parking area or other space shall be so reduced in area
or dimension as to make such area or dimension less than the minimum
required under this article. If already less than the minimum required under
this article, such area or dimension shall not be further reduced.
§ 330-170. Principal buildings.
Only one principal building may be erected on a lot except for related
buildings forming one principal use in the same ownership, and limited to
the following:
district requirements; provided, further, however, that no side yard
shall be reduced to less than 1/2 the required side yard.
A. Public or institutional building complexes.
B. Research, light industrial, office or retail shopping complexes, or
complexes involving mixed office and retail use.
C. Multifamily dwelling complexes.
D. Principal buildings owned by and as part of a club, community
association or similar organization in a PLC District.
E. Buildings and uses in a planned development.
F. Combined uses in the TC Town Center District.
G. Combined uses and buildings in the CR Commercial Recreation District.
[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
H. No principal building shall be located closer to another principal
building than the height of the taller building.
I. Buildings and structures located in the PLLC Zone District. [Added
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
§ 330-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-171
1:587
§ 330-171. Accessory buildings and structures.
Except as may be otherwise provided in this article, buildings and
structures which are accessory to a principal use or building are permitted
in all zones and as provided herein. Any such accessory building or
structure must be customarily incident and subordinate to the principal use
of the land or building, located on the same lot containing the principal
use and building(s), and comply with the requirements of Schedule C,
the contents of which are incorporated herein.82 To the extent that the
particular standards of this section depart from those contained in Schedule
C, the standards of this section shall prevail and control.
A. Accessory buildings in residential districts.
(1) No accessory building shall exceed a height of 15 feet except for
accessory buildings used in connection with farming operations,
which shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(2) No accessory building shall be located closer than 10 feet to any
other building.
(3) No accessory building shall be located closer to a right-of-way line
than the principal building except on corner lots, through lots and
except on a farm; and except a gazebo not disproportionate to the
size of the lot or the principal building and provided a front yard
setback equal to the prescribed side yard setback for the
corresponding zone is maintained. On corner lots and through lots,
accessory buildings other than a gazebo as aforesaid shall not be
located closer to a street than the minimum front yard
requirements for the district. [Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No.
02-04]
(4) Unless otherwise provided in Schedule C, an accessory building
located in a side yard shall not lie closer to a side lot line than the
minimum side yard setback requirement for a principal building. A
farm building or an accessory building used on a farm shall not lie
closer to a side lot line than the height of the building or the
minimum side yard setback for a principal building in the zone,
whichever is greater.
(5) Unless otherwise provided in Schedule C, an accessory building
located in a rear yard shall not be located closer than five feet to a
side or rear lot line. A farm building or an accessory building used
on a farm shall not be closer to a property line than the height of
the building or the minimum side yard setback requirement for a
principal building in the zone, whichever is greater.
(6) No accessory building shall occupy more than 25% of the rear yard
area.
82.Editor's Note: Schedule C, Setback Requirements for Accessory Structures, is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 330-171 VERNON CODE § 330-171
1:588
§ 330-172. Yards.
Every lot must provide front, rear and side yards as required for its
respective district. All front yards must face a dedicated public street or an
improved private street approved by the Planning Board.
§ 330-173. Front yard exceptions.
(7) There shall not be more than two accessory buildings on a lot,
except on a farm and excepting a gazebo not disproportionate to
the size of the lot or the principal building and provided a front
yard setback equal to the prescribed side yard setback for the
corresponding zone is maintained.
(8) Excepting stone walls, trellises, arbors, planters and similar
structures commonly associated with landscaping and gardens,
and excepting a driveway and up to two accessory buildings as
regulated in Subsection A(7) of this section, there shall be not more
than two accessory structures on any lot except on a farm.
(9) No accessory building in any district shall have a footprint which is
greater than 60% of the footprint of the principal building, except
on a farm. The total of the footprint of all accessory structures in a
residential district shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or 60% of the
footprint of the principal structure, whichever is less, except on a
farm. No accessory building in a residential district shall be
allowed to be otherwise disproportionate in height, size or area to
the building and use to which it is accessory. [Amended
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
B. Accessory buildings in nonresidential districts. Accessory buildings in
nonresidential districts shall meet all the requirements applicable to
principal buildings, unless otherwise provided in Schedule C.
A. Where a lot is situated between two lots, each of which is developed
with a principal building which has a nonconforming front yard setback,
the minimum front yard setback requirement for such lot may be the
average of the front yards supplied with respect to the existing
nonconforming buildings on the said adjacent lots.
B. Where a lot adjoins one lot developed as described above and a vacant
lot, the minimum front yard setback requirement for such lot may be
the average of the nonconforming front yard setback of the developed
lot and the required front yard setback for the zone.
C. Where in any given block there exists a prevailing uniformity in the
alignment and setback of existing buildings in which the front yard
setbacks are greater or less than required, then, in that event, any new
building in such block shall conform to such established alignment and
setback.
§ 330-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-174
1:589
§ 330-174. Corner lots and through lots. [Amended 1-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-04]
Where a lot is bounded by more than one street or is a corner lot or through
lot as defined in this chapter, the front yard setback requirements for the
zone shall be satisfied with respect to each abutting street. In an application
for an approval or a permit concerning any such lot, the owner shall declare
and the Board or Zoning Officer shall approve the front of the lot, which
shall be consistent with the direction the building faces. The yard opposite
the front of the lot shall be considered the rear yard for purposes of this
article and establishment of the minimum rear yard requirement.
§ 330-175. Height exceptions.
Chimneys, spires, steeples, belfries, cupolas and similar architectural
features and ornaments shall be exempt from the building height
restrictions contained in Schedule B,83 provided they are normally
appurtenant to a building. Mechanical equipment such as HVAC equipment
and other roof-mounted and appurtenant equipment and spaces such as
elevator elements shall also be exempt, provided they are adequately and
appropriately screened pursuant to this chapter.
§ 330-176. Dedication of right-of-way.
Whenever provision for additional street width is sought and obtained by
the Township of Vernon, County of Sussex or State of New Jersey for
present or future road improvement by purchase, donation, dedication,
condemnation or other legal means, the required minimum lot area of
an existing lot shall be reduced by the same area to be conveyed to the
Township, county or state as aforesaid.
§ 330-177. Decks and porches. [Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-27]
For properties in the R-3 Zone, decks and porches may extend into the rear
yard setback area, provided that at least 25 feet is maintained between the
deck or porch and the rear property line and that the porch is not screened
in or enclosed.
§ 330-178. Fences and walls.
A. Purpose. These restrictions are intended to prevent the proliferation of
fences, particularly closed or solid privacy fences, which might tend to
uncommonly divide, interrupt and clutter the landscape of the
Township's neighborhoods. However, these provisions also recognize
that certain fencing can accomplish certain zoning objectives under
appropriate circumstances.
83.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 330-174 VERNON CODE § 330-178
1:590
B. Classifications. Fences shall be generally classified as follows:
(1) Open (split-rail, contemporary rail and similar fencing) in which
75% or more of the composition is open.
(2) Semi-open (spaced picket fences, etc.), of which 25% to 75% of the
composition is open.
(3) Closed or solid privacy (stockade, solid picket, board, board-andbatten,
board-on-board, louver panel, staggered board, panel) of
which less than 25% of the composition is open or appears open.
C. General principles and restrictions.
(1) Wherever possible, natural screening shall be used to achieve
privacy. However, where a privacy fence appears to offer a better
alternative than the absence of such fence or natural screening due
to circumstances involving the characteristics of the affected
properties, fences conforming to this section shall be permitted.
(2) The finished side of all fence surfaces shall face adjacent
properties.
(3) No fence shall be erected of barbed wire or similar harmful
elements, nor constructed in any manner which might be
dangerous to persons or animals, except that this restriction shall
not apply to farms.
(4) No fence or wall shall be erected in a prescribed sight triangle.
(5) No fence anywhere in a front yard, including a fence running along
or approximately parallel to a side lot line within a front yard, shall
be more than four feet high nor shall it be less than 50% open. On a
through lot, this subsection shall apply to all yards which abut a
street. [Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
(6) No fence, running substantially along a rear lot line, or
approximately parallel thereto, or otherwise in a rear yard, shall
exceed six feet in height measured from average grade
corresponding to each eight-foot section of fencing. If such fence
has decorative scalloped panels or pickets along its upper edge,
height may be measured to the lowest point of such edge, thus
allowing posts and corresponding elements to exceed the height
limitation of this subsection, but in no event by more than one foot.
Where a rear yard or side yard of a corner lot abuts a side lot line
and front yard of an adjacent lot, then in no event shall a fence in
such rear or side yard on the corner lot exceed four feet in height or
be less than 50% open for such portion thereof which lies parallel
to or otherwise substantially alongside the front yard of the
adjacent lot.
(7) No fence or wall shall be so constructed or installed as to constitute
a traffic or other hazard.
§ 330-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-178
1:591
§ 330-179. Swimming pools. [Amended 10-14-1999 by Ord. No.
99-15; 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(8) All fencing other than a stone fence or stone (or masonry) wall shall
be constructed of wood or a material that is relatively
indistinguishable from wood.
(9) Walls of masonry or natural stone, such as New England drywalls
and rows of fieldstone, shall not exceed a height of four feet.
(10) All fences required to be associated with swimming pools per
BOCA shall be constructed and erected as provided therein, subject
to this section.
(11)Without limitation hereto, the following fences and fencing
materials are specifically prohibited:
(a) Barbed wire or other hazardous construction or material.
(b) Canvas, fabric or cloth fences.
(c) Electrically charged fences.
(d) Poultry fences or "turkey wire"; except that so-called "chicken
wire" and similar thin gauge-wire mesh fence material may be
used in conjunction with rail and similar open or semi-open
fences.
(e) Temporary fences, such as snow or silt fences, except as the
latter may be necessary during development or other approved
land disturbance.
(12) Any fence, wall or similar structure as well as shrubbery screening
which substantially cuts off light or air or which may cause a
nuisance, dangerous condition, or a substantial fire-fighting
impediment shall be prohibited.
(13) Subsection C(6) notwithstanding, chain link fencing may be
substituted for wood or simulated wood fencing for safety, a dog
run, or other appropriate reason; provided, however, that the
closed loop edge shall be at the top, the fencing shall be finished in
black or dark green color, and no part of such fencing shall lie
within a front yard.
D. Retaining walls. (Reserved)
A. A "swimming pool" is defined as a water-filled enclosure, permanently
constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below
the level of the surrounding ground, or an above-surface pool having a
depth of more than 30 inches, designed, used and maintained for
swimming and bathing.
§ 330-178 VERNON CODE § 330-179
1:592
§ 330-180. Signs. [Added 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16; amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27; 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04;
11-12-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24; 11-14-11 by Ord. No. 11-24. Repealed
and replaced 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-05]
B. All private swimming pools shall be located only in a rear yard, except
that where a lot is a corner lot, a lot otherwise abutting more than one
street, or a lot without a rear yard, a private swimming pool may be
located in a yard other than a front yard, provided that the pool and its
appurtenances, including a fence or other enclosure, is screened by
densely planted evergreen vegetation, having a height of not less than
the fence or enclosure, along its visible length as revealed to any street.
All private swimming pools shall comply with the regulations of the
Uniform Construction Code with respect to but not limited to safety
enclosures, together with the requirements of Schedule C.
Editor's Note: Schedule C, Setback Requirements for Accessory
Structures, is included at the end of this chapter.
A. Definitions.
SIGN — Any device used to attract the attention of the public for
advertising purposes or message conveyance. The word sign includes
letters, figures, drawings, lines, trademarks, photographs, and other
markings encompassed within the area of the sign.
AREA OF A SIGN — The area of a sign shall be computed by multiplying
the greatest vertical dimension by the greatest horizontal dimension of
the sign space. The framing or edging of the sign shall be considered
part of the sign area. The total area, including both faces of a doublefaced
sign is included, but for calculating maximum area permitted,
the area of only one face of a double-faced sign is counted toward the
maximum area permitted.
A-FRAME (SANDWICH) SIGN — Temporary signs placed upon the
property for the purpose of advertising items sold or services supplied.
AWNING SIGN-CANOPY SIGN — Roof-like covering extending over a
walkway, sidewalk or exterior place supported by a frame attached
to a building and/or ground with a surface made of fabric or more
rigid material and either retractable or fixed in place, covered by any
lettering, logo, or other characters, symbols or figures.
BANNER — Any temporary sign printed or displayed upon cloth or
other flexible material.
BILLBOARD SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction that is sold, offered or
existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where such sign is displayed.
The term shall include an outdoor advertising sign (vehicle, billboard,
trailer, and utility pole).
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A variable message sign composed of
individual letters panel-mounted in or on a track system.
§ 330-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-180
1:593
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign of noncommercial nature which directs
the reader to the location of public or educational institutions, historical
structures, historical areas, public parks, or public buildings.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business
conducted on the premises, or to a product sold or service supplied by
such business.
FACADE — Principal faces of a building, and is generally one side of
the exterior of a building, especially the front, but also sometimes the
sides and rear. In architecture, the facade of a building is often the most
important from a design standpoint, as it sets the tone for the rest of
the building.
FLAG — A piece of cloth, varying in size, shape, color, and design,
usually attached at one edge to a staff or cord, and used as the symbol
of a nation, state, or organization, as a means of signaling, etc.
FREESTANDING SIGN — See Ground Sign.
GARAGE SALE — A temporary sign placed upon the property for the
purpose of advertising to the public the outdoor sale of used personal
or household items held on the seller's premises.
GATED COMMUNITY — A form of residential community containing
strictly controlled entrances for pedestrians, bicycles, and automobiles,
and sometimes characterized by a closed perimeter of walls and fences.
Gated communities usually consist of small residential streets and
include various amenities. For smaller communities this may be only a
park or other common area.
GRAFFITI SIGN — The name for images, markings, initials, slogans, or
lettering that is scratched, scrawled, painted, or marked in any manner
on property.
GROUND SIGN — Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building, but
excluding "Pylon Sign." A sign which is supported by 2 or more upright
or braces in or upon the ground.
HISTORICAL (MEMORIAL) SIGN — A sign, tablet, or plaque
memorializing a person, event, structure, or site.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign having a source of light for
illumination either externally or internally, or a combination of both.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — An area zoned and planned for the purpose of
industrial development.
INFORMATIONAL SIGN — An on-site sign commonly associated with,
but not limited to, information and directions necessary or convenient
for visitors coming on the property, including signs, marking entrances
and exits, parking areas, circulation direction, rest rooms, and pickup
and delivery.
MAINTENANCE / SERVICE SIGNS (a/k/a lawn signs or yard signs
- includes but is not limited to landscaping, lawn service, paving,
§ 330-180 VERNON CODE § 330-180
1:594
driveway sealing and/or repair) — Small signs placed on lawns are most
often rectangular.
MARQUEE — A permanent roof-like shelter extending from parts or all
of a building face; most commonly a structure placed over the entrance
to a hotel, theatre, or store. It has signage stating the name of the
establishment or, in the case of theatres, the play or movie and the
artist(s) appearing at that venue. The marquee is often identifiable by a
surrounding cache of light bulbs.
NAMEPLATE — A sign located on the premises giving the name or
address, or both, of the owner or occupant of the building or premises.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which exists, but does not meet
the requirement of this section.
OFFICIAL SIGN — Any sign erected and maintained by a federal, state,
county, or local government agency for public purposes.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction that is sold, offered or
existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where such sign is displayed.
The term off-site shall include an outdoor advertising sign (vehicle,
billboard, trailer, and utility pole).
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A communication device whose message and
design relates to a business, an event, goods, profession or service
being conducted, sold or offered on the same property as where the
sign is erected.
PEDESTAL SIGN — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, post,
or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign is 3 to 18 inches
above grade.
PENNANT — A long, tapering flag or burgee of distinctive form and
special significance, used in signaling or for identification.
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign related to any political event,
issue, or campaign.
PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential community that can be an
association or a proprietary organization. Associations can include
condominiums, residential associations, or cooperatives.
PROFESSIONAL SIGN — A sign listing only the name and profession of
the practitioner.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is affixed to any building and
projecting beyond the building wall or parts thereof, structure, building
line or property line, but which is not constructed or erected so as to
extend above the roofline of the structure to which it is affixed.
PYLON (OR POLE) SIGN — A sign in the form of a tower or pier that is
mounted on a freestanding pole, post, or other support.
§ 330-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-180
1:595
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign placed upon the property
for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of said
property.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign which moves in any manner by mechanical
means.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected, constructed, and maintained on or
above the roof of any building or structure. Decorative façade is not
considered a roof if it is affixed to but separate from the main building
structure and serves an aesthetic purpose only.
SANDWICH (A-FRAME) SIGN — Temporary signs placed upon the
property for the purpose of advertising items sold or services supplied.
SCROLLING SIGN — The continuous movement of information either
vertically or horizontally on a screen.
SECURITY SIGN — Information sign containing a representation of
certain security-related information.
SIGN FACE — The area of a sign on which copy is intended to be placed.
SIGN PERMIT — A document obtained from the Zoning Official upon
payment of required fees, if applicable, granting permission to erect the
sign described therein.
SPECIAL EVENT — Is one that helps a business or group meet a
specific marketing objective—to increase awareness, build goodwill,
introduce a new product, or simply to entertain. Special event signs are
used to inform and to promote the event, remind attendees about the
purpose of the event, etc.
STANCHIOHN — An upright bar or post, often providing support for
some other object.
STREAMERS — An ensign, flag, or pennant, which floats in the wind;
specifically, a long, narrow, ribbon like flag.
STRIP MALL (a/k/a Shopping Plaza or Mini-Mall) — An open area
shopping center where the stores are arranged in a row, with a
sidewalk in front. Strip malls are typically developed as a unit and have
large parking lots in front. They face major traffic arterials and tend
to be self-contained with few pedestrian connections to surrounding
neighborhoods.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign or advertising display constructed of
cloth, canvas, fabric, wood, plastic, paper, or other light material and
designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
WALL SIGN — A sign which is affixed to or painted on an exterior wall
of any building, Such signs shall project not more than 12 inches from
the building wall or parts thereof. No wall sign shall be constructed or
erected above the roofline of the structure to which it is affixed.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is affixed to the inside of any window,
or glass portion of any door.
§ 330-180 VERNON CODE § 330-180
1:596
B. Maintenance of Signs. All signs, together with their supports, braces,
guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair. All signs shall be so
maintained that their appearance is in keeping with the standards of
Vernon Township and does not constitute a blighting factor for
adjoining property owners.
C. Construction.
(1) No sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to
obstruct any fire escape, or any window, door, or opening used as a
means of egress or for firefighting purposes, or so as to prevent
free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof.
(2) No sign shall be erected or placed so as to obstruct sight distance
or obstruct pedestrian access.
D. Prohibited signs. All signs not expressly permitted pursuant to this
section shall be prohibited. Without limitation thereto, the following
shall be prohibited:
(1) String banners, string flags, aluminum ribbons or similar attentiongetting
devices, except as a temporary sign, e.g. "Grand Opening."
(2) Illuminated signs which flash, spell, or display any portion
intermittently.
(3) Roof signs.
(4) Signs which are menaces to public safety or which obstruct the
views of any street, intersection, or crosswalk.
(5) Signs placed on public sidewalks or rights-of-way.
(6) Revolving, rotating, or moving signs.
(7) Erecting a sign less or more distant from the lot line or edge of
pavement than prescribed by this section.
(8) Signs that extend above the roof line of the structure to which it is
affixed.
(9) Temporary signs which are illuminated.
(10) Billboards.
(11) Any flashing, moving, or animated, or sequentially lighted signs.
(12) Any sign whose lighting or central mechanism causes radio or
television interference.
(13) Real estate directional signs.
(14) Signs utilizing the colors red or green in their illuminations within
100 feet of a signalized intersection (also known as a traffic light,
traffic signal, stop light, traffic lamps, stop-and-go lights.)
§ 330-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-180
1:597
(15) Signs which resemble, simulate, or may be mistaken for a traffic
sign within 20 feet of a roadway.
(16) Attaching a sign to, or painting or otherwise marking letters, logos,
or other expressions on a utility pole, tree, rock, or natural feature
of any kind.
(17) Signs affixed or painted on water towers or similar structures.
(18) Signs which obstruct motorists' vision (site triangle), traffic signs
or signals, or business identification signs outside the lot on which
the business is located.
(19) All billboards, signboards, advertising signs, vehicular signage, or
devices not expressly related to the business being conducted on
the premises including advertising on trucks or motor vehicles, the
apparent primary purpose of which is to provide a display to
broadly attract the attention of the public rather than to directly
serve and identify the business of the owner thereof in the manner
which is customary for such vehicles.
(20)Off-premises sign or other off-site commercial sign, except that one
off-site sign may be erected on the previous site of a business which
has relocated for not more than 30 days.
(21) Exhibiting statements, words, pictures, or images of an obscene or
pornographic nature.
(22) Emitting a sound, odor, or visible matter such as smoke or vapor.
E. Distinguishable objects; exempt signs. The definition of "sign" in
§ 330-180A Definitions notwithstanding, the following objects or
structures shall not be considered "signs" or, alternatively, shall
nevertheless not be subject to this section:
(1) Customary holiday decorations displayed for a normal duration;
provided, however, that white or clear lights evoking candle flames
or miniature candle flames shall be permitted from mid-November
through the end of March in the C-1, C-2, C-3, CR, and TC Districts.
(2) Residential nameplates.
(3) Traffic control signs, the face of which meets the standards of the
Department of Transportation, and which contains no commercial
message.
(4) Signs for official, governmental, or quasi-governmental business,
including signs or banners advertising public or quasi-public events
that are posted or displayed with the permission of the Zoning
Official or the governing body.
(5) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey, Township of
Vernon, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United
§ 330-180 VERNON CODE § 330-180
1:598
States, other flags adopted or sanctioned by any elective legislative
body of competent jurisdiction, and flags flown in conjunction with
the flag of the United States, provided that no such flag shall
exceed 60 square feet in area, nor shall any such flag be flown
from a pole in excess of 35 feet in height. The flag's area shall be
in reasonable proportion to the height of the pole from which it is
displayed. Not more than 3 flags may be flown from any one pole.
Statutory requirements associated with flags and the generally
accepted standards of flag display protocol shall be observed.
(6) Flags honoring and remembering military and service men and
women of the United States.
(7) Public safety signs.
(8) Signs displayed by places of worship.
(9) Any public notice or warning or safety sign required by a valid and
applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance.
(10) Any sign indicating the name of a building and/or date of
construction and/or other incidental information about its
construction, which sign is made an integral part of a stone or
masonry surface, or made of bronze or similar permanent material,
including historic tablets, cornerstones, memorial plaques,
monuments and emblems which do not exceed 4 square feet in area
from a single viewpoint.
(11) Signs forbidding trespassing, hunting, fishing or trapping as
authorized by state laws and regulations concerning fish, game and
wildlife, but not exceeding one square foot in size; and, further
provided that no such sign shall be located less than 50 feet from
another.
(12) Pump-mounted fuel price information signs subject to the
following:
(a) Only one fuel price information sign shall be permitted per fuel
pump; each such sign shall be limited in size to an area of 260
square inches; each such sign shall be affixed directly and
firmly to a fuel pump, and shall be stationary.
(13) Regulation mailboxes of the United States Postal Service.
F. Public signs. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to restrict or
prohibit the erection, construction or maintenance within the Township
of Vernon of signs or markers for use in policing, directing or
controlling of traffic or parking when legally authorized by the State of
New Jersey and/or the County of Sussex, and/or the Township of
Vernon; or signs for official, governmental or quasi-governmental
business, including signs or banners advertising public or quasi-public
§ 330-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-180
1:599
events that are posted or displayed with the permission of the Zoning
Official or the governing body.
G. Termination of use. At the termination of any use of any premises,
building structure or lot, the permission to display signs associated with
such use shall terminate. All nonconforming signs, and the brackets and
posts which support the signs, shall be removed from the premises
within 10 days from the date of termination of such use, unless approval
for any extension of time is requested from and granted by the Zoning
Official.
H. Permitted sign specifications (if a specific type of sign is not listed, see
Zoning Official).
(1) Banner signs. Any temporary sign printed or displayed upon cloth
or other flexible material. Promotional banners include those used
to announce open houses and grand openings, make special
announcements, or communicate events.
(a) Permitted zones: Nonresidential.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One sign per lot.
(c) Size: Shall not exceed 36 square feet in area, or 12'L x 3'H in
size.
(d) Time limitation: May be placed 30 days before the event, and
removed no later than 2 business days after the event.
(e) Maximum height: 8 feet, measured from ground to top of sign.
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 12 feet measured from road edge.
(g) No outdoor banner, flag, paper, canvas, or cloth signs used to
advertise an event shall be erected until the proper no-fee
permit is obtained.
(h) No-fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before "banner"
can be erected or displayed.
(2) Charitable organization drives. Temporary signs for campaign or
money-raising drives for religious or charitable organizations.
(a) Permitted zones: Off-premises, Nonresidential.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One sign per lot.
(c) Time limitation: May be placed 30 days prior to the publicized
event, and removed no later than 2 business days after the
event.
(d) Size: Shall not exceed 36 square feet in area, or 12'L x 3'H in
size.
(e) Maximum height: 8 feet, measured from ground to top of sign.
§ 330-180 VERNON CODE § 330-180
1:600
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 12 feet measured from road edge.
(g) No-fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before "sign"
can be erected or displayed.
(3) Construction signs. Temporary signs pertaining to the
construction, repair, remodeling of any building shall be located at
the principal entrance to the building.
(a) Permitted zones: All.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One sign per construction site/lot.
(c) Time limitation: May be placed at start of construction, and
removed within 2 days of conclusion.
(d) Size: Shall not exceed 16 square feet in area, or 4'L x 4'H.
(e) Maximum height: 8 feet, measured from ground to top of sign.
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 5 feet measured from road edge.
(g) No-fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before "sign"
can be erected or displayed.
(4) Garage sale signs. A temporary sign designating or advertising to
the public the sale of used or unwanted possessions, as household
articles, often held in the garage of a house.
(a) Permitted zones: All.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One.
(c) Time limitation: May be placed 3 days prior to event, and must
be removed within 2 days of conclusion.
(d) Size: Not to exceed 4 square feet or 2'W x 2'H.
(e) Maximum height: 4 feet, measured from ground to top of sign.
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 5 feet measured from road edge.
(g) No-fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before signs can
be erected or displayed.
(5) Grand opening signs. Colored pennants are permitted on
streamers/string (see Zoning Official for details).
(a) Permitted zones: Nonresidential.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One sign per lot.
(c) Size: Shall not exceed 36 square feet in area, or 12'L x 3'H in
size.
§ 330-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-180
1:601
(d) Time limitation: May be placed 30 days prior to event, and
removed within 2 days of conclusion.
(e) Maximum height: 8 feet, measured from ground to top of sign.
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 12 feet measured from road edge.
(g) No-fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before "sign"
can be erected or displayed.
(6) Ground signs. Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building, but
excluding "pylon sign," which is supported by one or more upright
posts or braces in or upon the ground. Ground signs may include 2
components, branding and changeable marketing.
(a) Permitted zones: Nonresidential.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One per business occupancy.
(c) Time limitation: n/a permanent.
(d) Size: Shall not exceed 30 square feet.
(e) Maximum height: 10 feet measured from the ground level.
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 5 feet measured from road edge.
(g) Fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before sign can be
erected or displayed.
(7) Maintenance/service signs. (a/k/a lawn signs or yard signs -
includes but is not limited to landscaping, lawn service, paving,
driveway sealing and/or repair):
Small signs placed on a lawn.
(a) Permitted zones: All.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One per site.
(c) Time limitation: During work, and for 2 days after cessation of
work.
(d) Size: Shall not exceed 4 square feet, 2'L x 2'H in size.
(e) Maximum height: 4 feet, measured from ground to top of sign.
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 5 feet measured from road edge.
(g) No-fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before sign can
be erected or displayed.
(8) New occupancy signs.
(a) Permitted zones: All.
§ 330-180 VERNON CODE § 330-180
1:602
(b) Number of signs permitted: One sign per lot.
(c) Time limitation: They shall be removed within 15 days of
occupancy.
(d) Size: Shall not exceed 36 square feet in area, or 12'L x 3'H in
size.
(e) Maximum height: 8 feet, measured from ground to top of sign.
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 12 feet measured from road edge.
(g) No-fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before sign can
be erected or displayed.
(9) Pedestal or sandwich signs. Signs which direct attention to
products sold, or services supplied.
(a) Permitted zones: Nonresidential.
(b) Number of signs permitted: Up to 2 signs permitted per
property; properties with multi-business (plaza/centers) are
limited to 2 pedestal signs.
(c) Time limitation: Displayed during normal business hours, must
be removed nightly, and may not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic or sight distance.
(d) Size: Shall not exceed 8 square feet, or 2'W x 4'H in size.
(e) Maximum height: 4 feet, measured from ground to top of sign.
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 5 feet measured from road edge.
(g) No-fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before sign can
be erected or displayed.
(10) Political event signs. Political signs announcing political events,
issues or campaigns may be erected providing that they do not
constitute safety hazard by blocking sight distance, pedestrian or
vehicular traffic and the like.
(a) Permitted zones: All.
(b) Time limitation: May be placed thirty (30) days prior to event
or campaign, and removed within 7 days after completion of
the event or campaign.
(11) Professional occupation. A sign listing only the name and
profession of the practitioner.
(a) Permitted zones: All.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One.
(c) Time limitation: n/a permanent.
§ 330-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-180
1:603
(d) Size: Shall not exceed 4 square feet, 2'L x 2'H in size.
(e) Maximum height: 8 feet.
(f) Sign placement: Minimum 10 feet measured from road edge.
(g) Permit must be filed with Zoning Office before sign can be
erected or displayed. Note: building department permit(s) may
be required. Cannot be internally lit—down lighting only.
(12) Projecting sign. A sign which is affixed to any building and
projecting beyond the building wall or parts thereof, structure,
building line or property line more than 12 inches, but which is not
constructed or erected so as to extend above the roof line of the
structure to which it is affixed.
(a) Permitted zones: Nonresidential.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One.
(c) Time limitation: n/a permanent.
(d) Size: The area of the sign shall not exceed 16 square feet, or
4'L x 4'H.
(e) Projection: Shall not project beyond the building line more
than 4 feet, and in no case shall a projecting sign project
beyond any property line into public rights-of-way.
(f) Supports and attachments: Shall be in compliance with the
N.J.U.C.C.
(g) Maximum height: The bottom of the sign shall be at least 8 feet
clear above the walk or ground.
(h) Fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before sign can be
erected or displayed. Note: building department permit(s) may
be required.
(13) Real estate signs. A temporary sign placed upon the property for
the purpose of designating or advertising to the public the sale or
lease of said property. No-fee permit required.
Real estate signs may be one of the following 2 types:
(a) Real estate "for sale/for lease/sold" signs.
[1] Permitted zones: All.
[2] Number of signs permitted: One sign per lot to advertise
the sale or rental of premises upon which the sign is
located by the owner or real estate agent or broker.
[3] Time limitation: The sign shall be removed within 7 days
after consummation of a sale or lease transaction.
§ 330-180 VERNON CODE § 330-180
1:604
[4] Size: The sign is not to exceed 8 square feet in residential
districts or 16 square feet in all other districts (this
includes farm assessed land).
[5] Maximum height: n/a.
[6] Sign placement: Minimum 5 feet measured from road
edge.
(b) Real estate "Open House" signs.
[1] Permitted zones: All.
[2] Number of signs permitted: One sign, in addition to the
"for sale" sign, may be placed on the subject property.
[3] Time limitation: The sign may be placed up to 7 days prior
to the open house and shall be removed within 2 days after
the open house.
[4] Size: The sign shall not exceed 6 square feet in size.
[5] Maximum height: 4 feet (measured from ground to top of
sign).
[6] Sign placement: Minimum 5 feet measured from road
edge.
(c) Real estate "directional" signs are prohibited.
(d) No-fee filing requirements. Real estate office/broker must
register annually; filing window: November 1st through
December 31st, for each year.
(14) Special event signs. (e.g. Special Olympics, Earthfest, Municipal
events, etc.)
(a) Permitted zones: Nonresidential.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One sign per lot.
(c) Time limitation: May be placed 30 days before the event, and
removed no later than 2 business days after the event.
(d) Size: Shall not exceed 36 square feet in area, or 12'L x 3'H in
size.
(e) Maximum height: 8 feet measured from ground to top of sign.
(f) Sign placement: See Zoning Official.
(g) No outdoor banner, flag, paper, canvas, or cloth signs used to
advertise a special event shall be erected until the proper nofee
permit is obtained.
§ 330-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-180
1:605
(15)Wall. A sign which is affixed to or painted on an exterior wall of any
building.
(a) Permitted zones: Nonresidential.
(b) Number of signs permitted: No more than one wall sign per
face of a building which fronts on a street shall be permitted to
any one business occupancy.
(c) Time limitation: n/a permanent.
(d) Size: Total area of all wall signs on any one building shall not
exceed in area 30 percent of the total area of the first story or
ground level face of the building on which they are erected, up
to 40 square feet, and shall be designed to be architecturally
compatible with the building.
(e) Projection: No wall sign shall project higher than the highest
point of the façade of the building upon which it is to be
erected, and it shall not project more than 8 inches from the
façade of the building.
(f) Supports and attachments: Shall be in compliance with the
N.J.U.C.C.
(g) Corner properties: Corner properties, fronting on 2 or more
streets, shall be permitted no more than one wall sign fastened
on each wall fronting upon a street.
(h) Maximum height: n/a.
(i) Sign placement: Wall signs shall be placed in the front of the
building only, except on corner properties.
(j) Fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before sign can be
erected or displayed. Note: building department permit(s) may
be required.
(16)Window signs. Temporary window signs designed to promote the
sale of any article or business activity.
(a) Permitted zones: Nonresidential.
(b) Number of signs permitted: One per window.
(c) Time limitation: Shall not remain in a window longer than 30
continuous days, and shall be removed within 2 days after the
event or activity has taken place.
(d) Size: Shall not exceed in total sign area 50 percent of any total
window area.
(e) Maximum height: n/a.
(f) Sign placement: n/a.
§ 330-180 VERNON CODE § 330-180
1:606
(g) No-fee permit must be filed with Zoning Office before sign can
be erected or displayed.
I. Illumination and electrical equipment.
(1) All lit signs shall be turned off each day by midnight, unless the
business is still open.
(2) The only illumination permitted shall be down-lit (a light projecting
from the top of the sign downward onto the sign) and/or internally
lit (lit from within the sign itself).
(3) All permitted illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the
N.J.U.C.C.
J. Nonconforming signs. Any sign lawfully in existence prior to the
effective date of this section (adopted May 14, 2012 by Ord. No. 12-05)
may be continued, provided that the same shall be regularly maintained
and kept in good repair. However, no change in lettering, content, size,
construction, location, or lighting of such sign shall be permitted except
by approval of the Zoning Official.
No nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in such a way as to
increase its nonconformity unless approved by the Land Use Board. All
nonconforming aspects shall be removed or altered to conform to the
provisions of this section when any such sign is changed or modified in
shape, size, illumination, or structure.
K. Permits, fees, and enforcement.
(1) Permit.
(a) Temporary signs. Permit required (No fee).
(b) All other signs. No other sign shall be erected, constructed,
altered, or structured condition repaired until a permit has
been issued by the Zoning Official and fee paid.
(2) Regulations.
(a) Fees. Fees shall be collected by the Zoning Official in
accordance with the Vernon Township Fee Ordinance. Fee shall
be required for all new signs and all signs replacing existing
signs.
(b) Exemptions. The requirements for a permit fee shall not apply
to:
[1] Temporary window signs.
[2] Temporary signs of a political nature.
[3] Temporary signs advertising charitable fund raising
events.
§ 330-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-180
1:607
[4] Temporary real estate signs.
[5] Temporary special event signs.
[6] General maintenance and upkeep on an existing permitted
sign.
[7] Amendment/alteration of advertising copy on an existing
permitted sign.
[8] Security signs.
[9] Maintenance/service signs.
(3) Enforcement.
(a) Inspection. The Zoning Official shall inspect each sign for
which a permit is required upon completion of its installation.
(b) Unsafe signs. In the event that any sign is found to be in a
dangerous structural condition, the Zoning Official shall notify
the owner of such sign and/or the owner of the property on
which it is erected in writing, and advise the owner to make the
same safe and secure. In the event the owner does not comply
with the requirements as specified within 2 business days from
receipt of such notice, the sign may be removed by the
Township of Vernon, in which case the owner of the sign and
the owner of the building shall be jointly and severably liable to
the Township for the costs of removal.
(c) Defective signs. In the event any sign is found to be in violation
of size, number or location provisions of this section, the
Zoning Official shall notify the owner of such sign and the
owner of the property on which the sign is erected of such
violation in writing, and the owner shall within 5 business days,
correct such violation.
(d) Penalties. Violation of and/or nonconformance with this section
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in the Vernon
Township Administrative Code.
L. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
Ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by any
Court of competent jurisdiction, such provision(s) shall be deemed
severable, and the remaining portions of this Ordinance shall remain in
full force and effect.
M. All ordinances or parts of ordinances or resolutions that are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are repealed to the
extent of such inconsistency.
§ 330-180 VERNON CODE § 330-181
1:608
§ 330-181. Nonconforming buildings and uses.
Any lawful nonconforming use which existed at the time of the passage of
this article may be continued and any existing building designed, arranged,
intended or devoted to a nonconforming use may be reconstructed or
structurally altered subject to the following regulations:
A. Such building shall in no case be enlarged unless the use therein is
changed to a conforming use.
B. A nonconforming use shall not be extended, expanded or enlarged at
the expense of a conforming use.
C. A nonconforming use changed to a conforming use may not thereafter
be changed back to a nonconforming use.
D. A nonconforming use shall not be permitted to be changed to another
nonconforming use.
E. In the event that there is a cessation of operation or use of any
nonconforming use for a period of six consecutive calendar months, the
same shall create a rebuttable presumption of an intended
abandonment of such nonconforming use. In the event that there is a
cessation of operation or use of any nonconforming use for a period of
12 consecutive calendar months, the same shall be conclusively
presumed to be an intended abandonment of such nonconforming use.
Any subsequent exercise of such abandoned use shall be deemed a
violation of this section and article.
F. A building which is conforming in use but violates the yard, coverage,
setback or height requirements of this article may not be extended,
expanded or enlarged within any required yard or setback area nor
extended above the height limits of this article.
G. Nothing in this section shall prevent the restoration of a nonconforming
building partially destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of
public enemy, provided that any building partially destroyed in the
manner aforesaid may be reconstructed and thereafter used only in
such a manner as to not enlarge the causes for nonconformity. Any
building totally destroyed in the manner aforesaid may only be
reconstructed as a conforming use.
H. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require any change in
plans, construction or designed use of a building for which a building
permit has been heretofore issued and diligently acted upon, which, for
purposes of this section, shall mean that construction shall have been
undertaken within 12 months of the date of such permit.
I. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as authorization for or
approval of the continuance of the use of a structure or premises in
violation of zoning regulations in effect at the time of the effective date
of this article.
§ 330-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-181
1:609
§ 330-182. Additions to nonconforming residential structures.
J. The foregoing provisions of this section shall apply to buildings,
structures, land or uses which hereafter become nonconforming due to
any reclassification of zone districts under this article or any
subsequent change in the regulations of this article.
K. In all cases the nature and extent of nonconforming uses shall be
determined as of the date on which such use became nonconforming
whether by reason of the adoption of this article or of any previous
code, article, section, chapter or amendment.
A. Where a single-family residence which is nonconforming with respect
to one or more bulk or setback requirements is proposed to be enlarged
by a horizontal or vertical addition, and such addition would protrude
no farther into a required yard than the existing footprint of the
building or existing building envelope, and assuming no other violation
of a restriction as to height, stories or building coverage, the Zoning
Officer shall issue a zoning permit therefor and a variance shall not be
necessary. However, if in the reasonable judgment of the Zoning Officer
the proposed addition would appear to be so large and/or so
distinguishable by design as to substantially transform the character of
the residence and the impact of the same on the use and enjoyment of
one or more neighboring properties, an application for a variance shall
be required. For purposes of construing this section, no substantial
interest of the neighborhood or public shall be allowed to be
substantially compromised for the sake of expedient procedure; nor,
however, shall any reasonable and relatively insubstantial addition as
contemplated herein be unnecessarily proceeded upon.
B. Where a residence is to be enlarged as aforesaid and a proposal for the
same is shown to meet all setback, height and coverage requirements, a
variance shall not be required merely because the lot is deficient in area
or width, provided the lot shall have been lawfully created by filed map
or deed prior to the date of the first ordinance of the Township
requiring approval of a subdivision by the Planning Board or pursuant
to a perfected approval by the Planning Board.
C. Usual and customary residential appurtenances such as but not limited
to swimming pools, hot tubs, storage sheds, garages, porches, additions
and other similar recreational structures are permitted in all zones,
provided: [Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04; amended
6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 04-21]
(1) They are accessory to an existing lawful nonconforming or
conforming single-family or two-family residence.
(2) They are located within the curtilage of the residence as
determined by the Zoning Officer.
§ 330-181 VERNON CODE § 330-182
1:610
§ 330-183. Development of isolated undersized lots.84
In the event that a lot shall have been lawfully created by filed map or deed
prior to the date of the first ordinance of the Township requiring approval of
a subdivision by the Planning Board or by a perfected subdivision approval
by the Planning Board, no variance shall be required for the proposed
development of such lot merely because the lot is deficient in area or width
pursuant to this article, provided that the proposed development shall be
shown to meet all setback, height and coverage restrictions of this article.
§ 330-184. Supplemental regulations for certain classifications and
districts.
(3) They meet the setback requirements for the zone in which they are
located.
(4) They additionally meet the setback requirements of the R-4 Zone.
D. Except for swimming pools and except on a farm, appurtenances under
this section shall not exceed 500 square feet. [Added 1-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-04; amended 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 04-21]
A. PLC Private Lake Community classification.
(1) Goals and objectives.
(a) Findings and purpose. The Master Plan establishes, as one of
its goals and objectives, the preservation of existing residential
neighborhoods and lake communities, and the review of
"residential zoning standards governing the lake communities
in order to avoid unnecessary variances." Id, at I-1. The Master
Plan recognizes the "lake resort communities from the 1930's"
and later lake communities as having unique and common
qualities which are distinguishable from other residential
neighborhoods and communities within the Township.
Approximately 40% of the Township's residents live within the
lake communities (Source: 1995 Master Plan at II-1); the
largest of these is Highland Lakes, with 1,959 homes and a
population of over 4,500. At page II-9, the Master Plan
observes the following:
"The medium density residential land use refers to the R-3 zone
which includes the existing Lake communities. The density as
per the current zoning is for a 30,000 square foot lot although
the Lake communities were planned out on a 10,000 square
foot or smaller lot basis. This discrepancy in the zoning should
be resolved since this zoning requires a variance procedure
for any expansion activity of the existing homes within the
lake community. Lots that were established prior to 1978 in
84.Editor's Note: This section was repealed 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 02-38 but was later
reinstated in its entirety on 8-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-24.
§ 330-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:611
the lake communities are grandfathered under current zoning
ordinances. It is recommended, therefore, that a lake
community zoning district be established which would
recognize the grandfathered lots and establish appropriate
zoning standards that would preclude the need for Board of
Adjustment relief for minor dwelling additions without
increasing the density in the community. Highland Lakes
[Country Club and Community Association] prepared a master
plan concerning the future management and development of
its community. The establishment of this new zoning district
would complement the objectives of the Highland Lakes
master plan. The Highland Lakes master plan indicates that it
is very important that homes be permitted to improve and the
zoning should be so structured to permit these improvements.
This will also achieve the same objective for the other lake
communities."
[1] It is therefore the purpose of this section and the
corresponding standards reflected in Schedules A and B85
to reconcile these purposes and prevailing conditions with
appropriate zoning standards to the benefit of the lake
communities.
[2] It is also the purpose of this section to encourage the
private lake communities to prepare and adopt express
community policies and/or standards with respect to land
development and redevelopment within a private
community, and to file a statement of the same with the
Township Clerk for the benefit of the Township Council,
Mayor, Zoning Official, Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment, Road Department and other agencies and
officials. (Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08)
(b) Principles. Renovation, rehabilitation and improvement of
developed private properties and common properties of private
lake community associations ("PLCAs") shall be and is hereby
encouraged. Adaptive use and reuse of historical and older
examples of lakestyle architecture in the older lake
communities is distinctly favored. Suitable and desirable
improvements to lakes and lakeshores and their
appurtenances is distinctly favored. Improvement of parks,
playgrounds, playing fields and courts, and other common
facilities or amenities is encouraged. The suitable
construction, reconstruction, renovation, or expansion or other
improvements to clubhouses or other buildings or structures
owned and operated by PLCAs is encouraged.
(c) Community Plan; FCP. Every private lake community
association (PLCA) shall be permitted and is encouraged to file
85.Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:612
with the Township Clerk a community plan, in written and/or
graphic form, including but not limited to composite elements
such as the community charter, by-laws, rules and regulations,
master or originating deeds, restrictive covenants and
easements; together with descriptive statements and/or plans
as to requirements, standards or policies with respect to
development, construction, architecture, property
maintenance, roadways and circulation, utilities (including
common water supplies, and drainage structures and
facilities), environmental features and conservation measures,
recreational facilities and other common elements or facilities.
The Township Clerk shall distribute copies or the community
plan to the Township Council, Mayor, Zoning Official, Planning
and Zoning Administrator, Secretary to the Planning Board
and Zoning Board of Adjustment, Road Department and such
other agencies or officials as the Township Council or Mayor
shall deem appropriate. The Planning Board shall consider
the suitability and completeness of the community plan and
shall do so by affording the PLCA an opportunity to be heard
thereon, either by and before a committee of the Board or
by and before the entire Board. The Planning Board or a
committee of the Board is encouraged to lend technical and
other assistance to the PLCA in connection with the community
plan and is encouraged to develop a checklist or other
instructional material concerning a proper community plan
submission. [Added 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 06-16;
amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
[1] Upon finding that a PLCA has made a proper filing of a
meaningful community plan with the intent and purpose of
this section, the Board shall adopt a resolution
acknowledging the filing of the community plan for the
purposes of this section. Such resolution shall not be
unreasonably withheld as a matter of qualitative analysis if
the submission substantially satisfies the quantitative
requirements of the checklist, nor shall a PLCA be
precluded from having the plan filed simply because the
history, organization, patterns, resources or other factors
of the PLCA do not reasonably allow or prepare it to offer
information with respect to one or more elements of a
community plan submission.
[2] Upon adoption of a resolution acknowledging the filing of a
community plan, a true copy of such resolution shall be
forwarded by the Planning Board Secretary to the
Township Clerk for distribution as set forth above. The
community plan shall be marked "filed" and shall
thereafter be a Filed Community Plan (FCP) for purposes
of this section. For purposes of eligibility under this
section, such FCP shall be updated and re-examined by the
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:613
Planning Board at least once every six (6) years after initial
filing in accordance with the same procedures described
herein.
(d) If a PLCA has an FCP and if the PLCA shall thereafter make
application for a building permit or other permit within the
contemplation of this chapter with respect to its common
elements and property, the PLCA shall be eligible for the
following expedited procedure:
[1] Applications for permits involving development normally
or potentially requiring formal site plan approval
associated with the PLCA's principal use(s), building(s)
and/or parking facilities. Minor site plan submission and
review per § 330-50 irrespective of the fact that the
proposed development would exceed the scope of that
term and the procedure therefor as defined in § 330-2 and
contemplated in § 330-50.
[2] Development projects normally or potentially requiring
only minor site plan approval: exempt.
[a] For purposes of construing this subsection, the
following development or redevelopment activities by
a PLCA shall not require site plan approval:
[i] Reconstruction or rehabilitation of dams and
lakes;
[ii] Construction or reconstruction of docks, boat
racks and boat storage facilities;
[iii] Construction or reconstruction of structures and
buildings other than principal buildings as defined
in § 330-2;
[iv] Construction of parking facilities involving less
than three spaces or less than 400 square feet in
area of disturbance;
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
[v] Construction or alteration of play fields, play
courts, playgrounds, racquet sports facilities,
beaches, parks, boat launches, and substantially
similar uses and structures.
(e) Applications by members in good standing of a participatory
PLCA. An applicant for a building permit concerning an
addition to a nonconforming residence in a PLC District within
the contemplation and criteria of § 330-182 who is a member in
good standing of a PLCA for which there is an FCP shall enjoy a
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:614
rebuttable presumption that the proposed addition is
permissible and that no variance is necessary. The applicant
shall supply evidence that the permit application meets PLCA
standards and/or, where appropriate, has been approved by
the PLCA.
B. Town Center District and design guidelines for Town Center District
and C-2 Commercial District. [Adopted 12-22-1999 by Ord. No.
97-16; amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27. Repealed and
replaced 3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this district to create a mixed-use
Town Center in the Township of Vernon which provides for
commercial, residential and senior housing uses in a development
pattern and with design guidelines that promote a pedestrian scale
center that reinforces the unique sense of place of Vernon. Where
requirements of this section are in conflict with other sections of
the Township Ordinance, this section shall supersede those
requirements. The General Design Standards, Section 330-184B(5)
shall also apply to the C-2 District.
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply:
APARTMENT — A rental or condominium dwelling unit limited to a
minimum of 500 square feet.
AWNINGS — A retractable or permanently affixed device on a
storefront or over a building entrance or window that provides
shelter from light or the elements.
BALCONY — A platform that projects from the wall of a building
and is surrounded by a railing, balustrade, or parapet.
BASE — The lowest part of a structure, such as a wall, considered
as a separate unit: the base of a column.
BRACKETED BLADE — Type of wall mounted sign that projects
perpendicular to the building wall held in place by a bracket.
BUILDING BAY — Building facades defined by columns, pilasters,
and architectural recesses to create distinct areas along the
building wall.
CANOPY — A permanent structure designed to shelter persons or
activities from the elements. May be freestanding or attached.
CAP — The topmost member of any vertical architectural element,
often projecting, with a drip edge as protection from the weather,
e.g. the lintel of a door.
CLADDING — The exterior feature of a building; the veneer.
CULTURAL FACILITIES — Establishments that document social,
intellectual and artistic events including museums, art galleries
and libraries.
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:615
CUPOLAS — A vaulted roof or ceiling or a small dome set on a
circular or polygonal base or extending beyond the main ridge line
of the roof.
DUPLEX — A one-family dwelling unit attached to one other
dwelling unit in which each unit has its own front and rear access
to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
separated from the other by a vertical common fire-resistant wall.
E.I.F.S. — Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems - Multi-layered
exterior wall systems that are used on both commercial buildings
and homes.
FACADE — The face or front of a building, especially the principal
face.
FIRST FLOOR — The street level floor of the building as it orients
to the front or main entrance of the building.
LIVE/WORK UNIT — A combined apartment space and office/studio
space for professionals, service providers and artisans. Live work
units are mixed-use units with an interior connection from the
commercial space to the living space.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — Uses contained in multi-story structure
with commercial use on ground level and apartment dwellings,
offices or commercial uses on the upper levels. A mixed-use
building may also contain live/work units.
MULLION — A structural member that separates ganged windows,
doors and transoms.
MULTIFAMILY — Any building housing three or more dwelling
units containing one or more stories.
MUNTIN — A framing member that divides panes of glass in a
window or simulates divisions in window.
RSIS — Residential Site Improvement Standards.
SECONDARY STREETS — Secondary streets are any streets in
the Town Center except County Route 515, NJSH Route 94, Main
Street and Church Street.
SIDEWALK DISPLAYS — Temporary, movable signage, tables and
merchandise that could be placed on the sidewalk for display
purposes.
STREET FURNITURE — The functional elements of streetscapes
including but not limited to benches, trash receptacles, planters,
telephone booths, kiosks, sign posts, streetlights and bollards.
TAVERN — An establishment used primarily for the serving of
liquor by the drink to the general public and where food or
packaged liquors may be served or sold only as accessory to the
primary use.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:616
TRANSOM — A horizontal window located over a door or another
window separated by a horizontal mullion.
WASHING — The practice of illuminating an entire building facade
with floodlights.
(3) Permitted uses. A mix of uses is permitted based on building types
designated as such. Unless expressly permitted below, all other
uses are deemed to be prohibited. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-27]
(a) Antiques Shop.
(b) Arts Center or Gallery.
(c) Age-Restricted Housing: Defined as residential units with a
minimum of 80% of the residences occupied by persons 55
years of age and older, and the remainder not having any units
occupied by persons less than 45 years of age, are permitted.
Age-restricted housing is permitted on second floors over
retail/commercial uses. Age-restricted housing is permitted in
a stand-alone building when fronting on secondary streets.
Age-restricted housing is not permitted in basement levels.
(d) Apartments/Condominiums: Permitted on the upper floor(s)
above commercial and retail uses. Apartment and
condominiums buildings are permitted when fronting on
secondary streets. Apartments are not permitted in basement
levels unless part of a single unit with above ground residential
space.
(e) Banks, Savings and Financial Institutions.
(f) Banquet Halls and Catering Facilities.
(g) Bed-and-Breakfast: Permitted with a maximum of 15 rooms.
(h) Bus Shelters: Design shall be consistent with the street
furniture.
(i) Business Services.
(j) Child Care Center: Shall be permitted, consistent with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.6. They may be located on the first or second floor
of buildings. Children pick-up and/or drop-off area(s) shall not
be directly located in Main Street, Route 94, or Route 515.
(k) Civic and Institutional Uses, including Governmental Uses.
(l) Community Centers.
(m) Community Residences for the Developmentally Disabled:
Permitted on the second floor of mixed use buildings or
residential buildings having an ADA accessible elevator.
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:617
(n) Convenience Stores: Permitted having a minimum of 1,500
square feet and a maximum 4,000 square feet.
(o) Cultural Facilities.
(p) Drive-Through Facilities: Permitted as an accessory use to a
principal permitted use when located to the side or rear of a
facility.
(q) Health Care Facility.
(r) Health Clubs.
(s) Health Services.
(t) Inns and Bed and Breakfast Facilities: Permitted with a fifteen
(15) room maximum.
(u) Live/Work Units: Permitted with first floor commercial and
second, or upper floor residential space.
(v) Non-Residential (social type) Lodge: Permitted on second floor
of mixed use buildings or in a stand-alone building.
(w) Offices and Office Buildings: Not permitted on the first floor on
Main Street.
(x) Place of Worship.
(y) Retail and Service Establishments.
(z) Recreation Facility, Commercial, Public, or Private: Permitted
as indoor facilities or outdoor public park, plaza or square.
(aa) Restaurants: Fast food restaurants shall be permitted on the
first floor only of mixed-use buildings or as separate standalone
facilities provided they are not fronting on Main Street.
(bb) Restaurant, Take Out or Pick Up Facilities: Permitted on the
first floor.
(cc) School Bus Shelter: Design shall be consistent with the street
furniture.
(dd) Shelter and Adult Care Facilities.
(ee) Shopping Center and Specialty Shopping Centers: Defined as
having two or more retail establishments. The minimum lot
size shall be 2 acres and a maximum building size shall be
50,000 square feet, having a minimum of two retail
establishments, one such retail establishment shall have a
minimum of 4,000 square feet.
(ff) Solar or Photovoltaic: See Article XXI, Solar Zoning and
Standards, Sections 330-260 and 330-261.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:618
(gg) Specialty Food Store: Permitted with a 1,500 Square feet
minimum and 4,000 square feet maximum size for the use.
(hh) Supermarket: Permitted with maximum of 90,000 square feet
of gross building area with a required two-story building
design.
(ii) Temporary Outdoor Activity: Permitted with written
permission from the Township of Vernon.
(jj) Theaters and Amphitheaters.
(kk) Bars, Brewpubs, Craft Breweries or Distilleries or Wineries.
[Ord. No. 2016-27]
(4) Bulk standards.
(a) Facades: Buildings shall appear to be a minimum of 2 stories.
Second stories are not required to contain usable space;
however the facades of the building should be 2 stories.
(b) Bulk standards for the Town Center Zone are:
[1] Minimum lot width — 120 feet.
[2] Front yard setback — Minimum 14 feet from back of curb.
[3] Side yard setback — 7.5 feet.
[4] Rear yard setback — 5 feet.
[5] Minimum floor to ceiling height — Ground floor:
[a] Commercial — 12 feet.
[b] Residential — 8 feet.
[6] Minimum floor to ceiling height — Upper floor:
[a] Commercial — 10 feet.
[b] Residential — 8 feet.
[7] Maximum building height — 50 feet.
[8] Roof type — Pitched roofs are permitted. Flat roofs shall
have parapets. Mansard roofs are also permitted.
[9] Parking:
[a] Lodging — 1.0 space per room.
[b] Office — 1.0 per 250 square feet.
[c] Retail — 1.0 per 350 square feet.
[d] Restaurant — 1.0 per 3.0 seats.
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:619
[e] Other uses: 1.0 per 350 square feet.
[10] Parking, residential — As per RSIS standards.
[11] Shared parking is encouraged. In order to promote more
efficient use of parking facilities, a parking space may be
counted towards the parking requirement for two or more
different uses provided that the parking is within 250 feet
of the use and the use is on the shared parking factor
table. The shared parking factor illustration below shows
how shared parking can be calculated for two uses within
the same vicinity of one parking area. The shared parking
factor is used by adding together the parking requirement
for each function then dividing it by the shared factor. For
example, if a residential use requires 10 spaces and retail
use requires 10 spaces, the total number of 20 spaces is
divided by the shared parking factor of 1.2, yielding a
requirement of 17 spaces. The shared parking factor
should be utilized for uses in adjacent blocks within the
proximity of a shared lot. When three functions share
parking, the lowest factor should be used to assure enough
parking is provided.
[12] Shared Parking Factor Table.
[13] Impervious coverage — 85%.
[14] Building coverage — 70%.
[15] Residential units — A rental or condominium dwelling unit
must have a minimum of 500 sq. ft. of livable space.
(5) General design standards: Applicable in the TC District and the C-2
District, with exceptions as noted.
(a) Architectural attributes.
[1] Buildings in the Town Center District shall be designed to
evoke the architectural attributes of mountain village
architecture, alpine architecture, or the colonial
architectural elements of historic Vernon buildings.
Building materials shall contain mountain resort
architectural elements such as timber framing, cedar
shake shingles and field stone, or traditional architectural
elements such as clapboard siding, gable roofs and
window shutters.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:620
[2] The building mass, footprint and architecture shall be
designed to create an attractive visual presence at a
pedestrian scale. Mixed-use buildings are encouraged with
commercial on the ground floor and offices or apartments
on the upper floors. Historic structures shall be preserved
and renovated in a sensitive manner to preserve the
Township's history. All sides visible from a street or
parking area shall be "finished" with architectural
features.
[3] The following photographs represent architectural and
design elements that are desired in the Town Center and
C-2 Districts:
(b) Building types. The following diagrams show examples of
building types permitted in the TC District. Additional building
types may be permitted by the Land Use Board subject to the
design standards of this subsection. Building types are not
applicable to the C-2 District.
[1] Mixed-Use/Commercial Buildings.
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:621
Mixed-Use/Commercial
Building with Parking
Under
Mixed-Use/Commercial
Building
[2] Multifamily/Senior Housing.
[3] Civic Building.
(c) Building Dimensions.
[1] See Schedule B — Bulk and Yard Requirements.
[2] Cupolas, clock towers and other features shall be placed at
gateway locations and on corner buildings. These features
may exceed the maximum building height.
(d) Building Setbacks.
[1] See Schedule B — Bulk and Yard Requirements, which may
be found at the end of this chapter.
[2] Buildings shall be located close to the front lot line to
establish a defined building edge along the street;
however, there shall be setback variation along the
building façade to accommodate recessed courtyards,
outdoor nooks for tables, wall treatments and entry
alcoves to add visual interest.
(e) Building materials and colors.
[1] All building materials and colors used on the exterior of a
building shall be compatible with its overall design. Wood
clapboard, or manufactured equivalent, is recommended.
Natural wood or cedar shake siding is also recommended.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:622
Natural or cultured stone is recommended as a primary
accent material especially for building foundations,
decorative piers and columns. Textured wood siding is
recommended. Textured vinyl, cement fiber materials (if
they appear similar to clapboard or split batten boards)
and brick are permitted. Vinyl siding (non-textured),
aluminum siding, non-decorative concrete block and other
similar materials are prohibited. Stucco or stucco-like
products such as drivit or E.I.F.S. may be used only as an
accent material and not encompass more than 40 percent
of the wall surface.
[2] Building colors shall utilize historic paint colors such as
Sherwin Williams' Preservation Palette or Benjamin Moore
Historic Color Collection. However, other creative color
patterns and schemes will be considered. The building
colors shall include a base color, complementary trim
colors, and accent colors for doors and shutters.
[3] For existing buildings under 50 years old, replacement or
retention of original materials shall depend upon the visual
prominence of the building, the features to be replaced
and the building's compatibility with adjacent structures.
[4] Historic structures, over 50 years old, are encouraged to
be retained and rehabilitated in keeping with the original
building character to the greatest extent possible.
[5] Buildings with multiple storefronts shall include variations
in roofline and building height to define the individual
stores within a building block.
[6] Buildings with multiple storefronts shall be unified
through the use of architecturally compatible styles,
materials, colors, details, awnings, signage, and lighting
fixtures on all storefronts.
[7] Changes in building material should occur at a logical
place, such as a change in building mass, roof or an inside
corner.
(f) Building walls.
[1] Blank windowless walls are strongly discouraged. The
façade shall be broken up into sections or bays to provide
variety and interest. These bays or sections shall be a
minimum of 20 feet wide and a maximum of 36 feet wide.
Columns, recesses, variations in the rooflines shall be used
to break up the wall of the building into smaller sections.
Variations in building materials, patterns and colors shall
also be used to differentiate the building wall.
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:623
Landscaping can also be used to break up a blank wall
area.
[2] Building facades shall provide unified design with a clearly
defined building entrance. Recessed entrances are
encouraged similar to those on older commercial
buildings. Columns, awnings, canopies and pilasters can
be used to define the entryway. Doors and window trim
shall be used to highlight these features.
[3] The architectural treatment of the front façade shall
continue around all visible exposed sides of a building.
Each façade of a building shall be consistent in style,
materials, colors and details. Buildings shall have a
defined base and cap. The base may align with the window
sill level of the first floor, the foundation edge, or the
ground with foundation plantings. The cap of the building
includes the building cornice, parapet or eaves at the top
of the building wall.
[4] The outside face of any column shaft will align with the
outside face of the frieze board or beam above. The column
cap will project beyond the face of the frieze board or
beam, both at the inside and outside face of the column
shaft and beam above. The column base is typically larger
than the capital and will be, or "appear" as, solid stone,
brick or wood. Visible aluminum vent blocks are
inappropriate and will be discouraged. The foundation or
porch edge must be extended beyond the edge of the frieze
or beam above to allow proper column alignment. All
columns shall be of wood, masonry, or a composite
material and properly flashed to allow for a long lasting
waterproof condition.
[5] Fire escapes are not permitted on the front façade wall.
(g) Roofs and roof material.
[1] Roofs shall be designed to reflect the style of the historic
Vernon structures in terms of pitch and materials. They
shall be compatible with the building's architecture and
complementary to adjoining structures. Roof offsets,
dormers and gables are encouraged. Architectural
embellishments including towers, cupolas, chimneys,
dormers, and cross gables can be used to break up large
roof masses and add visual interest.
[2] Gable roofs with a slope of no less than 6:12 (excluding
porches and dormers) are recommended. Flat roofs are
discouraged on one and one-and-a-half story buildings.
Flat roofs on two- and three-story buildings shall include a
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:624
decorative parapet wall at least two 2 feet in height above
the roof level up to 6 feet high.
[3] Roof material shall be textured asphalt shingles, slate,
slate-like tiles or wood shingles, in dark earth tone colors
compatible with the architecture of the building. Metal
roofs or panels may be permitted particularly as accent
features.
[4] Roofs shall be designed to hide rooftop service equipment.
(h) Windows.
[1] Windows shall have a vertical orientation and alignment.
The window arrangement shall be in a unified pattern with
the windows on the upper levels vertically aligned with the
windows and doors on the ground level. The window
locations and rooflines shall be compatible with adjoining
building bays and adjacent buildings.
[2] First floor windows shall have a window sill height of not
more than 2 feet.
[3] The first floor windows of commercial uses shall be
transparent to encourage pedestrian activity and be
designed to accommodate displays. A minimum of 50% of
the ground floor wall area shall be transparent. On the
upper floors, a minimum of 30% of the wall area shall be
glazed.
[4] Windows with mullions are encouraged. Reflective and
overly tinted glass are prohibited. Outside window gates
are prohibited.
First Floor Window Example
(i) Building location and orientation.
[1] Buildings shall be located to front towards and relate to
public streets, both functionally and visually.
[2] In a multiple building development, buildings located on
the interior of a site shall front towards and relate to one
another, both functionally and visually. To the extent
possible, multiple building developments shall be
organized around features such as courtyards,
quadrangles and alleys, which encourage pedestrian
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:625
activity and incidental social interaction among users.
Smaller, individualized groupings of buildings are
encouraged.
[3] Buildings shall be located appropriately to allow for
adequate fire and emergency access.
(j) Building height — Additions.
[1] Extensions of existing buildings, particularly those with
architectural character, shall require careful attention.
Additions which overpower or conflict with the original
architecture shall not be permitted. Additions which
maintain a sense of continuity, through setbacks,
compatible colors and materials, and similar geometric
relationships are encouraged.
(k) Service equipment.
[1] All air-conditioning units, HVAC systems, exhaust pipes or
stacks, elevator housing and satellite dishes and other
telecommunications receiving devices shall be screened
from public view, by using walls, roof elements, penthousetype
screening devices or landscaping, designed to be
architecturally compatible with the building's style,
materials, colors and details.
[2] Fire escapes shall not be permitted on a building's front
facade. In buildings requiring a second means of egress
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code, internal stairs
or other routes of egress are preferred. Only in exceptional
circumstances shall an attached external fire escape be
permitted as one of the required means of egress, and only
if located, on a building's rear or side elevation.
(l) Security gates.
[1] Solid metal security gates or solid roll-down metal
windows shall not be permitted. Link or grill type security
devices shall be permitted only if installed from the inside,
within the window or door frames; or, if installed on the
outside, if the coil box is recessed and concealed behind
the building wall.
[2] Security grilles shall be recessed and concealed during
normal business hours. Models which provide a sense of
transparency, in light colors, are encouraged.
(m) Lighting.
[1] Decorative fixtures shall be used both along the street
edge and private walkways to establish a consistent
lighting design theme. Fixtures shall be Hadco
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:626
Independence (V151) fixtures in black, double-headed, in
black with decorative post and shaft as shown below, or
an equivalent light fixture and pole approved by the Land
Use Board. Downward facing lights may be approved by
the Land Use Board for interior parking areas.
Hadco Independence Light
Fixture
Double-headed with Flag
Posts
Hadco Independence Light
Fixture (V151)
[2] Other lighting fixtures such as decorative sign lighting and
building accent lighting shall be reviewed on a case-bycase
basis in accordance with these guidelines.
[3] Pole-mounted light fixtures, bollards and wall-mounted
fixtures shall follow an approved lighting design plan.
Twelve-foot high decorative light poles and metal halide
lamps shall be used. Lighting intensity shall be consistent
with the Land Development Section 330-80. House side
shields must be provided where abutting a residential use.
Low-pressure sodium, fluorescent, or mercury vapor
lighting, either attached to the exterior building façade or
to light the exterior of the building is prohibited. Neon
lighting is prohibited.
[4] Wall-mounted light fixtures used for street, driveway and
alley illumination are permitted. Wall-mounted menu
boards shall be detailed and complement the storefront
design.
[5] Wall-mounted light fixtures used for street, driveway or
walkway lighting shall match the approved Town Center
Design Specifications. Lighted bollards may be used as
decorative lighting along walkways and in plaza areas in
place of the approved light fixture.
[6] Building facades may be lit from the exterior. Such lights
shall be concealed through shielding or recessed behind
architectural features. Other wall-mounted decorative
lighting such as at building entrances shall be compatible
with the architectural style of the building.
[7] Decorative street signs and traffic signal poles shall follow
an approved design plan. Hanging banner and planter
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:627
brackets shall be used as decorative pole elements along
streets and walkways.
[8] "After-hours" lighting which illuminates the front of the
storefront while contributing to a comfortable nighttime
pedestrian experience is encouraged.
[9] Visible fluorescent bulbs, exposed exterior neon lighting,
colored bulbs (except for seasonal decoration) and
internally lit awnings are not permitted. Electric boxes,
transformer utilities, and conduits shall be concealed from
view.
[10]"Washing" the entire building facade is not permitted.
[11] Attached building or wall pack lighting shall be screened
by the building's architectural features or contain a 35
degree cut-off shield.
(n) Landscaping.
[1] Extensive landscaping shall be provided. All areas of the
site not occupied by building, parking and other
improvements shall be intensively planted with trees,
shrubs, ground, grasses and perennials. Existing trees and
shrubs shall not be removed unless a tree/ shrub removal
plan has been submitted and approved by the appropriate
Township Official.
[2] The landscape plantings shall be complementary to the
buildings and accentuate important features. Plants shall
be chosen for year round interest including color, flowers,
fruit, bark interest or branching patterns. Hardy native
plants shall be used where possible. Plant materials shall
be selected to provide variety considering height, texture
and color. Existing healthy and mature trees shall be
retained and incorporated into the landscape plan where
possible.
[3] The use of planters, window flower boxes and hanging
baskets is encouraged to provide seasonal color. Adequate
open sidewalk areas shall be provided along the storefront
being careful not to block the view of the window displays.
[4] The landscaping shall be integrated with other site design
features such as walkways, paths, gazebos, fountains,
street furniture and public art.
[5] Street trees, a minimum of 3 inch caliper at the time of
planting, shall be planted along both sides of all streets in
the Town Center. The bottom branches shall be trimmed to
a minimum of 7 feet from the ground to allow pedestrian
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:628
passage. Tree spacing shall be generally 35 feet apart with
variation for driveways, lighting and other streetscape
impediments.
[6] The Town Center development shall utilize Ironsmith
"Camelia" tree grates or approved equal around street
trees in the sidewalk area. All landscaping shall conform to
the Land Development Section 330-72.
[7] The following street trees are the required species for the
Town Center and should be planted in an alternating
pattern:
[a] Prunus Serrulata Kwanzan, (Kwanzan Cherry)
[b] Pyrus Calleryana "Redspire" (Redspire Pear)
[8] The following trees are recommended for landscaped
areas and parking areas:
[a] Fraxihus Pennsylvanica (Green Ash)
[b] Zelkova Serrata (Japanese Zelkova)
[c] Tilia Cordata Greenspire (Greenspire Linden)
[d] Quercus Rubra (Northern Red Oak)
[e] Acer Rubrum (Red Maple)
[9] The following small flowering trees are recommended for
landscaping and parking areas.
[a] Carpinus betulus "Fastigata" (Pyramidal European
Hornbeam)
[b] Prunus Serrulata Kwanzan, (Kwanzan Cherry)
[c] Celtis Occidentalis (Hackberry)
[d] Pyrus Calleryana "Redspire"(Redspire Pear)
[e] Crataegus Crusgalli var. inermis (Thornless Cockspur
Hawthorne)
(o) Streetscape, sidewalks, crosswalks and public spaces
(Applicable to TC District, not C-2 District)
[1] Where not existing already, streetscape improvement shall
be constructed along the road frontage of every lot
proposed for development in the Town Center District. The
streetscape shall include sidewalk, brick paver or
landscaped area, street trees, street lights and street
furniture.
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:629
[2] Sidewalks shall be wide enough to handle pedestrians and
accommodate benches, planters and street trees lights.
Sidewalks along Main Street shall be a minimum width of
12 feet wide. Sidewalks elsewhere in the Town Center
District shall be a minimum of 6 feet wide. A minimum 2
foot wide brick paver strip shall be constructed between
the curb and the sidewalk. Walkways shall be raised and
curbed along buildings and within parking lots, where
suitable. Following are 2 streetscape examples:
[a] Main Street Streetscape:
[b] Secondary Street Streetscape:
[3] Walkways shall be raised and curbed along buildings and
within parking lots, where suitable. Scored or decorative
concrete, having a limited number of raised areas, shall be
the preferred material. All walkways and paved areas not
within the public right-of-way may use appropriately
colored pavers, at the option of the property owner. All
specific designs shall be subject to Vernon Land Use Board
approval.
[4] Asphalt and non-aggregate exposed concrete slabs, clay
brick, and decorative concrete pavers are permitted and
shall provide a flat walking surface. Sidewalks shall be
wide enough to handle pedestrians and accommodate
benches, planters, street trees and street lights.
[5] Decorative crosswalks shall be used to connect the public
walkway system and help slow down traffic to create a
pedestrian friendly environment.
[6] Barrier-free walkway systems shall be provided to allow
pedestrian access to buildings or uses from parking lots
and public sidewalks.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:630
Pedestrian Space Example
(p) Parking.
[1] Parking location.
[a] Off-street surface parking shall be located at the rear
of the building and on the interior of lots. Parking shall
be accessed by means of common driveways
preferably from side streets. Off-street parking shall
be prohibited in any front yard setback area.
[b] Parking on the side of buildings is discouraged; but if
parking is located to the side of buildings it must be
heavily screened from the street.
[c] Parking shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
side and rear yards and rear building façade.
[2] Parking layout.
[a] Parking lots shall be limited in size where possible and
interconnected with commercial parking lots on
adjacent properties. Shared parking areas and shared
driveways are strongly encouraged. Cross access
easements for adjacent lots with interconnected
parking lots shall be required, in language acceptable
to the Township.
[b] Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided within
parking lots.
[c] Parking lot design shall consider pedestrian
circulation. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided
and linked to the wider pedestrian network. Pavement
textures shall be required on pedestrian access ways,
and strongly encouraged elsewhere in the parking lot,
as surfacing materials, or when used as accents.
[d] Parking lots shall meet New Jersey ADA requirements
for handicapped parking.
[3] Parking lot landscaping.
[a] Parking lots shall be suitably landscaped to provide
shade and visual relief. At least one shade tree a
minimum of 3 inch caliper in size shall be provided for
every 10 cars in the parking lot. At least, 10% of the
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:631
lot shall be green. A stonewall or evergreen hedge at
least 4 feet in height shall be used to screen parking
along the front lot line. The perimeter edge of the
parking lot shall be planted with evergreen hedges,
shade trees, shrubs, related ground covers.
[b] For parking lots over 2 rows, 5 foot wide planted aisles
shall be located between the rows to provide room for
shade trees, shrubs and other plant materials. Also
landscaping shall be installed in the parking lot
islands to provide shade coverage in the parking lot.
The height of any required screen shall decrease
where driveways approach sidewalks or walkways, to
provide adequate visibility for pedestrians from motor
vehicles, and shall not interfere with sight triangle
requirements. Diamond-shaped planters for trees may
be utilized for tree plantings if the applicant shows
there is insufficient space on the lot for the 5 foot wide
planters.
(q) Loading and service areas.
[1] Loading and service areas, trash receptacles and utility
boxes shall be placed in visually unobtrusive locations in
the side or rear of the buildings. The service areas shall be
integrated with the building design. Recesses in the
building, or depressed access ramps can also be used.
Shared area for such service areas shall be considered.
[2] Screening shall be provided to block direct views into
these areas. A solid wall, a minimum of 6 feet in height and
constructed of stone or similar material compatible to the
building shall be used to screen trash and service areas.
Materials shall be heavy duty and able to withstand
loading activities. Heavy duty, solid gates of metal or wood
framed with metal shall be used to screen openings around
trash and service areas.
[3] Chain link fencing including use of wood or plastic slats
and wood stockade fencing is prohibited for screening of
trash and service areas.
[4] Appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent bears and
other animals from gaining access to trash receptacles and
dumpsters.
[5] Walls and fences shall in all public areas be constructed to
match the architectural detail of the principal structure
and shall not be located abutting residential property.
[6] Property owners and businesses are encouraged to
consolidate and share refuse areas and equipment to the
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:632
best extent possible. Exterior storage units are prohibited.
Storage rooms, or areas, may be built into a building,
subject to proper means of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
control, and further that said storage area shall be
necessary as part of an approved premises or use.
(r) Walls, fences and guiderails.
[1] Walls and fences shall be architecturally compatible with
the style, material and colors of the principal building on
the lot. Fences and screen walls shall be limited to a
maximum height of 4 feet except they must be 6 feet in
height when used as a buffer for service area enclosures.
[2] Walls can be used as seating walls and for privacy.
Stonewalls are the preferred material for walls and accent
elements in the Town Center. Stone walls shall be topped
with a stone or cast stone cap.
[3] Fencing may be used for screening and to define spaces
such as courtyards and semi-private spaces. Decorative
metal or cast iron fences are desirable. Solid decorative
fences are permitted only in the side and rear yards.
Within the front yard, fences shall be at least 50% open.
Wood picket fences with either stone or wood piers are
desirable. Chain link, highway-style guard rail, or
contemporary security fencing such as barbed wire or
razor wire, are prohibited.
[4] Walls or fences over 50 feet in length shall require piers
set no further than 20 feet on center. Corners and
entrances shall be defined with articulated piers or posts.
[5] Structural retaining walls over 4 feet in height must be
designed by a professional engineer. They shall be
constructed of the Highland wall stone system as
manufactured by Grinnell or approved equal. Stone or
brick veneers are permitted but not preferred.
[6] Guide rails within the Town Center shall be of a wood
timber design in accordance with the Vernon standards.
Metal guide rails are prohibited.
[7] Walls and fences shall not interfere with sight triangle
requirements of this chapter.
Decorative Wall Example
(s) Signage.
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:633
[1] Applicable sign standards can be found in Section 330-180
Signs.
(t) Outdoor cafes.
[1] Outdoor cafes shall be permitted on sidewalks, plazas and
courtyards, provided pedestrian circulation or access to
store entrances is not impaired.
[2] Sidewalk cafes shall maintain a minimum of 4 feet of
passable sidewalk to allow for pedestrian circulation.
[3] Removable enclosures are encouraged and shall be used
as a way of defining the area occupied by the cafe.
Extended cloth or canvas awnings, colorful canopies or
large umbrellas are also recommended as a way to define
the dining area.
[4] The operators of outdoor cafes shall be responsible for
maintaining a tidy appearance within the area of their
activities.
Outdoor Café Example
(u) Sidewalk displays.
[1] Displays, limited to the premises (or their products and
services) are permitted directly in front of an
establishment along the sidewalk, provided at least 6 feet
of clearance is maintained at the storefront entrance and
at least 4 feet of sidewalk is maintained by pedestrians.
Displays are permitted in the rear and side yards of the
premises, provided that said display is temporary, defined
as being readily removed and is not a permanent fixture,
attractive and may not generally exceed 6 feet in height.
Sidewalk Display Example
(v) Awnings.
[1] Fixed or retractable awnings are permitted at ground floor
level, and on upper levels where appropriate, provided
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:634
they complement a building's architectural style, are
compatible with its materials, colors and details, do not
conceal architectural features, such as cornices, columns,
pilasters or decorative details, do not impair façade
composition, and are designed to work within the
building's facade subdivisions. Awning shapes shall reflect
the shape of the top of the opening to which they relate.
[2] Canvas is the preferred material, although other waterproofed
fabrics may be considered. Metal or aluminum
awnings are prohibited. Solid and striped patterns are
preferred. Colors of awnings shall be compatible with the
building and sign colors.
[3] Canopies are permitted, and may extend over the
sidewalk, but shall not restrict pedestrian circulation, and
shall follow the standards set forth for awnings.
[4] Particular attention shall be taken with selection of the
appropriate supporting structure and hardware, as well as
with the location and method by which it is attached to the
building façade.
[5] In buildings with multiple storefronts, compatible awnings
shall be used as a means of unifying the structure.
Awning Example
C. MTC Mountain Conservation classification and district; source; intent
and purpose.
(1) Certain lands comprising part of Hamburg Mountain are subject to
a deed restriction benefitting the public, which restriction limits
the use of such lands to "… parks, natural areas, forests, camping,
fishing, water reserves, wildlife, reservoirs, hunting, boating,
winter sports, and similar uses, for either public outdoor recreation
or conservation of natural or historic resources, or both." Such
language effectively incorporates the language of N.J.S.A.
13:8A-37f which defines "recreation and conservation purposes,"
and which includes "natural areas." This definition is part of the
"New Jersey Green Acres Land Acquisition and Recreation
Opportunities Act." That Act principally contemplates the
governmental acquisition of lands for outdoor recreation and
conservation purposes. Acquisition for public purposes can be
accomplished under the Act by "… a restriction on the use of land
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:635
by others including owners of other interests therein; such interest
or right sometimes known as a conservation easement. [sic]"
(2) As grantor of the lands subject to this restriction, New Jersey
Department of Environment Protection ("DEP") appears to have
subsequently vested considerable discretion in the Township as to
the interpretation and enforcement of the restriction. This places
the Township in a position of broad responsibility, since the "public"
to be benefitted would presumably extend beyond the citizenry of
Vernon Township.
(3) Since it would appear that DEP's reservation of rights on behalf of
the public is clearly in the nature of a "conservation restriction,"
the Township takes notice of the Legislature's definition of that
term as:
"An interest in land … appropriate to retaining land or water areas
predominantly in their natural, scenic or open or wooded condition,
or for conservation of soil or wildlife, or for outdoor recreation or
park use, or as suitable habitat for fish or wildlife, to forbid or limit
any or all:
(1) Construction or placing of buildings, roads, signs, billboards,
or other advertising, or other structures on or above the
ground.
(2) Dumping or placing of soil or other substance or material as
landfill, or dumping or place of trash, waste or unsightly or
offensive materials.
(3) Removal or destruction of trees, shrubs or other vegetation.
(4) Excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat, gravel, soil,
rock or other mineral substance.
(5) Surface use except for purposes permitting the land or water
area to remain predominantly in its natural condition.
(6) Activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water
conservation, erosion control or soil conservation, or fish and
wildlife habitat preservation.
(7) Other acts or uses detrimental to the retention of land or water
areas according to the purposes of this chapter." N.J.S.A.
13:8B-2B
(4) Having employed the legal device of "conservation restriction" in
order to give effect to the language of the restriction which
incorporates the defined scope of "recreation and conservation
purposes" under N.J.S.A. 13:8A-37f, it would seem that the state
has contemplated use of these lands which is substantially more
limited than the uses permitted under the CR Commercial
Recreation classification, making the permissible use of these lands
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:636
significantly inconsistent with that zoning classification. The
Mountain Conservation classification is thus designed to reconcile
the different controls which regulate the use of these lands. The
classification and district are further designed to be consistent with
the restricted use of the Hamburg Mountain Wildlife Management
Area in Vernon and Hardyston Townships, and to promote the types
of recreational activities, such as hiking, fishing, and cross-country
skiing, as are contemplated in the Land Use Plan of the Master
Plan as "eco-tourism" for the Conservation District. Finally, this
classification would limit disturbance of woodlands, steep slopes,
wildlife habitats and other environmentally sensitive areas, as well
as preserve the profile of the mountain's ridgeline, all as
contemplated in the Conservation Plan of the Master Plan.
Accordingly, use of these lands shall be restricted as follows:
(a) Permitted principal uses: outdoor recreation and conservation,
including parks, natural areas, historic areas, forests, camping,
fishing, water reserves, preservation and appreciation of
wildlife, reservoirs, hunting, boating, winter sports and similar
uses for either public outdoor recreation or conservation of
natural resources, or both (N.J.S.A. 13:8A-37f).
(b) Permitted accessory uses: ancillary improvements to land or
water areas designed to expand and enhance their utilization
for outdoor recreation and conservation purposes, including
ancillary roadways, parking, landscaping, fencing, lighting,
utilities and buildings in support of outdoor recreation (N.J.S.A.
13:8A-37d).
(c) Except as necessary or appropriate in support or furtherance
of outdoor recreation and conservation under Subsection
C(4)(a) of this section, and/or unless necessary or appropriate
as an ancillary accessory use under Subsection C(4)(b) of this
section, the following shall be prohibited in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 13:8B-2b:
[1] Construction or placing of buildings, roads, signs,
billboards, or other advertising, or other structures on or
above the ground.
[2] Dumping or placing of soil or other substance or material
as landfill, or dumping or placing of trash, waste or
unsightly or offensive materials.
[3] Removal or destruction of trees, shrubs or other
vegetation.
[4] Excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat, gravel, soil,
rock or other mineral substance.
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:637
[5] Surface use except for purposes permitting the land or
water area to remain predominantly in its natural
condition.
[6] Activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water
conservation, erosion control or soil conservation, or fish
and wildlife habitat preservation.
[7] Other acts or uses detrimental to the retention of land or
water areas according to the purposes of this chapter.
(d) Interpretation: The scope and nature of permitted principal
and accessory uses in the MTC District as contemplated in this
subsection shall be construed in a manner which is consistent
with the construction and enforcement of the said deed
restriction by the State of New Jersey, its designees, assigns
and successors. This subsection is intended to be no more and
no less restrictive than the said deed restriction.
D. SR Seasonal Recreation District.
(1) Only proprietary campgrounds facilities and wilderness
campgrounds as defined by and subject to the Proprietary
Campground Facility Health and Safety Standards of the State of
New Jersey shall be permitted in this district. Such facilities and
campgrounds are further subject to the requirements contained in
this section. Cabins, permanent or semipermanent huts or other
similar immobile living accommodations are prohibited.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) The contents or omissions of Schedule A86 of this article
notwithstanding, the following shall also be permitted as
accessory uses within proprietary campgrounds authorized
under this section on lots within such campgrounds upon
which a camping unit has been placed; provided, however, that
any such accessory structures authorized hereby shall be
removed from the lot if the camping unit to which they are
appurtenant is removed from the lot and not returned or
replaced by another such camping unit within one year from
the date of said removal:
[1] Decks and covered porches: one deck or one covered
porch.
[2] Screen houses and gazebos: one screen house or one
gazebo.
[3] Storage sheds: one storage shed.
86.Editor's Note: Schedule A, Permitted, Conditional and Accessory Uses and Structures, is
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:638
(b) Implementation and use of any accessory use as authorized
pursuant to this subsection shall be governed by and subject to
the provisions of Subsections D(4) and (5) of this section.
(3) No permanent or year-round occupancy of the campsites is
permitted. Only such use as is seasonal in nature and clearly
incidental to recreation and resort activities shall be permitted. No
recreational vehicles shall be occupied for more than 10 continuous
days between November 1 and March 31 or such other time as
seasonal water supply is not in service.
(4) Except as may be expressly and specifically permitted pursuant to
this section or article, permanent decks or other similar permanent
structures are prohibited.
(5) Supplementary regulations for campgrounds.
(a) Outdoor storage of materials or equipment in all front yards
and buffer strips shall be prohibited, and, further all other
outdoor storage shall be prohibited unless the same is
necessary for the operation of the campground and has been
approved by the Planning Board.
(b) Permanent storage sheds, permanent decks, and other similar
permanent structures are prohibited, except as and to the
extent authorized under Subsection D(2) of this section.
(c) All outside lighting shall be installed so as not to cause glare
onto adjoining buildings or properties or upon public streets or
roads.
(d) Signs displayed on any lot shall be limited to those adequate to
identify respective use or occupancy, and shall be in
conformance with Section _____. All bare light sources shall be
shielded from direct view. Moving or flashing illumination is
prohibited. Advertising signs or devices are prohibited.
(e) Location. No campsite shall be less than 100 feet from any
public right-of-way or from a project area line. No campsite
shall be located less than 50 feet from the bank of any stream
or within 50 feet of any shore line or any area subject to
periodic inundation from surface or subsurface water.
(f) Campsite density and area. The density of campsites in a
project area shall not exceed an average of 10 per acre on any
given acre. Each campsite, including parking space, shall
provide a minimum of 1,800 square feet of space.
(g) Campsite occupancy. Each campsite may accommodate only
one camping unit occupied by the camper and party, provided
that the number of occupants of the camper shall be limited to
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:639
the manufacturer's specifications for sleeping accommodations
of the camper.
(h) Access roadways: vehicular and pedestrian.
[1] Access for camping vehicles and other vehicular traffic to
the campgrounds shall be from an arterial interior access
road of sufficient width for two camping vehicles to pass
conveniently, and constructed so as to minimize dust, ruts
and mud holes in accordance with the standards approved
by the Township Engineer. All other interior roads or
drives shall, if possible, connect with the interior arterial
road. Such other streets shall not be paved but shall be
maintained with gravel surface and kept in passable
condition at all times, and such roads and drives shall be of
sufficient width to accommodate one camping vehicle.
There shall be spaces provided at the side of such roads
and drives at appropriate intervals to allow vehicles to
pass. All such roads or drives shall be and remain private
streets.
[2] Every section within a project area shall have at least 100
feet of frontage on an interior arterial access road.
(i) Sewage disposal. The applicant shall provide an acceptable
method of disposal for all sewage in accordance with all state
and local health requirements.
(j) Surface drainage. All necessary drainage shall be provided as
required by the Planning Board on the advice of the Board
Engineer, which drainage shall be adequate considering the
seasonal nature of the use.
(k) Landscaping. Landscaping plans shall be submitted as part of
the site plan review process in both map and written form and
shall indicate the types of trees and shrubs to be used.
(l) Access drives and paths. Individual access drives to each
campsite and camper pads of crushed stone or gravel shall be
constructed by the applicant.
(m) Rules to be filed. All rules and regulations governing the use of
the campground proposed to be established by the applicant
or, in the case of condominiums, copies of the proposed master
deed, association bylaws and facilities license agreement, shall
be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board. Once
approved by the Planning Board, no changes shall be made
without Planning Board approval.
(n) Statement of operator. The owner or operator of every
campground shall file with the Township Clerk a statement
giving the name, address and telephone number of the person
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:640
principally responsible for the operation of said campground,
to whom any complaints for violations of this chapter or any
other ordinance of the Township can be referred for correction.
The owner or operator shall immediately notify the Township
Clerk of any change in the name, address or telephone number
of said responsible person.
(o) Power of attorney to accept process. Where the owner or
operator of any campground is a nonresident of the County of
Sussex or is a corporation or partnership having its principal
place of business elsewhere than in the County of Sussex, said
owner or operator shall file with the Township Clerk, and shall
keep on file, a power of attorney authorizing the Township
Clerk to accept service of process for and on behalf of said
owner or operator. Any complaint or other legal process so
served upon the Township Clerk, pursuant to said power of
attorney to accept process, shall be deemed service upon the
owner or operator, and the Township Clerk shall immediately
forward such complaint or other legal process to the owner
and/or operator at the address shown in the power of attorney,
by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.
(p) All accessory structures permitted under Section _____ of this
chapter shall be freestanding, and no such structure shall be
attached to the camping unit to which it is appurtenant or any
other structure or improvement. "Zero" clearance is permitted.
All such accessory structures shall be a minimum of eight feet
from any road which abuts the property on which it is
located.87
(q) One outdoor storage shed is permitted and shall not exceed
100 square feet and shall not be used for any purpose other
than the storage of camping and related equipment and
supplies.88
(r) Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, no single accessory
structure allowed pursuant to Subsection D(2) of this section
shall have a square footage in excess of 400 square feet or the
square footage of the camping unit to which it is appurtenant;
whichever is less. The total aggregate square footage of all
such accessory structures on any single camping lot shall not
exceed 600 square feet.
(s) Porches and gazebos permitted pursuant to Subsection D(2) of
this section may only be enclosed with screening material.
Solid wall coverings, glazing, knee walls or any other method
of enclosure is expressly prohibited. Eighty percent of the
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:641
perimeter wall area of any such porch or gazebo shall be open
(i.e., enclosed by screening material).
(t) No accessory structure permitted pursuant to Subsection D(2)
of this section shall be constructed on any camping lot until the
owner is in possession of a construction permit duly issued by
the Vernon Township Construction Official and all approvals
required by the governing body of the campground operator.
All such structures shall conform to the applicable building
codes governing same. Any such structure which shall exceed
100 square feet shall be built in modular sections and
constructed in such a way as to be easily removable. The
Construction Official shall ensure such modular construction
meets all building codes and can be readily disassembled.
E. Private Leasehold Lake Communities (PLLC) District. [Added
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Private Leasehold Lake Community
District is to establish specific regulations for structures in
unsubdivided lake communities such as Lake Pochung and Laurel
Lake.
(2) Principal permitted uses.
(a) Private leasehold lake communities as defined in § 330-2 of this
chapter.
(b) Single-family detached dwellings.
(3) Existing single-family structures in unsubdivided lake communities
must meet the following standards:
(a) Minimum distance between buildings: 20 feet.
(b) Minimum distance to lake: 15 feet or the existing setback,
whichever is greater.
(c) Minimum distance to center line of any road or common
driveway: 15 feet or existing setback, whichever is greater.
(d) Maximum size of addition: 100% of the existing structure or
500 square feet, whichever is less.
(4) Accessory structures.
(a) Minimum distance to associated principal structure: five feet.
(b) Minimum distance to separate principal structure: 10 feet or
the existing setback, whichever is less.
(c) Minimum distance to center line of any road or common
driveway: 10 feet.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:642
(d) Maximum height: 15 feet.
(5) Any new principal structure built in the PLLC District must meet
the requirements of the PLC Zone District.
F. Public Use District. [Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this district to establish a zone
regulating public open space and government uses.
(2) Permitted uses.
(a) Public recreation, open space and conservation areas.
(b) Community, cultural, recreational, athletic, social and
educational facilities owned and operated by a public entity.
(c) Public parks, roads and other public areas.
(d) Agricultural uses.
(e) Single-family detached dwellings as regulated in the
Conservation Zone District.
(3) Accessory uses. Any use that is customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
(4) Area and bulk requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 135,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum front yard: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard: 100 feet.
(e) Maximum impervious coverage: 20%.
(f) Maximum height: two stories or 45 feet, whichever is less.
G. Mountain Resort. The following provisions shall apply to a Mountain
Resort. [Added 6-12-2000 by Ord. No. 00-14; amended
11-15-2001 by Ord. No. 01-26; amended 7-10-2006 by Ord. No.
06-21]
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this paragraph is to establish provisions
for a Mountain Resort complex in conjunction with outdoor
recreational and conservation uses in adjacent conservation zones.
It is contemplated the Mountain Resort would encompass a
substantial area of land, and that the use of such land would be
coordinated with recreational and conservation uses in a common
theme operated as a single entity. The intent is to allow for the
creation of a major regional resort and conference destination
providing a wide array of indoor and outdoor activities consistent
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:643
with the resort nature of the area. This paragraph contemplates
the establishment of a resort village featuring pitched roofs,
articulation of the planes of buildings, balconies and other
ornamental features, together with the establishment of
complementary uses designed to create development in harmony
with the valley and the mountains.
(2) Principal Use. The sole permitted principal use in the MR zone
district shall be a Mountain Resort. For purposes of this paragraph,
a Mountain Resort shall mean a planned commercial development
in which a ski area, ski resort, conference center, recreational
facilities, spa and wellness center, shopping centers, art centers,
hotels and other resort lodging, retail sales, restaurants, galleries,
offices, and recreational uses, in any approved combination
thereof, would establish a resort, operated as a single entity under
a common theme.
(3) Zoning Requirements.
(a) A Mountain Resort shall consist of no more than 1.6 million
square feet of space among the various elements.
(b) There shall be a maximum of 133 vacation type units included
in a Mountain Resort. "Vacation type units" shall be attached
townhouse style units constructed on grade.
(c) There shall be a maximum of 1,677 hotel units in a Mountain
Resort.
(d) There shall be no more than 220,000 square feet of other
commercial space, including ski resort support services, but
excluding hotel units and vacation type units.
(e) The minimum tract area for establishment of a Mountain
Resort shall be 200 acres.
(f) Of the total acreage, at least 80 acres shall be available for
development, meaning it is not subject to deed restrictions or
easements which prohibit development.
(g) The lots comprising the tract area shall be contiguous, except
for intervening public streets, and any railroad right-of-way, in
order that a perimeter boundary may be established to
delineate the boundaries of the Mountain Resort.
(h) Portions of the resort may be subdivided for purposes of
financing and conveyance. All lands shall be subject to common
covenants, conditions and restrictions in order to make certain
the various elements of the resort will continue to operate as a
single entity under a common theme, regardless of ownership.
In this regard, a form of deed restriction shall be established as
a blanket covenant and restriction designed to perfect the
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:644
purpose of this paragraph in the event of any sale of a hotel
unit, vacation type units, other commercial component,
building or a portion of any building.
(i) The buildings within the Mountain Resort shall be located
within 1,200 feet west or north of State Highway 94, and
within 500 feet east or south of State Highway 94.
(j) Buildings shall not exceed four and one-half (4 1/2) stories, and
sixty-five (65) feet in height as measured from final grade,
except as hereinafter provided. The applicant may construct
one set of buildings on land bordered by Sand Hill Road and
the northerly side of Route 94, so as to take advantage of the
terrain. At such location, the height of that building or
combination of buildings shall not exceed seven and one-half
(7 1/2) stories and one hundred (100) feet as measured from
final grade. For the portion of such building or buildings within
sixty (60) feet from the edge of pavement of Route 94, no more
than four (4) stories may be constructed at a maximum height
of fifty (50) feet measured from final grade. The set back from
Sand Hill Road on such building or buildings shall be a
minimum of sixty (60) feet, except that the setback for a
covered entrance or an entrance to a parking area, shall be set
back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. Except for the
building or buildings facing Sand Hill Road, the finished grade
at the front of any building shall be measured from that portion
of the building or buildings facing Route 94. It is recognized
that buildings west or north of Route 94 may be higher than
four and one-half (4 1/2) stories, but no such portion of any
building shall be permitted to exceed seven and one-half (7 1/
2) stories and one hundred (100) feet as measured from
average grade along any single façade.
(k) All stories above the first floor shall be limited to resort
lodging, except that other commercial space may exist on the
second floor if the access is from the first floor. Spa and/or
conference center space may be located anywhere within any
building.
(l) Buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of ten (10) feet
from any public right-of-way. Otherwise, there shall be no
required minimum setback, except as may be required for
emergency access and fire safety.
(m) Parking requirements shall be as follows:
(i) The vacation type units shall be provided with 300 parking
spaces.
(ii) The hotel units shall be provided with 1.25 parking spaces
per unit. Of those spaces, .85 per unit shall be under
grade, and not visible from any public street.
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:645
(iii) In addition to parking for vacation type units and hotel
units, a Mountain Resort shall, at all times, maintain a
minimum of 1,000 additional surface parking spaces.
(iv) In addition, there shall be provided surface parking at the
rate of 13 spaces for each 1,000 square feet for the
maximum of 220,000 square feet of other commercial
space permitted in the Mountain Resort.
(v) The under grade parking shall be permitted to be 9 feet
wide by 18 feet long, recognizing they will be used by
resort residents. All surface spaces shall be of a size
required by the code applicable to other commercial uses.
(vi) All required surface parking does not have to be located on
the tract of land being used as a Mountain Resort, nor does
it have to be located in the MR zone district. Any
application for development shall be required to establish
the required number of parking spaces, in close proximity
to the resort, to the satisfaction of the Planning Board,
including a means of transportation from parking areas to
the various attractions at or around the resort. On tract
parking decks may be used to satisfy the parking
requirement.
(vii) In any application for development, the developer shall be
permitted to defer construction of 40% of the surface
parking required in Paragraph G(3)(m)(iv), above, until
construction of a total of 800,000 square feet of space.
Thereafter, the developer shall be required to construct
the deferred parking, or seek a waiver from the
requirement to construct those spaces by establishing to
the Planning Board that the spaces are not presently
necessary, and establishing in a site plan where those
reserved spaces would be constructed, if necessary in the
future. Subsequent to construction of the first 800,000
square feet of space, the developer may continue to seek a
waiver for up to 40% of the additional required surface
parking under Paragraph G (3) (m) (iv); not as an
automatic deferral, but by establishing the lack of present
need and by establishing in a site plan where the reserved
parking would be constructed, if necessary. In order to
obtain the waiver, the applicant shall establish, that the
required parking is not necessary at the time of the
application. In making such a request, the developer shall
be required to show the total amount of required parking
can be constructed in the event it proves to be necessary.
The Planning Board may require some form of surety to
guarantee the parking is constructed, if it is determined to
be necessary.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:646
(n) In the event of a subdivision in connection with the Mountain
Resort, there shall be no restrictions on frontage, lot size or
dimension or maximum impervious or building coverage in
connection with the development, provided maximum building
coverage for the entire Mountain Resort is no greater than
10%, maximum impervious coverage for the Mountain Resort
is no greater than 25% and maximum newly permitted site
disturbance is no greater than 50%.
(o) The following specific uses shall be permitted as components
of a Mountain Resort:
(i) Resort lodging
(ii) Bakeries
(iii) Banks and financial institutions, including ATM's, either
with a banking facility or as a stand alone machine
(iv) Barber and beauty shops
(v) Bookstore/newsstand/card shop
(vi) Bicycle and sports related rentals, sales and service
(vii) Childcare facilities
(viii) Cocktail lounges and bars
(ix) Conference center and support services, including
stationery and supplies
(x) Delicatessens/coffee shops
(xi) Drug stores and pharmacies
(xii) Galleries
(xiii) Grocery and convenience stores
(xiv) Health clubs
(xv) Indoor recreation uses (e.g., amusements and arcades)
(xvi) Learning center (e.g., Audubon Society)
(xvii) Liquor stores
(xviii)Water park/miniature golf/related recreation
(xix) Nightclubs/dance clubs
(xx) Offices
(xxi) Outdoor festival and art show, commercial retail and food
and beverage
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:647
(xxii) Restaurants
(xxiii) Resort support services (e.g., gondolas, water park
support, resort sales and operation centers, skier
information services, transit center, lift ticket offices,
event areas)
(xxiv) Spas and personal service
(xxv) Theatres
(xxvi) Clothing and other merchandise sales
(xxvii) Temporary uses which are customary and incidental to a
resort, including but not limited to festivals, concerts,
events, picnics, shows, games and other temporary
gatherings or event.
(xxviii) Other commercial, retail, and service uses of similar
character normally associated with a resort.
(p) Except as modified by this paragraph, the bulk criteria of the
CR zone district as currently in effect as of the date of adoption
of this paragraph shall apply.
(4) Miscellaneous Requirements. The following provisions shall apply
to a Mountain Resort:
(a) A developer shall seek general development plan (GDP)
approval for a Mountain Resort, and seek individual site plans
in connection with the creation of a Mountain Resort. An
application for GDP approval shall be submitted in anticipation
of submission of applications for site plan approval, or be
submitted in conjunction with any such site plan application. A
preliminary site plan application that is filed prior to the
effective date of this ordinance may proceed without the filing
of a GDP plan on condition that: (1) the developer establishes
to the Planning Board, conceptually, how the site plan
improvements will be coordinated with the entirety of the
Mountain Resort; and (2) GDP approval is obtained prior to
obtaining final site plan approval. [Amended 9-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-32]
(b) Any applicant for any component of a Mountain Resort must
submit a parking plan and traffic control plan as part of the
submission. The plans shall present a comprehensive means
for providing efficient handling of all components of parking
and traffic. For each phase of submission, there shall be
required an updated parking and traffic management plan
demonstrating how the requirements for all guests, employees,
visitors and staff will be satisfied.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:648
(c) The development shall make adequate accommodation for the
flow of traffic to be generated to and from the resort, as well as
provide for safe and efficient vehicular circulation within the
development.
(d) The developer shall design an attractive streetscape in all
portions of the development, which shall not be altered or
changed in any way without approval of the Vernon Township
Planning Board.
(e) A landscape plan shall be designed to enhance the particular
identity and character of the site, and create a pleasant entry
experience for vehicles and pedestrians by means of street
trees, lighting, buffers, walkways, street furniture, and
accessory structures designed to create and enhance the
resort atmosphere, all as may be approved by the Planning
Board.
(f) The developer shall design a lighting plan to be approved by
the Planning Board.
(g) The developer shall create a system of signage in connection
with the use, which shall be designed to create and enhance
the resort. In this regard, the developer shall submit to the
Planning Board a proposed plan for signs in connection with
the various components of the plan, which plan for signs shall
be complementary to the use, enhance the resort theme, and
be subject to Planning Board approval. No operator of any
facility within the resort shall be permitted to change or alter
the system and plan for signage without approval of the Vernon
Township Planning Board.
(h) An important element of the Mountain Resort is pedestrian
movement. The developer shall design a pedestrian plan, as
well as a system of bike paths, which shall include walkways
and travel ways which are aesthetic in nature, and include
links to current and future public circulation systems.
(i) There shall be a system of stormwater and sanitary sewerage
disposal facilities, potable water supply, fire protection, solid
waste disposal, and appropriate street lighting and traffic
safety signage presented to and approved by the Planning
Board.
(j) The plan shall be designed to preserve sunlight in major
pedestrian areas for much of the day, and ensure that public
plazas and shopping areas receive maximum sunlight
throughout the year for safety, snow removal and warmth.
(k) In keeping with the resort theme, the plan shall include sitting
areas and plazas, and other places and structures such as hotel
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-184
1:649
entrances, fountains, and other amenities designed to enhance
the resort experience.
(l) The developer shall be required to design an adequate plan for
parking for skiers, visitors, and employees at appropriate
locations which shall be designed to create convenient and
safe access.
(m) The development shall be designed in order that prompt snow
removal within the Mountain Resort, when and where
appropriate, can be undertaken. The developer shall design a
method for emergency medical response services.
(n) This paragraph references a "single entity" to operate the
Mountain Resort. To effectuate this, the developer shall
establish a master association, and such other building or
neighborhood associations, as are necessary to maintain or
otherwise provide for required architectural elements,
common areas, trash removal, snow removal, pedestrian ways,
driveways and parking areas, and related elements. All uses
shall be subordinate to the Mountain Resort, and appropriate
documents shall be established by the developer, subject to the
approval of the Township Planning Board, to assure that
buildings, structures and uses shall be and remain under the
ultimate authority of the Master Association. It is recognized
that certain elements within the components of the resort may
be owned by individual companies or persons, including but
not limited to, hotels, commercial and resort units. Pursuant to
this requirement, all such sales shall be subject to deed
restrictions and other requirements which may be approved by
the Planning Board in order to make certain the entire
Mountain Resort use operates with a coordinated common
theme.
(o) All site plans submitted in connection with the Mountain
Resort shall indicate existing wooded areas and individual
specimen trees a caliper of 12 inches or greater, measured 4
feet above the ground, which may be located within the areas
to be disturbed by the development of buildings and
structures.
(p) Development on steep slopes may occur, provided adequate
precautions are taken in design and construction to prevent
soil erosion and any risks to public safety.
(q) Evidence shall be established by the developer that buffer
requirements as well as depiction of rivers, streams, brooks,
lakes, ponds, and open waters are in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 330-184 VERNON CODE § 330-184
1:650
§ 330-185. Supplemental regulations for certain permitted uses.
(r) An applicant seeking to establish a Mountain Resort shall
submit to the Planning Board a set of design standards for the
treatment of all buildings and structures, which shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board. Upon approval
of the design standards, the standards shall not be altered or
changed in any way without approval of the Vernon Township
Planning Board, which in reviewing any requests for
modifications or deviations shall have, as a paramount
concern, the need to maintain a common theme throughout the
entire resort.
(s) Hotel units and vacation type units, even though they may be
separately owned under the condominium form of ownership,
shall not be considered residential uses. Those units are
commercial in nature. As a result, those units are not subject to
those provisions of the subcode incorporating N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1,
et seq., (Residential Site Improvement Standards). Those units
are designed for resort lodging, and for participation in a
resort rental program. The units are subject to the Township's
Hotel Use and Occupancy Tax, and shall be compliant with the
requirements of Construction Code Use Group R-1. The
occupancy of units shall be primarily transient in nature,
meaning occupancy less than 30 days. [Amended 9-18-2006
by Ord. No. 06-32]
A. Campgrounds (public).
(1) Principal uses shall be limited to recreational and/or instructional
camp facilities and public campgrounds, including campsites for
tents, lean-to(s), recreational vehicles, and cabins, excepting
cabins for permanent, year-round or extended occupancy and/or
dwelling purposes.
(2) All requirements of N.J.S.A. 26:4A-4 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 8:22-1.1 et
seq. shall be satisfied with respect to, but not limited to, review and
approval by the Health Department, NJDEP and other appropriate
governmental agencies, construction, composition of a
campground, potable water supply, water closets and showers,
sanitation, solid waste, management, utilities, stormwater
drainage, auxiliary buildings, fire safety, infestation control,
emergencies and public bathing.89
(3) Outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be prohibited
except where the same is appropriate or necessary to the safety
and/or reasonable function of the facility.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-185
1:651
(4) No permanent residency shall be allowed within a campground
facility.
(5) All requirements of § 330-185 shall be satisfied.
(6) Public, nonproprietary campgrounds shall be subject to
§ 330-184D(5)(a), (c), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l), (m), (n) and (o),
even when such standards are more restrictive than state law or
rule, unless expressly preempted. In all other matters and respects,
state law shall control.
B. Home professional office in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts.
(1) No more than two persons not residing in the building shall be
employed on the premises.
(2) The residential character of the premises shall remain substantially
unchanged.
(3) The building shall continue to serve as the principal residence of
the professional practitioner.
(4) Not more than 40% of the total habitable floor area of the building
may be used for the professional office.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per 200
square feet of office area, plus two spaces for the resident family,
not counting garage spaces.
(6) All bulk requirements for the respective zone pursuant to Schedule
B90 shall be satisfied.
C. Townhouses. Wherever townhouse development is permitted, the
buildings shall comply with the following requirements notwithstanding
any other provision of this chapter to the contrary:
(1) The minimum tract size shall be 10 acres.
(2) The maximum density shall be four units per acre.
(3) The maximum number of units per building or structure shall be
eight.
(4) The maximum length of a structure in any direction shall be 200
feet.
(5) The maximum building coverage shall be 20%.
(6) The minimum distance between structures shall be:
(a) End to end: 35 feet.
90.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 330-185 VERNON CODE § 330-185
1:652
(b) Front to front: 75 feet.
(c) Front to rear: 75 feet.
(d) Rear to rear: 60 feet.
(e) Front to rear; to end: 45 feet.
(7) The minimum distance from a structure to a tract boundary line
shall be 50 feet.
(8) The minimum width of any unit shall be 20 feet.
(9) No more than two units shall have their front or rear facade in the
same plane. Building offsets shall be a minimum of four feet.
(10)No unit shall contain more than three bedrooms; no more than 20%
of the units in any housing tract shall have three bedrooms; and not
more than 20% of the units in any housing tract shall have two
bedrooms; all remaining units shall be one-bedroom units or
efficiency units with no separate bedrooms.
D. Sale of seasonal farm produce. (Reserved)
E. Places of worship shall be permitted in all districts in accordance with
the following requirements: [Added 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(1) Such use shall be subject to site plan review and approval.
(2) Lot area. Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(3) Frontage. Minimum street frontage shall be 200 feet.
(4) Front yard. Minimum front yard depth shall be 100 feet.
(5) Side yards. Minimum side yards shall be 50 feet.
(6) Rear yard. Minimum rear yard depth shall be 100 feet.
(7) Parking. All parking shall be located in the rear or side yards and a
minimum of 25 feet from any property line and shall be screened
from view from adjacent properties.
(8) Residences for clergy shall be permitted on the same lot as the
place of worship and shall meet all bulk requirements of the zone
where located.
F. Two-family structures. Two-family structure developments provide
opportunities for alternate housing for all income levels in the R-4 zone
district and shall comply with the following requirements not
withstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary:
[Added 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
(1) Minimum tract area shall be 5 acres.
§ 330-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-185
1:653
(2) Maximum density shall be four units per acre.
(3) Maximum number of units in a building shall be two.
(4) Maximum building height shall be 40 feet or 3 stories.
(5) Minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
(6) Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
(7) Minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.
(8) Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet (principal structures):
20 feet (front porch).
(9) Side yard setback shall be 12 feet one side or 30 feet for both sides.
(10) Rear yard setback shall be 30 feet unless a garage is placed in the
rear yard whereby the setback is reduced to 5 feet.
(11) Maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50%) percent.
(12) Maximum building coverage shall be twenty (20%) percent.
(13) Attached garage per structure (not per unit) shall contain no more
than two (2) cars.
(14) Parking requirement pursuant to Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS).
G. Two-family development lots. One two-family structure or two singlefamily
homes on farm assessed properties provide opportunities for
alternate housing for farm family and relatives and/or employees of the
farm in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-1, C-2, C-3, CR, AET and LI zoning
districts and shall comply with the following requirements not
withstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the contrary:
[Added 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 06-13]
(1) Minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre and be suitable for septic
disposal as determined by Township Engineer and Township Health
Officer.
(2) Maximum number of units per lot shall be two.
(3) The bulk and yard requirements shall be the same as those listed in
Schedule B (Section 330 Attachment 3) for the R-3 zoning district.
(4) Farming and agricultural uses are limited to the remainder of the
farm assessed tract and such uses are subject to the Right To Farm
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq. and shall be consistent with the
provisions of Section 330-197 of this Chapter.
(5) All accessory uses customarily incidental to the above mentioned
uses shall be permitted.
§ 330-185 VERNON CODE § 330-185
1:654
§ 330-186. (Reserved)
§ 330-187. Personal wireless telecommunications towers,
equipment and facilities. [Added 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-17]
(6) Notwithstanding any other provision in this Section, no such two
family structure or two single family structures shall be permitted
on any lot which has previously been subdivided from a farmland
assessed lot, it being the intention of this Section to provide
alternative housing for farming families and not to permit
subdivision of farms for the purpose of creating two family zones or
developments.
A. The Township of Vernon has recognized the need to permit personal
wireless telecommunications towers, equipment and facilities in
appropriate locations in the Township.
B. The intent of this section is to allow these facilities as conditional uses
on municipal property or within the public right-of-way of major traffic
corridors in nonresidential zones within the Township of Vernon or
within the public right-of-way of all state or county roads within the
Township of Vernon or on approved existing lawful structures in any
zone. Wireless communications facilities are expressly prohibited from
being located on private property in a residential zone. However, this
prohibition shall not apply to the collocation of new antennas on
preexisting towers in residential zones, provided there are no structural
or aesthetic changes or a new facility that is completely concealed
within lawful existing structures.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the opportunity to
locate personal wireless telecommunications facilities in areas in which
there will be no substantial impact on the rural/undeveloped character
of Vernon Township. The intent of this section is to limit the location of
the such facilities to areas which are both acceptable to
communications companies wishing to provide service and consistent
with the above objectives; to insure that competition is fostered among
local wireless service providers; to insure that opportunities for
economic development are created; and to insure that the local
government benefits from the services offered by telecommunications
providers. The overriding objective of this section is to insure that the
public health, safety and welfare is safeguarded and that the following
goals are advanced:
(1) Protect residential zones and uses from the potential adverse
impacts of wireless telecommunications towers, facilities and
equipment;
(2) Require the location of new wireless telecommunications towers,
facilities and equipment in specific locations within the Township;
§ 330-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-187
1:655
(3) Minimize the number of wireless telecommunications towers in the
Township exceeding 80 feet in height;91
(4) Encourage collocation of new antennas on existing towers and
structures; and
(5) Require the use of stealth technology for all new towers or antenna
locations through innovative design, siting and camouflaging
techniques.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Location priorities. Locations are enumerated below in the order of
the location priority:
(a) Existing lawful structures.
[1] Existing buildings or structures owned by the Township of
Vernon may be utilized for the placement of personal
wireless telecommunications facilities, provided a license
or lease authorizing such facilities has been approved by
the Vernon Township governing body, subject to the
following conditions:
[a] The added equipment shall not extend higher than 25
feet above the existing structure upon which said
equipment is to be placed.
[b] The added equipment shall not protrude beyond the
existing sides of the structure more than five feet.
[c] Personal wireless telecommunications facilities shall
maintain a minimum fifteen-foot setback to any
property line and shall be appropriately landscaped as
required by the approving authority.
[2] Existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or
telephone wires, located along major traffic corridors in
nonresidential zones within the Township may be utilized
to install a system of multiple low-powered antennas.
Similar technology that does not require the use of towers
may also be utilized within the same public rights-of-way,
subject to the following condition:
[a] Antennas and all attendant facilities must be capable
of being mounted on existing structures.
[3] Existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or
telephone wires, located within the public right-of-way of
any state or county road within the Township may be
utilized to install a system of multiple low-powered
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-187 VERNON CODE § 330-187
1:656
antennas. Similar technology that does not require the use
of towers may also be utilized within the same public rightof-
way, subject to the following condition:
[a] Antennas and all attendant facilities must be capable
of being mounted on existing structures.
[4] With the consent of the property owner, personal wireless
telecommunications facilities may be placed on or in an
existing lawful structure in any zone, subject to the
following condition:
[a] To minimize the visual negative impact of personal
wireless telecommunications facilities, owners and
users of antennas and related facilities utilizing
existing structures are required to use innovative
camouflage techniques with the goal of completely
concealing the equipment. The foregoing
notwithstanding, any antenna to be placed on an
existing lawful structure in a residential zone must be
completely concealed from view.
(b) Antennas on existing towers. An antenna may be attached to
an existing tower in any zone. To minimize the visual impact
associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers,
collocation of one or more providers' antennas on an existing
tower takes precedence over the construction of new towers,
subject to the following collocation requirements:
[1] Collocation requirements.
[a] A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the collocation of additional antenna
shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower,
unless the approving authority allows reconstruction
as a monopole or stealth structure; provided, however,
that the height of the modified or reconstructed tower
shall not exceed the height of the existing tower
except as set forth in Subsection D(1)(a)[1][a],
Conditional uses, Location priorities, Existing lawful
structures. [Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No.
00-22]
[b] Collocation conditions and limitations. Any new tower
shall provide for future collocation as set forth in this
section. Collocation by two or more
telecommunications providers shall be permitted on
one tower, provided that, by collocating, all conditions
of this section are satisfied.
[i] In the event a proposed tower for an existing or
future collocation cannot be constructed within
§ 330-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-187
1:657
the permitted height limitations, then such
collocation is prohibited.
[ii] No tower may be designed or built to collocate
with another telecommunications provider at a
height greater than the maximum permitted by
this section.
[iii] In the event any collocation is proposed, a letter
of commitment shall be filed by the applicant to
lease excess space on the tower to other potential
users at prevailing market rates and conditions.
The letter of commitment shall be recorded prior
to the issuance of a building permit and shall be
binding upon the tower owner, property owner
and successors in interest.
[c] On-site location.
[i] A tower which is rebuilt or modified to
accommodate collocation may be moved on site
within 50 feet of its existing location, provided the
new location complies with all setback
requirements.
[ii] If two or more towers exist on a site and a tower is
rebuilt or modified to accommodate collocation,
only one tower may remain on the site. This
section shall not apply in those instances where
towers are located on sites occupied by hightension
wires.
[iii] A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be
measured from the original tower location for
purposes of calculating separation distances
between towers pursuant this section.
(c) New tower construction. As a last location priority, a provider
may apply for approval to construct a new telecommunications
tower. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the approving
authority that no existing tower structure or alternative
technology that does not require the use of towers can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. The applicant
shall submit information requested by the approving authority
related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative
technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna must consist of evidence showing that a significant
gap in the availability of wireless service will exist if a new
tower is not located within the geographic area. Upon
§ 330-187 VERNON CODE § 330-187
1:658
establishing a significant gap in service, the provider must
demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the approving
authority that the proposed tower is the least intrusive means
of filling that gap with a reasonable level of service. To do so,
the provider must show that a good faith effort has been made
to identify and evaluate less intrusive alternatives.
[1] Construction requirements. The following are the
construction requirements for all new tower applications:
[a] Area and setback requirements.
[i] Minimum lot area: five acres. [Amended
9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 00-22]
[ii] Residential setback from property lines: 300 feet
or 300% of the tower's height, whichever is
greater.
[iii] Nonresidential setback from property lines: 120%
of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot
line, nonappurtenant building or structure or
street right-of-way.
[b] Accessory buildings and structures.
[i] Maximum height of a security fence shall be six
feet.
[ii] Maximum height of an accessory building or
structure: 15 feet.
[iii] Maximum area of a wireless telecommunications
facility: 1,500 square feet.
[c] Maximum tower height.
[i] Eighty feet. This shall be measured as the overall
height, including antennas. [Amended
9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 00-22]
(2) Prohibited areas. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
prohibited within all residential zones and in the zones identified
below so as to protect ridgelines and ecologically sensitive areas
and to maintain scenic views and vistas:
(a) Conservation District.
(b) Agri-Eco Tourism Zone.
(c) Mountain Conservation Zone.
(3) General requirements for all towers and antennas.
§ 330-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-187
1:659
(a) Stealth requirements. Applicants are required to use the latest
stealth or camouflaging techniques to either make a tower
appear to be a tree of native species to blend in with
surrounding trees, other types of stealth structures or to be
completely concealed by placement within an existing
structure.
(b) Pole type. Monopole or stealth tower construction shall be
used in all new tower construction.
(c) Noise. Noise levels at any property line shall not be more than
50 decibels.
(d) Annual report. Upon issuance of a building permit for a
personal wireless telecommunications tower site, the owner or
operator of the site shall provide to the Secretary of the
Township Planning and Zoning Boards an initial report signed
and sealed by a licensed professional engineer certifying the
estimated useful structural life of the tower, if any, as well as
providing an initial inventory of all equipment and facilities on
the site. After 50% of the useful structural life of a tower has
lapsed, annual recertification reports as to the structural
integrity of the tower shall be required. An updated report
shall also be provided whenever antennas arrays are modified
and shall include a detailed listing of all antennas and
equipment. All vendors and lessees shall also be required to
notify the above Township official when the use of such
antennas or equipment is discontinued. If any of the reports
disclose that a condition of any site presents an imminent
hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, or that the tower
facilities and equipment are no longer in use, the owner shall,
and the Township Engineer or Zoning Officer may, order in
their discretion that the owner take appropriate corrective
action, including, if necessary, the removal of the tower,
facilities or equipment to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. Personal wireless telecommunications towers,
facilities and equipment shall be maintained to insure
continued structural integrity. The owner of the site shall also
perform such other maintenance of the structures and of the
site so as to assure that it does not create a visual nuisance.
(e) Abandonment. In the event a wireless telecommunications
facility is abandoned or not operated for the use as approved
for a period of one year, the same shall be removed, at the
option of the Township, and at the sole expense of the operator.
In no event may a wireless telecommunications facility be used
for a purpose other than its initial approved use.
(f) Signs. No signs shall be permitted on any tower, equipment or
facility, except for those signs required by law or containing
such information as owner contact information, warnings,
§ 330-187 VERNON CODE § 330-187
1:660
equipment information and safety instructions. These signs
shall not exceed two square feet in total area. Commercial
signs shall be prohibited on all wireless telecommunications
towers, facilities and equipment.
(g) Lighting. Site lighting shall be oriented inward towards the site
to avoid off-site impact. No tower lighting, except regulatory
lights required by federal laws, shall be permitted.
(h) RF radiation. The applicant shall comply with the New Jersey
Radiation Protection Act and regulations and any other federal
or local regulations in effect. The applicant shall demonstrate
compliance with such standards.
(i) Multiple towers. Any prohibition contained in any ordinance
restricting the number of principal uses per lot shall not apply
to the construction of personal wireless telecommunications
towers, facilities and equipment when the conditions contained
in this section are met. The minimum setback distance
between structures shall not apply to personal wireless
telecommunications towers, facilities and equipment.
(j) Site location analysis. Every application for a personal wireless
telecommunications tower, facility or equipment shall include a
site location alternative analysis, including an analysis of the
location priorities set forth in this section, describing the
locations of other sites considered, the availability of those
sites, the extent to which other sites do or do not meet the
provider's service or engineering needs and the reason why
the subject site was chosen. The analysis shall address the
following issues:
[1] How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunications tower, facility or equipment relates to
the objective of providing full wireless communications
services within the Vernon Township area at the time full
service is provided by the applicant and by other providers
of wireless telecommunications services with the Vernon
Township area.
[2] How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunications tower, facility and equipment relates
to the location of any existing towers, facilities or antennas
within or near the Vernon Township area.
[3] How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunications tower, facilities or equipment relates
to the anticipated need for additional towers, facilities or
equipment within and near the Vernon Township area by
the applicant and by other providers of wireless
telecommunications services within the Vernon Township
area.
§ 330-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-187
1:661
[4] How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunications tower, facilities and equipment relate
to the objective and goal of maintaining concealed or
reduced tower height with groups of towers within close
proximity to one another rather than isolated taller towers
with many users at greater tower heights at random
locations throughout the Township.
(k) Site plan approval. In addition to the applicable documentation
and items of information required for major site plans within
this chapter, the following additional documentation and items
of information shall be required as part of any personal
wireless telecommunications facility application:
[1] A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), adjacent roadways, proposed means
of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings
of the proposed tower and any other structures,
topography, parking and other information deemed
necessary to assess compliance with this section.
[2] The setback between the proposed facility and the nearest
residential unit.
[3] Documentation by a qualified expert regarding the
capacity of the proposed facility for the number and type
of antennas.
[4] Documentation by a qualified expert that any proposed
tower will have sufficient structural integrity to support
the proposed antennas and the anticipated future
collocated antennas and that the structural standards
developed for antennas by the Electronic Industries
Association and/or the Telecommunications Industry
Association have been met.
[5] A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form acceptable to
the Township Council, indicating that the applicant will
share the use of any tower with other approved personal
wireless telecommunications services.
[6] A visual sight distance analysis, graphically simulating the
appearance of any proposed tower and indicating its view
from at least five locations around and within one mile of
the proposed tower where the tower will be most visible.
(l) Experts. The approving authority reserves the right to retain,
at the applicant's expense, any technical consultants as it
deems necessary to provide assistance in the review of site
location alternatives analysis and specifications. By submitting
§ 330-187 VERNON CODE § 330-187
1:662
§ 330-188. Public utilities; restoration guaranty.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting public utility
distribution facilities, such as but not limited to water distribution lines,
sanitary sewers and telephone and electric distribution lines together with
related attendant facilities intended for local service, which utility systems
are conditionally permitted in all zone districts when approved by the
appropriate servicing utility agency and the Planning Board pursuant to
this chapter. The developer shall provide a restoration guaranty in an
amount representing 120% of the projected cost of restoring all areas to be
disturbed.
§ 330-189. Conditional uses.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67, certain conditional uses shall be and are
hereby recognized in certain districts notwithstanding the fact that such
uses may be permitted or prohibited in certain other districts. Such uses
shall be granted according to the following respective specifications and
standards:
an application for a personal wireless telecommunications
tower, facility or equipment, the applicant is aware of this
procedure.
(m) Grade elevation. No facility shall be located on property with
an existing grade elevation of less than 700 feet nor more than
1,080 feet.
(n) Access. Any access to a wireless telecommunications facility
shall conform to the driveway provisions of this chapter.
(o) Off-street parking. One off-street parking stall shall be
required.
(p) Satellite or dish antennas. The construction of any dish
antennas or other similar antennas or device, with a diameter
of more than 24 inches, is prohibited.
A. General conditions applicable to all conditional uses.
(1) Submission and approval of a complete application for site plan
approval, and performance of any terms and conditions thereof,
provided that this subsection shall not be construed to require the
submission of a site plan for a detached single-family or two-family
residence when such residence is a conditional use in any zone.
(2) Timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
Sussex County Planning Board when necessary pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:27-6 et seq., or approval as a result of that Board's failure to
report thereon within the required time period.
§ 330-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-189
1:663
(3) Approval by such other governmental agencies as may have
approval powers with respect to the application, together with the
timely fulfillment of any terms and conditions thereof.
(4) Satisfaction of all zoning requirements for the respective district
contained in Schedules A and B92 unless the use is more
particularly regulated pursuant to this section, in which event the
more particular regulation(s) shall control.
(5) Satisfaction of all design standards pursuant to Article VII et seq.
with respect to site plans and subdivisions unless the use is more
particularly regulated pursuant to this section, in which event the
more particular regulation(s) shall control.
(6) Satisfaction of all pertinent requirements of this article unless such
requirement(s) are supplemented by one or more particular
conditions under Subsection B of this section.
(7) Satisfaction of all performance standards pursuant to § 330-205
unless the use is more particularly regulated pursuant to this
section, in which event the more particular regulation(s) shall
control.
B. Particular additional conditions as to certain uses.
(1) Art center in the C-2, AET and TC Districts.
(a) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(b) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: (Reserved)
(d) All parking facilities shall be located at least 25 feet from a
street or property line.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: 4 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 100 feet.
[6] Maximum building height: 50 feet or 50% of any design
setback, whichever is less.
92.Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 330-189 VERNON CODE § 330-189
1:664
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(2) Auto service station in the C-1 and C-2 Districts.
(a) No such facility shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to any
other such facility.
(b) Gasoline pumps and other apparatus shall be so located as to
permit safe and convenient traffic circulation. Every gasoline
or oil tank, pump or other device, appliance or apparatus shall
be located at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way line, at
least 50 feet from a residential zone boundary and at least 25
feet from any property line.
(c) No such facility shall be located within 500 feet of any school,
place of worship, hospital, library, park, playground, or other
governmental or public facility or building.
(d) No such facility shall be located within 200 feet of a residence
nor within 100 feet of a residential district.
(e) At least 25% of the lot shall be devoted to vegetative cover.
(f) Each such facility and site shall be screened by dense
evergreens.
(g) Paving and curbing requirements. Pavement improvements
shall be consistent with Figure 4.3 in N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter
21. Curbs shall be granite block.
(h) Driveways.
[1] Driveway width: 24 feet to 36 feet.
[2] Minimum distance between driveway openings: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum distance of facility driveway(s) from driveways
on adjacent properties: 20 feet.
[4] Curb radius: 20 feet to 35 feet.
(i) No unregistered or disabled vehicles and no parts or tire
equipment shall be stored outside, and all vehicle repairs shall
be routinely normally accomplished inside a building.
(j) All storage tanks shall be installed below ground and otherwise
in accordance with all prevailing laws, regulations and
standards pertaining thereto.
(k) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
§ 330-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-189
1:665
[2] Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet (to principal
building).
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[6] Maximum building height: 30 feet.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(3) Boarding stable in the C-1 Districts.
(a) Each such stable facility shall be part of and associated with a
horse farm on three or more acres.
(b) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: 3 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[6] Maximum building height: 40 feet.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(4) Bus stop shelter in the C-1, C-2, C-3, CR and TC Districts:
[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) It shall be demonstrated that the designed facility in the
proposed location is safe, necessary, convenient and efficient
with respect to the use of public transportation, and that the
same will result in the facilitation of transportation service to a
neighborhood, community or area.
(b) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(c) Proof shall be shown that use of the proposed facility will not
significantly impair the use and enjoyment of neighboring
properties, nor pose any significant risks or hazards to public
safety.
§ 330-189 VERNON CODE § 330-189
1:666
(d) All bulk requirements for the respective zone pursuant to
Schedule B93 shall be satisfied.
(5) Campgrounds (public) in the AET Districts.
(a) Principal uses shall be limited to recreational and/or
instructional camp facilities and public campgrounds,
including campsites for tents, lean-to(s), recreational vehicles,
and cabins, excepting cabins for permanent, year-round or
extended occupancy and/or dwelling purposes.
(b) All requirements of N.J.S.A. 26:4A-4 et seq. and N.J.A.C.
8:22-1.1 et seq. shall be satisfied with respect to, but not
limited to, review and approval by the Health Department,
NJDEP and other appropriate governmental agencies,
construction, composition of a campground, potable water
supply, water closets and showers, sanitation, solid waste,
management, utilities, stormwater drainage, auxiliary
buildings, fire safety, infestation control, emergencies and
public bathing.94
(c) Outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be prohibited
except where the same is appropriate or necessary to the
safety and/or reasonable function of the facility.
(d) No permanent residency shall be allowed within a campground
facility.
(e) All requirements of § 330-185 as shall be satisfied.
(6) Church/place of worship in residential districts and the C-1 District.
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: the greater of
one space per three seats or one space per 60 inches of seating
pew; plus one space per 30 square feet of church hall area.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
(d) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: three acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
93.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-189
1:667
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[6] Maximum building height: 40 feet; at steeple: 75 feet.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(7) Conference rooms in the C-1, C-2, C-3, CR, AET and TC Districts.
[Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27; 1-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-04]
(a) A conference room shall be associated with and be part of an
inn, lodge or bed-and-breakfast establishment.
(b) Parking requirements for the dominant use shall be adjusted
upward by a ratio of one additional space per 30 square feet of
conference room area or per three persons of design
occupancy, whichever is greater.
(8) Funeral homes in the C-1 District.
(a) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(b) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
30 square feet of viewing room; plus one space per every 200
square feet of building area.
(d) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: two acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 100 feet.
[6] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(9) Garage (repair) in the C-2 Zone.
§ 330-189 VERNON CODE § 330-189
1:668
(a) Proof shall be shown that use of the proposed facility will not
significantly impair the use and enjoyment of neighboring
properties, nor pose any significant risks or hazards to public
safety.
(b) No such facility shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to any
other such facility.
(c) Gasoline pumps and other apparatus shall be so located as to
permit safe and convenient traffic circulation. Every gasoline
or oil tank, pump or other device, appliance or apparatus shall
be located at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way line, at
least 50 feet from a residential zone boundary and at least 25
feet from any property line.
(d) No such facility shall be located within 500 feet of any school,
place of worship, hospital, library, park, playground, or other
governmental or public facility or building.
(e) No such facility shall be located within 750 feet of a residence
nor within 750 feet of a residential district.95
(f) At least 25% of the lot shall be devoted to vegetative cover.
(g) Each such facility and site shall be screened by dense
evergreens.
(h) Special paving and curbing requirements: per Figure 4.3 of
N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21.
(i) Driveways.
[1] Driveway width: 24 feet to 36 feet.
[2] Minimum distance between driveway openings: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum distance of facility driveway(s) from driveways
on adjacent properties: 20 feet.
[4] Curb radius: 20 feet to 35 feet.
(j) No unregistered or disabled vehicles and no parts or
equipment shall be stored outside, and all vehicle repairs shall
be accomplished inside a building.
(k) All storage tanks shall be installed below ground and otherwise
in accordance with all prevailing laws, regulations and
standards pertaining thereto.
(l) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-189
1:669
[2] Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet as to building.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.
[6] Maximum building height: 30 feet.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(10) Golf course (miniature) in the AET District. [Amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: 1.5 spaces per
hole.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
(d) Design theme(s) shall be harmonized with the natural
environment, and structural development of the site shall be
minimal.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet to course; 50 feet to
building.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet to course; 50 feet to
building.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet to course; 50 feet to
building
[6] Maximum building height: 30 feet.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 25%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75% (total impervious coverage).
(11) Health club in the AET District. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-27]
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
§ 330-189 VERNON CODE § 330-189
1:670
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
300 square feet of gross building areas; plus 0.8 space per
exercise station.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
(d) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: two acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 75 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 100 feet.
[6] Maximum building height: 50 feet or 50% of any design
setback, whichever is less.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.96
(12)Home professional office in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, PLC and TC
Districts. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) No more than two persons not residing in the building shall be
employed on the premises.
(b) The residential character of the premises shall remain
substantially unchanged.
(c) The building shall continue to serve as the principal residence
of the professional practitioner.
(d) Not more than 40% of the total inhabitable floor area of the
building may be used for the professional office.
(e) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
200 square feet of office area, plus two spaces for the resident
family, not counting garage spaces.
(f) All bulk requirements for the respective zone pursuant to
Schedule B97 shall be satisfied.
96.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1147b12, Health services, as amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-27, which previously followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-189
1:671
(13) Hotels in the TC District. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-27]
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
room, plus one space for every 200 square feet of all other
areas.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
(d) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: three acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: as per district requirements.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: as per district requirements.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: as per district requirements.
[6] Maximum building height: 75 feet or 25% of design
setback, whichever is less.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(14) Inns in the TC District. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-27]
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
sleeping room and one space for every 200 square feet of
public rooms/areas.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
right-of-way or lot line.
(d) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
97.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 330-189 VERNON CODE § 330-189
1:672
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: two acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: as per district requirements.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: as per district requirements.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: as per district requirements.
[6] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(15) Institutional uses in the residential districts and C-1, C-3 and TC
Districts: [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as per the requirements
for such uses contained in this chapter.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or lot line.
(d) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(e) All bulk requirements for the respective zone pursuant to
Schedule B98 shall be satisfied.
(16)Kennels in the AET Districts: (Reserved)
(17) Public utilities in all districts: (Reserved) (See § 330-188, Public
utilities; restoration guaranty.)
(18)Racquet sports facilities in the AET Districts.
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
court, plus one space per 200 square feet of common area and/
or office area.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
98.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Bulk and Yard Requirements, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 330-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-189
1:673
(d) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: two acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: as per district requirements.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: as per district requirements.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: as per district requirements.
[6] Maximum building height: 50 feet or 50% of any design
setback, whichever is less.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.99
(19) Recreation facility (commercial) in the AET District. [Amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
200 feet of building common area, plus one space per room,
plus one space per acre, plus one space per 30 square feet of
pavement or deck, plus 0.8 space for each exercise station.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
(d) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: as per district requirements.
[2] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 100 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 100 feet.
99.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1147b20, Recreation facility in the LCR District, which
previously followed this subsection, was repealed 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27.
§ 330-189 VERNON CODE § 330-189
1:674
[6] Maximum building height: 75 feet or 25% of design
setback, whichever is less.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 15%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 30%.100
(20) Resort-oriented housing in the CR District. [Amended
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) The tract or site proposed for development shall be associated
with a ski area, regulation golf course and/or lake(s).
(b) Minimum lot, tract or site size: 100 acres.
(c) Maximum density: 1.5 dwelling units per acre.
(d) Residential cluster development and open space preservation
pursuant to §§ 330-201 and 330-202 shall be required.
(e) All bulk requirements pertaining to the R-2 District shall be
applied.101
(f) Off-street parking shall be designed to provide a total of two
parking spaces, at least one of which shall be in a garage.102
(g) A plot plan shall be submitted for each proposed lot, showing
suitable designs for driveway location and grade, existing and
proposed grade contours, drainage plan, sewage disposal and
location of the proposed dwelling and any accessory
structures.
(h) The provisions of § 330-83 regarding steep slopes
notwithstanding, resort-oriented housing associated with a ski
area shall require no buffer as to steep slopes and may be
constructed on slopes exceeding a fifteen-percent grade,
provided such housing can be otherwise suitably developed
pursuant to this chapter, the Uniform Construction Code, and
good engineering practices.
(21) Restaurants in the AET District.
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space for
every three seats, plus one space per every bar seat.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
100. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1147b22, Recreation development in the LCR District, and
Sec. 1147b23, Resort in the LCR District, which previously followed this subsection, were
repealed 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-189
1:675
(d) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: one acre.
[2] Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[5] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[6] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[7] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(22) Retail sales, outdoor, in the AET District. [Amended 12-13-1999
by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
120 square feet of indoor floor area, plus one space per 500
square feet of outdoor display area.
(c) The definition of "retail sales, outdoors" notwithstanding, only
the outdoor display and sale of garden, landscaping and farm
supplies, flowers, shrubs, plants, and produce, shall be
permitted in these districts.
(d) All bulk requirements for the respective districts shall be
satisfied, except that all outdoor sales items must be located at
least 50 feet from the front yard property line and 25 feet from
any side or rear yard property line.
(23) School bus shelters in all residential districts, C-2, C-3 and TC
Districts. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(a) A statement of need and site-suitability from an authorized
school official shall be produced.
(b) An enforceable maintenance plan shall be submitted and
approved.
(c) Proof of insurance coverage shall be filed annually with the
Township Clerk showing the Township of Vernon and/or its
assigns (including but not limited to the Board of Education) to
be insured in an amount acceptable to the governing body or
its designee(s).
§ 330-189 VERNON CODE § 330-189
1:676
(24) Shopping center in the C-1 District:
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
120 square feet of gross building area.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
(d) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: three acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet.
[6] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(25) Single-family dwellings in all nonresidential districts. (Reserved)
(26) Ski areas in the AET District. [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-27]
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
chair, plus one space per 120 square feet of common building
area.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
(d) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: 25 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet as to any building
and any slope.
§ 330-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-189
1:677
[4] Minimum side yard setback; 100 feet as to any building
and any slope.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 100 feet as to any building
and any slope.
[6] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 1%.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 15%.
(27) Temporary outdoor activities in all zones. The applicant shall show
cause to the reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning Official that
temporary parking, sanitary provisions, fire prevention, safety
conditions and noise conditions are or will be such that a permit
can and should be issued. Based upon the nature of the proposed
activity, the Zoning Official may request a site plan and other
pertinent documentation and prior approval of the Police, Health
and Human Services, Fire Prevention, Building and Zoning
Departments, and any other approving authority as deemed
appropriate, before the issuance of such permit. [Amended
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
(28) Theaters in the CR District.103
(a) The proposed site shall abut an arterial or collector street.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per
every two seats.
(c) All parking facilities shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street or property line.
(d) The architectural design of the facility shall be in accord with
the prevailing character of the neighborhood and district, and
shall be complementary to historical or other desirable
examples of local architecture.
(e) Lot regulations.
[1] Minimum lot size: five acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: as per district requirements.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: as per district requirements.
[4] Minimum rear yard setback: as per district requirements.
[5] Maximum building height: 60 feet or 25% of the nearest
setback (up to a maximum of 60 feet), whichever is less.
[6] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-189 VERNON CODE § 330-189
1:678
[7] Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(29) Mountain Resort in the CR District. [Added 11-15-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-26]
(a) There shall be resort village, residential village, and mountain
retreat components to a mountain resort, all operated by a
single entity in a common theme. The use shall only be
available to a developer who submits a general development
plan for approval to the Planning Board pursuant to the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 et seq., and who enters into
a development agreement memorializing the various elements
of the plan in anticipation of the submission of an application
or applications for site plan approval in phases or as a single
entity.
(b) There shall be no more than 1,650 resort units among the
various components and properties included in the mountain
resort, including hotel or lodge units, townhouses, duplexes,
and/or other vacation-type units.
(c) The minimum required tract area shall be 700 acres located in
the CR Zone District. The lots comprising the mountain retreat
component need not be contiguous, and need not be
contiguous to the lots comprising the resort village and/or
residential village. The resort village and residential village
lots shall be contiguous, except for intervening public streets.
(d) The following conditions shall apply to the resort village:
[1] There shall be no more than 200,000 square feet of
commercial space, exclusive of hotel or lodge units.
[2] The resort village shall be located within 1,200 feet and on
both sides of State Highway 94.
[3] The height of buildings shall not exceed 4 1/2 stories and
65 feet.
[4] All stories above the first floor shall be limited to hotel or
lodge units designed for temporary occupancy, except
commercial space may exist on the second floor if the
access is from the first floor.
[5] There shall be no more than 800 hotel and lodge units.
(e) The following conditions shall apply to the residential village:
[1] No portion of a residential village shall be located above
sea level 500.
[2] There shall be no more than 150 townhouses, duplexes,
and/or other vacation-type units.
§ 330-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-189
1:679
§ 330-190. Temporary permits for transportable structures;
temporary housing. [Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 231, Emergency Housing.
[3] Building height shall be limited to 2 1/2 stories and 35
feet.
(f) The following conditions shall apply to the mountain retreat:
[1] There shall be no more than five hotels and lodges,
together with townhouses, duplexes, and/or other
vacation-type units.
[2] Hotels or lodges shall not be located any closer than 500
feet to one another.
[3] The lots comprising the mountain retreat shall be
identified and consist of no less than 400 acres.
[4] The density permitted on the lots comprising a mountain
retreat shall be no greater than 1.5 resort units per acre.
[5] There shall be no construction of hotels or lodges,
townhouses, duplexes, or other vacation-type units in a
mountain retreat below sea level 1,000 feet; but accessory
structures may be constructed at lower elevations and not
all portions of the lots comprising the mountain retreat
need be located above elevation 1,000 feet.
[6] The height of townhouses, duplexes, and/or other
vacation-type units shall be limited to 2 1/2 stories and 35
feet, and the height of hotels or lodges shall be limited to
3 1/2 stories and 50 feet.
[7] Hotels and lodges may contain accessory commercial uses
limited to restaurants, retail sales, retail services, and
management offices designed to serve occupants of the
mountain retreat. Such accessory uses shall be limited to
the first and second floors only, and have access for
occupants solely from the lobby of the hotel or lodge in
which they are located.
(g) The general conditions specified in § 330-189A shall not be
considered conditions of this conditional use.
A. No transportable or wheel-based structure or other temporary
structure used as an office, storage shed or other use incidental to and
in connection with a permitted construction project or building shall be
placed on a site unless the Zoning Officer shall first have issued a
temporary permit therefor.
§ 330-189 VERNON CODE § 330-190
1:680
§ 330-191. Commercial vehicles in residential districts. [Amended
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04; 7-28-2003 Ord. No. 03-25]
Not more than one commercial vehicle shall be parked on a lot used
for residential purposes. Such vehicle shall be owned, leased or regularly
operated by a resident of the premises, or if not the resident, then on
property that is at least six acres in size, and said vehicle shall be limited to
vehicles which are no more than 26 feet in length and have a GVW rating
of 17,500, or is a school bus, and this provision shall not be construed to
limit the number and type of commercial vehicles in use on a farm and in
connection with farming operations conducted on the property.
§ 330-192. Outdoor storage.
Outdoor storage is prohibited in all residential zoning districts. In
nonresidential districts, no article, object or material shall be kept, stored or
displayed outside of the confines of a building unless the same is screened
by special planting or fencing and is otherwise approved pursuant to an
approval by the Planning Board. No storage area shall be located in a
front yard or other yard abutting a street. However, nothing in this section
shall be deemed to prohibit the display and sale of seasonal farm produce,
specifically-permitted outdoor uses, the outdoor parking or storage of farm
machinery or vehicles in use on a farm, or normal and unobtrusive outdoor
storage such as the storage of firewood in residential districts.
§ 330-193. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment in
residential districts. [Amended 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-04]
The outdoor storage or parking in residential districts of recreational
vehicles such as, but not limited to, trailers, large boats, and motorized
homes is permitted subject to the following requirements:
B. No temporary structure shall be located so as to be detrimental to the
use and enjoyment of any adjoining property and shall be removed from
the site prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
permitted construction project or building.
C. Whenever a dwelling destroyed or damaged by fire or other disaster is
determined to be uninhabitable in the opinion of the Construction
Official or Fire Official, a temporary permit for a trailer or similar
housing unit may be issued for a period of not more than eight months
and may be extended for additional sixty-day periods, if so warranted in
the opinion of the Zoning Official. Such housing unit shall require the
approval of the Zoning, Health and Building Departments and shall be
located on the same lot as the dwelling that has been rendered
uninhabitable. As per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, a restoration bond in the
amount of $2,000 shall be posted to guarantee the removal of the trailer
or similar housing unit and will be returned at the time of removal of
such unit.
§ 330-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-193
1:681
§ 330-194. Nonregistered and disabled vehicles.
No disabled or unregistered vehicles shall be stored in any district except
in an enclosed building.
§ 330-195. Keeping of animals. [Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No.
02-04]
A. Any such vehicle or piece of equipment shall be owned or leased by a
resident of the premises, and shall have a current registration with the
NJMVC in the resident's name and the vehicle or equipment must be in
operable condition.
B. Any such recreational vehicle shall be located so as to meet yard and
setback requirements applicable to accessory buildings and shall be
stored in the rear or side yard (behind the front yard setback) unless a
review by the Zoning Officer determines there is no suitable storage
location in the rear or side yard. In that case, recreational vehicles may
be stored in the front yard, if located in the driveway provided that the
recreational vehicle(s) does not encroach onto the public right-of-way
and/or is 10 feet from the street line.
C. No such storage or parking shall eliminate any required off-street
parking area.
D. No more than 2 such vehicles shall be parked or stored on a lot unless it
is garaged. In the event a commercial vehicle is stored on the property,
no more than one recreational vehicle is permitted.
E. All covers and tarps for such vehicles shall be of neutral or earth tone
colors and maintained in good condition.
F. Recreational vehicles are not permitted to be parked on public rightsof-
way and shall be parked at least 10 feet from the street line or
curbline.
A. The keeping of horses and ponies. Except on a farm, a minimum lot size
of three acres shall be required to keep a horse. Two horses shall be
permitted on the first three acres, and one horse shall be permitted for
each acre thereafter; and such lot(s) shall be in single ownership.
Horses and ponies shall be kept a minimum distance of 50 feet from
adjoining properties.
B. The keeping of farm animals. With the exception of horses and ponies,
farm animals and livestock as defined in N.J.S.A. 4:22-16.1c are
permitted on properties which are farm assessed. Such animals shall be
kept a minimum distance of 50 feet from adjoining properties. The
housing, maintenance and quantity of such animals shall be in
accordance with all relevant federal or state statutes or rules and
regulations. Board of Adjustment approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d shall be required for the keeping of farm animals on
properties which are not farm assessed.
§ 330-193 VERNON CODE § 330-195
1:682
C. The keeping of exotic animals. No person shall harbor, maintain or keep
any animal listed in N.J.A.C. 7:25-4.8 (Potentially Dangerous Animals) in
Vernon Township. The keeping of exotic animals not listed in N.J.A.C.
7:25-4.8 require Board of Adjustment approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d.
D. No more than six fowl, as defined by § 330-5, may be kept and
maintained in connection with a single-family residential use lot of less
than one acre so long as the lot is a minimum of 100 feet by 200 feet and
conforms to the minimum lot size with the zoning district. No more than
15 fowl, as defined by § 330-5, may be kept and maintained in
connection with a single-family residential use lot of more than one acre
but less than five acres. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to subvert
the rules and regulations of any homeowners' association (HOA) or
qualified private community. The maintaining of fowl as permitted by
§ 330-195D shall be subject to the following conditions: [Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-25]
(1) A zoning permit must be obtained from the Township's Zoning
Officer for all coops and runs. All coops and runs over 200 square
feet or larger also require Health and Building Department
approval and permits as required by the Township Code of the
Township of Vernon and state statute.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, fowl shall be
housed and kept in a manner which will not constitute a public or
neighborhood nuisance. Fowl shall not be permitted to fly or run at
large.
(3) All fowl shall be housed in coops or structures that are properly
designed for such use and completely separated from any building
utilized for dwelling purposes.
(4) Coops and runs shall be restricted to the rear yard area and shall
adhere to the applicable side and rear yard setbacks pursuant to
Schedule C of Chapter 330, Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Vernon. The setback requirement for accessory
buildings and structures from other buildings set forth in Schedule
C shall not apply to coops and runs.
(5) The Zoning Officer shall approve the structures prior to their
installation with the issuance of a zoning permit.
(6) No fowl shall be kept unless they can be contained on the property
of their owner or the agent of their owner.
E. Waste management for fowl, as defined by § 330-5, shall be subject to
the following: [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-25]
(1) Fowl manure may be applied to garden soil and incorporated into
the soil.
§ 330-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-195
1:683
§ 330-196. Farming and agricultural uses. [Amended 1-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-04]
It is an express purpose of this chapter and article to promote farming and
agricultural uses in Vernon Township in recognition of the Township's rural
and agricultural heritage. The provisions of this chapter and article shall,
therefore, be liberally construed as applied to farming and agricultural
uses, structures, buildings and standards. To the greatest practicable
extent, the application of the standards and regulations of this chapter and
article shall be reconciled with the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
and the provisions of § 330-197 of this chapter in such a way as to advance
agricultural purposes and efforts without unnecessary or excessive zoning
(2) Fowl manure shall not be used on the surface of any property or
portion thereof in a manner similar to that used in the laying of
mulch or topsoil.
(3) Fowl manure may be composted in such a way as to minimize any
fly and odor problems.
(4) Fowl manure may be bagged and removed from the premises.
(5) Fowl manure may not be stored, composted or applied to soil within
10 feet of the property line.
(6) There shall be no runoff of fowl manure to neighboring properties.
F. Feed for fowl, as defined by § 330-5, shall be subject to the following:
[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-25]
(1) Any food scattered for fowl consumption shall be cleaned up daily.
(2) All fowl food shall be stored and kept in tight containers.
(3) All fowl food shall be protected from access by rodents and other
wildlife.
G. Enforcement; penalties for fowl, as defined in as defined by § 330-5, are
as follows: [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-25]
(1) All enforcement agents of the Township shall have the authority to
enforce the provisions of this article. Such enforcement agents
shall include but not be limited to the Zoning Officer, the
Construction Code Official, the Health Officer and his staff, the
Animal Control Officer and/or the Police Department.
(2) Penalties may include the removal of fowl from the property.
(3) Summonses for noncompliance with any provision hereof may be
issued by the appropriate enforcement officials.
(4) Penalties may be imposed by the Municipal Court Judge up to the
maximum penalty allowed by law.
§ 330-195 VERNON CODE § 330-196
1:684
enforcement; provided, however, that the public health, safety and welfare
shall not be thereby compromised.
§ 330-197. Right to farm.
§ 330-198. Farmland preservation.
A. The owner or operator of a commercial farm which meets the eligibility
criteria for differential property taxation pursuant to the Farmland
Assessment Act of 1964 and the operation of which conforms to
agricultural management practices recommended by the State
Agriculture Development Committee and all relevant federal or state
statutes or rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and which
does not pose a direct threat to public health and safety may:
(1) Produce agricultural and horticultural groups, trees and forest
produces, livestock and poultry and other commodities as
described in the Standard Industrial Classification for Agriculture,
Forestry, Fishing and Trapping;
(2) Process and package the agricultural output of the commercial
farm;
(3) Provide for the wholesale and retail marketing of the agricultural
output of the commercial farm, and related products that
contribute to farm income, including the construction of building
and parking areas in conformance with the standards of this
chapter;
(4) Replenish soil nutrients;
(5) Control pests, predators and diseases of plants and animals;
(6) Clear woodlands using open burning and other techniques, install
and maintain vegetative and terrain alterations and other physical
facilities for water and soil conservation and surface water control
in wetland areas; and
(7) Conduct on-site disposal of organic agricultural wastes.
B. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that no commercial
agricultural operations, activity or structure which conforms to
agricultural management practices recommended by the State
Agriculture Development Committee, and all relevant federal or state
statutes or rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and which
does not pose a direct threat to public health and safety, shall constitute
a public or private nuisance, nor shall any such operation, activity or
structure be deemed to otherwise invade or interfere with the use and
enjoyment of any other land or property. [Amended 1-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-04]
§ 330-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-198
1:685
A. Any one or more owners of land within the Township which qualifies for
a differential property tax assessment pursuant to the Farmland
Assessment Act of 1964, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq., and which is
included in an agricultural development area as defined in N.J.S.A.
4:1C-13, may petition the County Agriculture Development Board for
the creation of a municipally approved program comprising that land;
provided that the owner or owners own at least the minimum acreage
established by such Board. The petition shall include a map of the
boundaries of the municipally approved program and other information
deemed appropriate by such Board.
B. In the event that the County Agriculture Development Board shall have
found that the minimum eligibility criteria for preservation have been
met, and in the event that a copy of such petition shall have been sent to
the County Planning Board and the Township Council, the Planning
Board shall, within 60 days of receipt of the petition, review and report
to the Township Council the potential effect of the proposed municipally
approved program upon the planning policies and objectives of the
Township.
C. The Township Council shall, after public hearing and within 120 days of
receipt of the report, recommend to the County Agriculture
Development Board, by ordinance duly adopted, that the municipally
approved program boundaries be approved, conditionally approved
with proposed geographical modifications, or disapproved.
D. If, upon receipt of the Township Council's recommendation to approve
the petition, the County Agriculture Development Board shall have
forwarded the petition for the creation of the municipally approved
program and the Township ordinance approving the municipally
approved program to the County Planning Board, such actions shall
constitute creation of a municipally approved program in and for the
Township and the petitioners therefor.
E. If the Township Council shall have conditionally approved the petition
subject to proposed geographical modifications, and if the County
Agriculture Development Board shall have reviewed the
recommendation and found that the criteria have been met
notwithstanding the proposed modifications, the petition shall be
forwarded and adopted as aforesaid. A recommendation by the
Township Council to disapprove the petition will cause the County
Agriculture Development Board to take no further action, and the
proposed municipally approved program shall not be adopted. If the
Township Council proposed modifications to the petition which exclude
any land from being included within a municipally approved program,
the owner thereof may request that the County Agriculture
Development Board mediate on behalf of the land owner with the
Township Council prior to acting on the recommendation thereof. The
Township Council shall have 180 days from receipt by the Planning
Board of the petition in which to act on said petition to create a
municipally approved program.
§ 330-198 VERNON CODE § 330-198
1:686
F. Any landowner not included in the municipally approved program as
initially created may, within two years following the creation date,
request inclusion, and upon review by the County Agriculture
Development Board and the Township Council, and upon a finding that
this inclusion is warranted, become part of the municipally approved
program; provided that the landowner enters into an agreement
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-24 for the remaining duration of the
municipally approved program.
G. Documentation of municipally approved program.
(1) The creation of a municipally approved program shall be
documented in the following manner:
(a) The petition in its final form shall be filed and recorded, in the
same manner as a deed, with the County Clerk and shall be
filed with the Township Clerk;
(b) The petition, the Township ordinance of adoption, and the
county resolution or ordinance of adoption, as the case may be,
shall be filed with the State Agriculture Development
Committee; and
(c) The petition in its final form shall be filed with the Township
Tax Assessor for the purpose of qualifying for exemption or for
property taxation under farm structures and improvements
within the municipally approved program.
(2) The documentation of the creation of the municipally approved
program as prescribed herein shall in no way be construed to
constitute or in any other way authorize exclusive agricultural
zoning.
H. Zoning of land in program. The provisions of this chapter
notwithstanding, the Township shall not alter the provisions of this
article and chapter as they pertain to land included within a municipally
approved program in any way so as to provide for exclusive agricultural
zoning or zoning which has the practical effect of exclusive agricultural
zoning for a period of 11 years from the date of the creation of the
municipally approved program, unless all landowners within that
municipally approved program who entered into an agreement
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-24 agree to that alteration by
express written consent at the end of the minimum period required
pursuant to the said section.
I. Agreement to retain land in agricultural production or to convey
development easement; restrictive covenant; filing and recording.
(1) Agreement.
(a) Landowners within a municipally approved program or other
farmland preservation program shall enter into an agreement
§ 330-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-198
1:687
with the County Agriculture Development Board, and the
Township Council, if appropriate, to retain the land in
agricultural production for a minimum period of eight years.
(b) Any landowner whose land is within a municipally approved
program or other farmland preservation program or a
landowner whose land qualifies for differential property tax
assessment pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964,
N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq., and which is included in an
agricultural development area, may enter into an agreement to
convey a development easement on the land pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-24, which easement shall be permanent or for a
term of 20 years.
(c) Any agreement entered into pursuant to Subsection I(1)(a) of
this section shall constitute a restrictive covenant and shall be
filed with the Township Tax Assessor and recorded with the
County Clerk in the same manner as a deed. Any development
easement conveyed pursuant to Subsection I(1)(b) of this
section shall be filed with the Township Tax Assessor and
recorded with the County Clerk in the same manner as a deed.
The recording of any such agreement or development
easement of limited term shall include notification that the
State Agriculture Development Committee may exercise the
first right and option to purchase a fee simple absolute interest
in the land pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-38 et al.
(2) A landowner, or a farm operator as an agent for the landowner,
whose land is within a municipally approved program or other
farmland preservation program, or is subject to a development
easement conveyed pursuant to Subsection I(1)(b) of this section,
shall be eligible and may apply to the local Soil Conservation
District and the County Agriculture Development Board for a grant
for soil and water conservation project approved by the State Soil
Conservation Committee subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
4:1C-11 et al.
(3) Approval by the local Soil Conservation District and the County
Agriculture Development Board for grants for soil and water
conservation projects shall be contingent upon a written
agreement by the person who would receive funds that the project
shall be maintained for specified period of not less than three
years, and shall be a component of a farmland conservation plan
approved by the local Soil Conservation District.
(4) If the landowner applying for funds for a soil and water
conservation project pursuant to this section provides 50% of those
funds without assistance from the county, the local Soil
Conservation District shall review, approve, conditionally approve
or disapprove the application. The State Agriculture Development
Committee shall certify that the land on which the soil and water
§ 330-198 VERNON CODE § 330-198
1:688
conservation project is to be conducted has had a development
easement conveyed from it pursuant to Subsection I(1) of this
section or is part of a municipally approved program or other
farmland preservation program.
J. For purposes of this chapter, there shall exist a rebuttable presumption
that no agricultural operation, activity or structure which is conducted
or located within a municipally approved program, or on land from
which a development easement has been conveyed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:1C-24 and which conforms to agricultural management practices
approved by the Committee and all relevant federal or state statutes or
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and which does not
pose a direct threat to public health and safety shall constitute the
public or private nuisance, nor shall any such operation, activity or
structure be deemed to otherwise invade or interfere with the use and
enjoyment of any other land or property.
K. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary,
any criteria developed by a land grant college or a recognized
organization of architectural engineers and approved by the Committee
for farm structure design shall be the acceptable minimum construction
standards for a farm structure located in a municipally approved
program or other farmland preservation program or on land from which
a development easement has been conveyed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:1C-24. The use by a farm owner or operator of a farm structure
designed and approved pursuant to this subsection shall be exempt
from any requirement concerning the seal of approval or fee of an
architect or professional engineer, notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter to the contrary.
L. Length of program; termination; inclusion of additional landowners.
(1) The program shall remain in effect for a minimum of eight years,
provided that a review of the practicability and feasibility of its
continuation shall be conducted by the County Agriculture
Development Board and the Township Council within the year
immediately preceding the termination date of the program.
(2) If, subsequent to notification by the County Agriculture
Development Board, none of the parties to the agreement entered
into pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-24 notify the County Agriculture
Development Board within this one-year period that they wish to
terminate the program, the program shall continue in effect for
another eight-year period and may continue for succeeding eightyear
periods, provided that no notice of termination is received by
the Board during subsequent periods of review.
(3) Termination of the program at the end of any eight-year period
shall occur following the receipt by the Board of any notice of
termination. The Township Tax Assessor shall be notified by the
§ 330-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-198
1:689
County Agriculture Development Board if the program is
terminated.
(4) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to preclude the
reformation of a program as initially created pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
(5) Any landowner not included in the program may request inclusion
at any time during the review conducted pursuant to Subsection
L(1) of this section. If the County Agriculture Development Board
and the Township Council find that this inclusion would promote
agricultural production, the inclusion shall be approved.
M. Withdrawal of lands; taxation.
(1) Withdrawal of land from the program prior to its termination date
may occur in the case of death or incapacitating illness of the
owner or other serious hardship or bankruptcy, following a public
hearing and approval by the County Agriculture Development
Board and Township Council. The approval shall be documented by
the filing with the County Clerk and County Planning Board, by the
County Agriculture Development Board and Township Council, of a
resolution or ordinance, as appropriate, therefor, together with
notification to the Township Tax Assessor.
(2) Following approval to withdraw from the program, the effected
landowner shall pay to the Township, with interest at the rate
imposed by the Township for nonpayment of taxes pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:4-67, any taxes not paid as a result of qualifying for the
property tax exemption for new farm structures or improvements
in the program, and shall repay, on a pro rata basis as determined
by the local Soil Conservation District, to the County Agriculture
Development Board or the State Agriculture Development
Committee, or both, as the case may be, any remaining funds from
grants for soil and water conservation projects, except in the case
of bankruptcy, death or incapacitating illness of the owner, where
no such payback of taxes or grants shall be required.
N. Offer to sell development easement; price; evaluation of suitability of
lands; appraisal.
(1) Any landowner applying to the County Agriculture Development
Board to sell a development easement pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-24
shall offer to sell the development easement at a price, which, in
the opinion of the landowner, represents a fair value of the
development potential of the land for nonagricultural purposes.
The valuation and suitability shall be determined in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 4:1C-31. Two independent appraisals pursuant to
Subsection c of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-31 shall be conducted for each parcel
of land so offered and deemed suitable. Any offer with respect to
such property shall be accepted or rejected within 30 days of
§ 330-198 VERNON CODE § 330-198
1:690
§ 330-199. Natural features.
It is the express purpose of this section and article to promote the
preservation of natural features in the Township of Vernon in respect of
the unique and varied nature of the same. Whenever an application shall
be made for an approval or permit pursuant to or involving this article,
the applicant shall establish in writing or in hearing that no significant
disturbance of natural features, including but not limited to trees,
woodlands, streams, ridgelines, scenic vistas, wetlands, open waters, rock
outcroppings, and topsoil is proposed or anticipated; or, in the event that
the same is proposed or anticipated, then the applicant shall establish how
and to what extent such features shall be preserved to the satisfaction
of the reviewing official or Board. This section shall not be construed
so as to relieve an applicant for site plan or subdivision approval of the
responsibility of submitting a site-specific and informative environmental
impact statement when the same is required pursuant to this chapter.
Whenever disturbance of natural features appears necessary, the maximum
extent of natural features consistent with the reasonable and permitted or
approved use of the property shall be preserved.
§ 330-200. Conservation easements.
Without limitation to the provisions of § 330-199 as aforesaid, an application
for a development approval or permit involving significant disturbance
as aforesaid may and is encouraged to be accompanied by an offer for
conveyance to an appropriate grantee, such as but not limited to the
applicant, the Township or other governmental agency, or a conservation
trust or organization, of a conservation easement providing for the
conservation and preservation of natural resources and features and open
space, subject to suitable provisions for entry, maintenance, liability
receipt thereof; any offer not accepted within 30 days shall be
deemed rejected pursuant to Subsection f of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-24.
O. Conveyance of easement following purchase; conditions and
restrictions; payment.
(1) No development easement purchase pursuant to the provisions of
this section or the Farmland Preservation Law shall be sold, given,
transferred or otherwise conveyed in any manner except as may be
provided by law.
(2) Upon the purchase of the development easement the landowner
shall cause a statement containing the conditions of the
conveyance and the terms of the restrictions on the use and
development of the land to be attached to and recorded with the
deed of the land, in the same manner as the deed was originally
recorded. These restrictions and conditions shall state that any
development for nonagricultural purposes is expressly prohibited,
shall run with the land and shall be binding upon the landowner
and every successor in interest thereto.
§ 330-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-200
1:691
insurance, use limitations and similar provisions to serve the purpose of
such easement.
§ 330-201. Residential cluster development and open space
preservation.
It is the express purpose of this section and article to promote the
preservation of open space and to encourage, in connection with large
tracts of land proposed for residential subdivision, the clustering of
residences in order to accomplish such preservation. Whenever the
subdivision of more than 20 acres is proposed, the applicant shall show
cause to the satisfaction of the Planning Board why cluster development
cannot or should not be effected, failing which the Planning Board may
require that the proposed subdivision be effected by cluster design rather
than conventional design. Without limitation to the Board's powers in this
and related respects, the Board may require an amendment in the layout
of the lots and improvements proposed by the developer, which amended
application shall be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the
original application for development. To the greatest practicable extent,
open space areas shall be designed and set aside for use tending to obviate
the development or disturbance of areas of distinct natural features, steeply
sloped topography, high groundwater or other unique natural
characteristics. Alternatively, open space areas may be designed for passive
or active recreation use and activities. Residential cluster development shall
comply with the following requirements:
A. The minimum gross tract area for residential cluster development shall
be 20 acres, and the minimum amount of open space to be set aside
therein shall be 33% of the total tract area. All open space shall
comprise a contiguous area of at least two acres.
B. Any open space areas created hereunder shall have access to an
improved street by easement, dedication or other suitable means to a
width of at least 25 feet.
C. Excepting the superseding and controlling provisions contained herein,
a proposed residential cluster subdivision shall satisfy all of the
requirements for subdivisions pursuant to Articles VII and VIII.
D. Open space areas shall be owned and maintained by an open space
organization as more particularly described and regulated herein.
E. Residential cluster developments shall be effected pursuant to the
following schedule of comparative requirements:
§ 330-200 VERNON CODE § 330-201
1:692
Conventional Cluster
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot Width
(feet)
Front Yard
Setback
(feet)
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot Width
(feet)
Front Yard
Setback
(feet)
R-1 120,000 250 75 40,000 200 50
R-2 80,000 200 75 30,000 150 50
R-3 30,000 125 50 20,000 125 40
F. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit the power of the
Planning Board to require a conventional development if the same
appears to offer a better development alternative under the
circumstances of the application, giving due consideration to land
conservation, efficient use of land, drainage, topography, traffic
conditions, effect of such development and subdivision on adjacent
lands and occupants thereof, water supply and quality, preservation of
natural features and other respects bearing on the public interest. The
Planning Board shall give due consideration to site-specific information
provided in the applicant's environmental impact statement, which
statement shall offer site-specific findings, analysis and
recommendations with respect to the suitability of cluster-versusconventional
development.
G. No dwelling unit and no portion of any residential lot shall be situated
on lands outside the respective zoning boundary for the residential
district within which the proposed development lies.
H. Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, the permitted uses and
required standards in the zoning district within which the subject tract
proposed for residential cluster development lies shall be the same as
those which are permitted and required under conventional
development.
I. Under no circumstances shall the provisions of this section be
construed to allow greater density than would ordinarily be permitted
under conventional development.
J. Any lands proposed for set-aside as open space for active recreation
shall not be so subject to constraints such as, but not limited to,
wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes or other limiting features as would
tend to thwart the active-recreation purpose of the proposed set-aside.
Open space subject to 50% or more constraint shall be presumed
insufficient.
K. Where a proposed open space set-aside is intended to serve the
purposes of land conservation, suitable conservation easements shall
be established to protect environmentally fragile and important natural
features and resources, including but not limited to aquatic buffer
§ 330-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-201
1:693
§ 330-202. Requirements for ownership and maintenance of
common open space.
areas, floodplains, wetlands, hydric soils, woodland areas, and
watercourses.
L. Common open space shall, to the greatest practicable extent, be set
aside by layout which affords as many lots as possible direct or
proximate access to such open space.
M. In the event that the proposed development involves a number of
stages, the Planning Board may require that acreage proportionate in
size to the stage being considered for final approval be set aside
simultaneously with the granting of final approval or as a condition
thereof for such particular stage even though such lands may be
located in a different section of the overall development.
A. Common open space may, subject to acceptance, be dedicated to the
Township or conveyed to an open space organization or trust, with
incorporation and bylaws to be approved by the Planning Board. If
common open space is not dedicated to and accepted by the Township,
the landowner shall provide for and establish an open space
organization or trust for the ownership and maintenance of the common
open space. Such organization or trust shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of any common open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain the
common recreation areas and development open space without first
offering to dedicate the same to the Township.
(1) If the applicant proposes that the common open space be dedicated
to the Township, then the Planning Board shall forward notice of
such proposal with a recommendation to the governing body prior
to the granting of preliminary approval of any development
application involving common open space, and any approval
thereafter granted shall be subject to the governing body's
determination and/or acceptance of such dedication.
(2) Lands offered to the Township for active recreational purposes
shall be improved by the developer and shall include suitable
equipment, walkways and landscaping.
(3) All lands not offered to and/or not accepted by the Township shall
be owned and maintained by an open space organization or trust as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 and as provided herein.
(4) Membership in such organization by all dwelling unit owners shall
be mandatory. Such membership and the responsibilities of the
members shall be in writing between the organization and the
individual members in the form of a deed covenant wherein each
member accepts responsibility for a pro rata share of the
§ 330-201 VERNON CODE § 330-202
1:694
organization's costs, and providing that the Township shall be a
beneficiary to such covenant and be entitled to enforce its terms.
(5) Deeds or other instruments to effectuate the purpose of this section
shall recite that the prescribed use(s) of the lands in common
ownership shall be perpetual and absolute and not subject to
reversion for possible future development.
(6) The organization and its members, jointly and severally, shall be
responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, maintenance, and
the condition of any facilities that may be erected on any land
within the contemplation of this section, and shall hold the
Township harmless from any liability arising therefrom. Should the
organization fail for any reason to meet its obligations under this
section, the Township may, at its discretion and without limitation,
undertake the responsibilities of the organizations and members
and then assess each member or benefitted property owner such
member's or owner's pro rata share of the same as more
particularly provided hereinbelow.
B. In the event that the organization shall fail to maintain any open space
or recreation area in reasonable order and condition in accordance with
the development plan and approval, the Township may serve notice
upon such organization or upon the owners of the development setting
forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain such
areas in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a demand
that such deficiencies in maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof,
and shall set the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held
within 15 days of the notice. At such hearing the Township may modify
the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an
extension of time not to exceed 65 days within which time the
deficiencies shall be cured.
(1) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modification thereof shall not be cured within said 35 days or any
permitted extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the
common open space and maintain the same for a period of one year,
may enter upon and maintain such land. Said entry and said
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the open
space and recreation areas except when the same is voluntarily
dedicated to the public by the owners.
(2) Before the expiration of said year, the Township shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the open space and recreation
areas, call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to such
organization and to the owners of the development, to be held by
the Township, at which hearing such organization and owners of
the development shall show cause why such maintenance by the
municipality shall not, at the election of the Township, continue for
a succeeding year. If the Township shall determine that such
§ 330-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-202
1:695
§ 330-203. Planned developments.
organization is ready and able to maintain such open space and
recreation areas in reasonable condition, the Township shall cease
to maintain such open space and recreation areas at the end of said
year. If the Township shall determine such organization is not ready
and able to maintain said open space and recreation areas in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion, continue
to maintain said open space and recreation areas during the next
succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing, a determination
in each year thereafter. The decision of the Township in any case
shall constitute a final administrative decision subject only to
judicial review.
(3) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
pro rata against the properties within the development that have a
right of enjoyment of the open space in accordance with the
assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien, and shall
become a lien and tax on said properties and be added to and be a
part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon, and enforced
and collected with interest by the Township in the same manner as
other taxes.
(4) Any open space organization or trust initially created by the
developer shall clearly describe in its bylaws the rights and
obligations of the property owners in the development, and the
articles of incorporation of the organization shall be submitted for
review by the Planning Board prior to the granting of final approval
by the Township.
A. Planned developments shall be permitted in certain districts as shown
in Schedule A.104 Approval of planned developments shall be pursuant
to subdivision and site plan applications pursuant to Article VI. The
standards governing the type and density, or intensity of land use, in a
planned development shall be as provided in this section and Articles
VI, VII and VIII. The density or intensity of land use otherwise allowable
in a particular district may not be appropriate for planned development.
The Planning Board may vary the type and density, or intensity of land
use, otherwise applicable to the land within a planned development in
consideration of the amount, location and proposed use of open space;
the location and physical characteristics of the site of the proposed
planned development, and the location, design and type of dwelling
units and other uses. Clustering of development between
noncontiguous parcels shall be permitted and, in order to encourage
the flexibility of density, intensity of land uses, design and type,
authorize a deviation in various clusters from the density, or intensity of
use, established for an entire planned development.
104. Editor's Note: Schedule A, Permitted, Conditional and Accessory Uses and Structures, is
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 330-202 VERNON CODE § 330-203
1:696
B. Planned adult community ("PAC") of semiattached or attached dwelling
units shall be permitted in the R-4, C-1 and CR Districts, subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Unless otherwise provided under Article VIII, the regulations and
standards contained herein shall apply notwithstanding provisions
to the contrary in any other article, schedule or appendix.
(2) Permitted accessory uses: uses clearly incident and customarily
subordinate to planned adult communities and the dwelling units
permitted therein, including private garages having not more than
two spaces, buildings for tools and equipment not exceeding 150
square feet in area, private tennis courts, private swimming pools,
fences, and such signs as are permitted in the zoning district as
regulated therein. In the CR Districts, golf courses, riding stables,
outpatient health care facilities, retail sales, fire stations, and
buildings for administration, maintenance and security shall also
be permitted.
(3) Required accessory uses for planned adult communities: clubhouse
and at least one recreational amenity such as, but not limited to, a
private tennis court, private swimming pool or other amenity of
similar qualities and community value to the residents of a planned
adult community. In the CR District, both a clubhouse and a private
swimming pool shall be required.
(4) Bulk and yard requirements.
(a) Buildings containing up to but not more than three
semiattached or attached dwelling units:
[1] Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
[4] Minimum front setback (measured from the future street
right-of-way):
[a] Collector or arterial street: 40 feet.
[b] Local street: 30 feet.
[5] Minimum each side setback: five feet; zero feet with
common wall.
[6] Minimum both side setbacks: 10 feet; five feet with one
common wall or zero feet with two common walls.
[7] Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
[8] Minimum gross floor area: 900 square feet.
§ 330-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-203
1:697
[9] Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
[10] Maximum building height: two stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less, in the R-4, R-5, C-1 and C-4 Zones; three
stories or 45 feet, whichever is less, in the CR Zone.
[11] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60:1.
(b) Buildings containing more than three but not more than six
semiattached or attached dwelling units:
[1] Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
[4] Minimum front setback (measured from the future street
right-of-way):
[a] Collector or arterial street: 40 feet.
[b] Local street: 30 feet.
[5] Minimum each side setback: 10 feet; zero feet with
common wall.
[6] Minimum both side setbacks: 20 feet; 10 feet with one
common wall or zero feet with two common walls.
[7] Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
[8] Minimum gross floor area: 900 square feet.
[9] Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
[10] Maximum building height: two stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less, in the R-4 and C-1 Zones; three stories
or 45 feet, whichever is less, in the CR Zone.
[11] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60:1.
(5) Development standards for planned adult communities.
(a) Parking requirements:
[1] In the R-4 and C-1 Zones, two parking spaces shall be
provided for every dwelling unit.
[2] In the CR Zone: off-street parking spaces shall be provided
in accordance with the following schedule for each type of
use contained in a site development plan:
[3] One and one-half spaces for each dwelling unit, one of
which shall be enclosed in a garage or carport.
§ 330-203 VERNON CODE § 330-203
1:698
[4] One space for each 200 square feet of floor area in use for
retail commercial purposes.
[5] One space for each eight persons for whom seating is
provided in an auditorium or place of worship, except that
this number may be reduced to the extent that combined
use of parking lots makes it feasible.
[6] One space for each 1,000 square feet of floor space in a
medical facility, plus additional space for each resident
doctor.
[7] All parking spaces in a PAC shall be 10 feet wide and 20
feet long.
[8] On-site parking facilities shall be of a design and location
that will not interfere with the efficient flow of traffic in the
area and with the access of emergency and service
vehicles nor cause a safety or nuisance hazard to residents
on the site or to adjoining properties. All assigned spaces
shall be located within 200 feet of the dwelling units they
serve.
[9] In conforming to the off-street parking requirements of
this chapter, curb parking spaces shall not be included.
[10] A landscaped separator between parking lanes, having a
landscaped width of at least five feet, shall be provided in
the commercial areas of a PAC development.
[11]No parking shall be permitted in the residential setback
area.
[12] Lighting standards for outdoor parking areas shall be
limited to 14 feet in height and shall be reflected away
from windows of the dwelling units in order to minimize
the impact of such lighting on the residents in the dwelling
units.
(b) Buffer requirements. Any provision of Article VII to the
contrary notwithstanding, a buffer shall be maintained around
the perimeter of the planned adult community project area that
is equal to the height of a respective building divided by three,
the quotient of which shall be squared to produce the
corresponding buffer.
(c) Clubhouse requirements. In any planned adult community
project in which a clubhouse is constructed, such clubhouse
shall provide multipurpose space in the nature of a meeting
room of at least the greater of 600 square feet or 12 square
feet per dwelling unit.
§ 330-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-203
1:699
(d) Swimming pool. A minimum of one swimming pool shall be
provided for each 600 dwelling units at a ratio of 1.7 square
feet of water surface area for each dwelling unit which the pool
will serve. There shall also be provided an improved sitting
area, contiguous to all sides of the pool, having an area two
times the water surface area of the pool. A twenty-five-meter
pool shall have a minimum width of 45 feet, and a fifty-meter
pool shall have a minimum width of 60 feet.
(e) Medical facilities. There shall be sufficient building space to
adequately allow for the provisions of all medical facilities for
retirement communities as required by any applicable federal,
state or local regulations. Conveniently located on-site loading
space and accessways for use by emergency vehicles shall also
be provided.
(f) Retail service facilities. Retail service facilities associated with
a PAC shall be located within the PAC development, shall be
designed to serve the residents of the PAC, and shall be
independently located on a site or portion of a site comprising
at least one acre.
(g) Minimum tract size. Minimum tract size for PAC in the R-4 and
C-1 Zones shall be 20 acres; minimum tract size in the CR Zone
shall be 100 acres.
(h) Density. PAC density shall not exceed four units per buildable
or net acre in both twenty-acre and one-hundred-acre sites.
(i) Open space. PAC development projects in the CR Zone shall
establish an area of common open space comprising at least
50% of the area of each section of development and
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the approving authority.
Where a PAC contains an improved golf course comprising an
area of at least 75 acres, open space in residential sections
may be reduced to 40%. The appropriate percentage of open
space need not be established cumulatively. Open space shall
consist of preserved vegetative growth and natural features,
landscaped areas or a combination thereof in accordance with
an approved open space/landscape plan. Open space and all
common areas shall be maintained by a homeowners'
association organized to the satisfaction of the approving
authority and in accordance with this chapter.
(j) Roads. Interior roads not dedicated to public use shall have a
paved roadway width of at least 30 feet. Road improvements
shall be made and maintenance shall be provided in
accordance with the standards of the Township of Vernon.
Provisions shall be made for private ownership so that the
same shall not thereafter be dedicated to the Township of
Vernon for public use.
§ 330-203 VERNON CODE § 330-204
1:700
§ 330-204. Architecture.
§ 330-205. Performance standards.
Any building, structure, site or tract of land developed, constructed or used
for any permitted principal or accessory industrial use shall comply with
all the performance standards set forth in this section. These performance
standards shall apply unless exceeded by any state or federal standards
or amendments thereto. If there is any reasonable doubt that the intended
use will conform to any section of the performance standards, the Planning
Board shall establish and request a deposit for each section in doubt, which
deposit shall be used to defray the cost of a special report by an expert
consultant qualified to advise on conformance to the required standard.
The amount of the deposit shall be based on a quotation from said expert
consultant. Said report shall be made within 30 days of the request and
copies supplied to the applicant. If any existing use or building is extended,
enlarged or reconstructed, the performance standards shall apply to such
extended, enlarged or reconstructed portion or portions of such use or
building or structure.
A. In any application for an approval or permit brought pursuant to or
involving this article, the applicant shall demonstrate to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer and/or reviewing board that:
(1) In the case of an addition to an existing building or structure, such
addition will be constructed to be architecturally consistent with
the existing building or structure.
(2) In the case of new construction, architectural design and
construction will be in accord with or complementary to the
prevailing architectural character of the neighborhood and district
if and to the extent that such prevailing architectural pattern is
desirably historic, thematic or otherwise visually creative and
appealing to persons of common and reasonable appreciation.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit the proposal of
creative design(s) by a registered architect tending to demonstrate that
the purposes of this article would be advanced notwithstanding an
apparent deviation from the standards of this section so long as such
proposal is consistent with the spirit of this section.
A. Noise. Measured at the lot line, the sound pressure level of noise
emitted by all sources on a single lot shall not exceed the levels
tabulated below and corrected for the character of the noise.
Measurement shall be made with a sound level meter corresponding to
ANSI Standards S1.4 and an octave band filter conforming to ANSI
standard Z24.10.
§ 330-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-205
1:701
Octave Band Center Frequency
Cycles per Second
Maximum Sound Pressure
Level,
Decibels Relative to 0.002
Microbars
31.5 84
63 70
125 57
250 50
500 45
1,000 41
2,000 38
4,000 35
8,000 32
Character of Noise Correction of Decibels
Night time noise
(10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.)
-5
Impulsive noise -5
Noise of periodic character -5
B. Smoke. There shall be no emission of smoke or other visible
atmospheric pollutant to give a plume equivalent opacity in excess of
15%. Opacity readings may be made visually by a trained observer or by
a stack mounted opacity meter. Steam plumes are exempt from this
limit, but steam may not be used to mask other emissions.
C. Odor. Emission of odorous matter shall be below odor threshold
concentrations at the lot lines and at the point of maximum ground level
concentration if this point is beyond the lot line. Recognized
compilations of odor threshold concentrations may be used as
standards of the granting of use permits, but for an established use the
actual detectability of odor shall be the standard. Odor threshold
compilations include Air Pollution Control Association Paper 68-131,
(1968); Table III, Chapter 5 of "Air Pollution Abatement Manual,"
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Washington, 1951; and US
Bureau of Mines Technical Paper 480 (1930).
D. Particulate emissions to the atmosphere.
(1) Dust, dirt, fly ash, and other particulates shall be controlled so that
no such emission will cause damage to human health, animals,
vegetation, or other property, or which can cause any excessive
soiling beyond the lot line of the source use. There shall be no
emission of any solid or liquid particulate matter in excess of 0.015
§ 330-205 VERNON CODE § 330-205
1:702
grains per dry standard cubic foot of stack gas, corrected to 12%
CO2. Particulate emission determinations shall be made according
to EPA Method 5.
(2) Fugitive dust shall be held to a minimum by use of good
housekeeping practices and other appropriate control techniques.
E. Noxious gases. Under no circumstances shall any use emit noxious,
toxic, or corrosive fumes or gases. Reference shall be made to "Table I,"
Industrial Hygiene Standards, Maximum Allowable Concentrations,
Chapter 5 of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual for determination of
toxic pollutants to be prohibited.
F. Glare and heat. No industrial uses shall carry on an operation which
will produce heat or direct or sky-reflected glare beyond the property
line of the lot on which the use is located. Industrial and exterior
lighting shall be used in such a manner that it produces no glare on
public highways and neighboring property.
G. Fire and explosion hazards. All activities shall be carried on only in
structures which conform to the standards of the Fire Prevention Code
published by the American Insurance Association, 1965, or Borough
Building Code or other applicable local ordinance, whichever is more
restrictive. All operations shall be carried on and combustible raw
materials, fuels, liquid, and finished products shall be stored in
accordance with the standards of said American Insurance Association.
The storage of more than 500 gallons of volatile or inflammable liquid
above ground is prohibited.
H. Liquid and solid wastes. There shall be no discharge at any point of
treated or untreated sewage or industrial waste into any stream, lake,
reservoir, or into the ground of any material which may contaminate the
water supply or endanger human health and welfare. No industrial
waste shall be discharged into any system, nor shall any wastes be
discharged in the public sewer system which are dangerous to the
public health and safety.
(1) Maximum five-day biochemical oxygen demand: 5.0 ppm.
(2) Maximum quantity of effluent: 10% of minimum daily stream flow.
(3) Maximum five-day biochemical oxygen demand after dilution (BOD
of effluent multiplied by quantity of effluent divided by quantity of
stream flow): 0.25 ppm.
(4) Acidity or alkalinity shall be neutralized to a pH of 7.0 as a daily
average on a volumetric basis, with a temporary variation of 6.0 to
8.5.
(5) Wastes shall not contain any insoluble substances in excess of
5,000 ppm, and no insoluble substances shall be noticeable in the
§ 330-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-205
1:703
water or deposited along the above or on the aquatic substrata in
quantities detrimental to the natural biota.
(6) Wastes shall contain no cyanides and no halogens.
(7) Threshold odor number shall not exceed 24° to 60° C.
(8) Wastes shall not exceed the following maximums:
(a) Maximum hydrogen sulphide: 10 ppm.
(b) Maximum sulphur dioxide: 10 ppm.
(c) Maximum nitrous oxide: 10 ppm.
(d) Maximum chorine demand: 15 ppm.
(e) Maximum phenols: 0.0005 ppm.
(9) No effluent shall contain any acids, ores, dust, toxic metals,
corrosive or other toxic substance in solution or suspension which
may cause odors, discolor, poison or otherwise pollute streams and
waterways in any way. There shall be no thermal discharges which
detrimentally affect the natural aquatic biota, or reasonably
anticipated reuse of the waters. There shall be no accumulation of
solid wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects.
(10) All methods of sewage and industrial waste treatment and disposal
shall be approved by the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection and the Sussex County Department of
Health, the Vernon Township Department of Health and Human
Services and the Sussex County Municipal Utilities Authority.
I. Vibration. No activity shall cause or create a steady state or impact
vibration at or beyond the lot line causing acceleration in excess of that
indicated in the attached figure. The numbers on the ordinate are peak
values of sinusoidal accelerations or 1.4 times the root mean square
values of random vibrations measured in octave bands. These criteria
are for vertical vibrations and are to be reduced by a factor of 1.4 for
horizontal vibrations. The ordinate unit, g, is 9.81 m/sec2 (32.2 feet/
sec2).
J. Radioactivity and electrical disturbance. Radioactivity shall not be
emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the US Bureau of
Standards, as amended from time to time. No electrical disturbances
(except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the
operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of
such disturbance.
K. Conformance to state standards. Any operation shall also comply with
any applicable state standards and requirements and particularly to the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, N.J.A.C. Title 7,
Chapter 27, Subchapters 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13 and 16.
§ 330-205 VERNON CODE § 330-205
1:704
ARTICLE XII
Stormwater Management
[Adopted in entirety 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-08]
§ 330-206. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural Best Management Practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in Section 330-207.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Vernon, except as specifically
excluded herein.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
§ 330-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-206
1:705
§ 330-207. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Means those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — Means the geographic depiction of the
boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and
CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — Means the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — Means pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Means an agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management
plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either
be:
DEPARTMENT — Means the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Means a State Development and Redevelopment
Plan Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Means a person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include,
but not necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements,
creation and development of project design and preparation of drawings
and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — Means the division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
COUNTY PLANNING AGENCY; or COUNTY WATER RESOURCE
ASSOCIATION created under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or
resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinances.
A.
§ 330-206 VERNON CODE § 330-207
1:706
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — Means a geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Means an area or feature which
is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Means a neighborhood designated
by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with"
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — Means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Means a surface that has been covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Is the process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Means any "development" that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose
of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or
movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Means any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — Means an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — Means a chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen
or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Township of Vernon, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
§ 330-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-207
1:707
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act
of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the
State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both
hazardous and non-hazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — Means the amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Means solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Means the lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur
or has occurred.
SOIL — Means all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Means an area delineated on the State Plan
Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended
to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Is defined as the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Means water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface,
or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage
facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Means water flow on the surface of the ground
or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Means an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Means any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
§ 330-207 VERNON CODE § 330-207
1:708
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Means a flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— Means a neighborhood given priority access to State resources through
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — Means a zone designated by the New
Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Is defined as previously developed
portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — Means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to
its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — Means an area that is inundated or saturated
by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 330-208. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in Section 330-209. To the maximum extent practicable,
these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If these
strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
§ 330-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-208
1:709
§ 330-209. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to
new major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
Note: Alternative standards shall provide at least as much
protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge,
stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of major
development projects as would be provided under the standards in
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with Section 330-211.4.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of paragraphs F. and G. below:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are re-vegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable or semi-permeable material, or nonstructural
water quality measures are incorporated into the design.
(4) The widening of or improvement of an existing roadway.
D. (Reserved)
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in paragraphs F.
and G. below shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth in this paragraph E.
into the design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural
measures incorporated into the design of the project. If the
§ 330-208 VERNON CODE § 330-209
1:710
applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in paragraph (2)
below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall
identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the
contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy paragraph (3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
§ 330-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-209
1:711
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under paragraph (2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see paragraph (3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in paragraph G.(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
§ 330-209 VERNON CODE § 330-209
1:712
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long
and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars,
to the elevation of the water quality design storm as
specified in paragraph G.(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in paragraphs F. and
G. shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Section 330-211.1, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at Section 330-210, either:
§ 330-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-209
1:713
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100 percent of the average annual
pre-construction groundwater recharge volume for
the site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
2-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to paragraph [3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
§ 330-209 VERNON CODE § 330-209
1:714
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at Section 330-210, complete
one of the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the preconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the 2-, 10- and
100-year storm events are 50, 75 and 80 percent,
respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with [1], [2] and [3] above shall only
be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff
could increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at Section 330-207 shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review
and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section
and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
§ 330-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-209
1:715
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for
sale. Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80 percent of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of non-structural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
§ 330-209 VERNON CODE § 330-209
1:716
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Section 330-211.1, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual
and other sources of technical guidance are listed in Section
330-211.1. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of
any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal
rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80 percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Section 330-211C.
§ 330-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-209
1:717
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one onsite drainage area, the 80 percent TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Sections 330-209F. and
330-209G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in Section 330-211.1.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
§ 330-209 VERNON CODE § 330-209
1:718
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where
the bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation
or vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph [1] above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subparagraph
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95 percent TSS post-construction
removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
§ 330-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-209
1:719
§ 330-210. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to paragraph (8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to paragraph
(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
as defined in paragraph (8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Paragraph (8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
§ 330-209 VERNON CODE § 330-210
1:720
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Section 330-210A.(1)(a) and the Rational
and Modified Rational Methods at Section 330-210A.(1)(b). A
runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an
existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the
design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed
on the site or portion of the site for at least five years without
interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one land
cover have existed on the site during the five years immediately
prior to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest
runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In addition,
there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic
condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good
cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tail water in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
§ 330-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-210
1:721
§ 330-211. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than one-third the width of the diameter of
the orifice or one-third the width of the weir, with a minimum
spacing between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between
bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must
comply with the requirements of Section 330-211.2D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in
diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
Section 330-211.2.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by Section
330-209.
§ 330-210 VERNON CODE § 330-211
1:722
§ 330-211.1. Sources for technical guidance.
§ 330-211.2. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of Section 330-209, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by
the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by
the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at paragraphs (1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
§ 330-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-211.2
1:723
Note: The provisions of this section are not intended to preempt more
stringent municipal or county safety requirements for new or existing
stormwater management basins. Municipal and county stormwater
management plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their authority,
require existing stormwater management basins to be retrofitted to
meet one or more of the safety standards in paragraphs B.(1), (2) and
(3) for trash racks, overflow grates, and escape provisions at outlet
structures.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ft sq.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft sq.
(3) For purposes of this paragraph (3), escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
§ 330-211.2 VERNON CODE § 330-211.2
1:724
§ 330-211.3. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
paragraph C. below a free-standing outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half feet. Such safety ledges
shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six
feet in width. One step shall be located approximately two and
one-half feet below the permanent water surface, and the
second step shall be located one to one and one-half feet above
the permanent water surface. See paragraph D. below for an
illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management
basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at paragraph C. below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
§ 330-211.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-211.3
1:725
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit 22 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
paragraph C. below.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's Site
Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from whom
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of 1"=100' or greater,
showing minimum 2-foot contour intervals. The map as appropriate
must indicate the following: existing surface water drainage,
shorelines, steep slopes, soils boundary lines and types per the
county soil survey, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands
and flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces,
existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and distances of
property lines, and significant natural and manmade features not
otherwise shown, pre and post development drainage areas w/TC
paths & limit of wooded areas. Topographic map must be sealed by
a licensed professional surveyor. Drainage area map must be
signed by a licensed professional engineer as per state statute.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
§ 330-211.3 VERNON CODE § 330-211.3
1:726
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land Use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections
330-208 through 330-211 are being met. The focus of this plan shall
be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective
of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(c) Drainage map with drainage area and TC path to each
proposed and existing storm inlet.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in Section 330-209.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Section 330-211.4.
§ 330-211.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-211.3
1:727
§ 330-211.4. Maintenance and repair.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in paragraph C.(1) through C.(6) above when it
can be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible
to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain
and its absence will not materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability.
(1) Projects subject to review as in Section 330-206C. shall comply
with the requirements of paragraphs B. and C. below.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph (2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Section paragraph (7) below
shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property on
which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
§ 330-211.3 VERNON CODE § 330-211.4
1:728
§ 330-211.5. Penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building; structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the penalties and fines as provided for in Chapter 1, § 1-19,
Violations and penalties.
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of non-vegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph (2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph (2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph (2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by paragraphs (6) and (7) above.
(9) The requirements of paragraphs (3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 330-211.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-211.5
1:729

ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)105
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 447, Property Maintenance.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-211.5
1:731

ARTICLE XIV
Affordable Housing106
§ 330-212. Purpose.
This article regulates and provides for low- and moderate-income housing
in and for the Township of Vernon, pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985
and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq., effective June 6, 1997.
§ 330-213. Development fees. [Added 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
A. Imposition of fees.
(1) Mandatory participation. Any developer of residential or
nonresidential property shall have the responsibility to participate
in the Township's efforts to provide its fair share of lower income
housing. These fees will apply in all zones of the Township of
Vernon. The level and type of mandatory participation shall be as
follows:
(a) Residential. Residential development fees shall be 1/2 of 1% of
the equalized assessed value for residential development. If a
"d" variance is granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5),
then the additional residential units realized (above what is
permitted by right under the existing zoning) will incur a bonus
development fee of 6% of the equalized assessed value rather
than the development fee of 1/2 of 1%. However, if the zoning
on a site has changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of the "d" variance application, the base density for
purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the
highest density permitted by right during that two-year period
preceding the filing of the "d" variance application. Residential
development of single-family residences being developed by an
owner for owner occupancy shall be exempt from the fees set
forth herein unless said residential development shall be part
of a major subdivision which received Planning Board approval
on or after June 12, 2000. [Amended 3-28-2005 by Ord. No.
05-05107]
(b) Nonresidential. Nonresidential development fees shall be 1%
of the equalized value for nonresidential development. If a "d"
variance is granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(4), then
the additional floor area realized (above what is permitted by
right under the existing zoning) will incur a bonus development
fee of 6% of the equalized assessed value rather than the
development fee of 1%. However, if the zoning on a site has
106. See also Volume I, Chapter 133, Affordable Housing.
107. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply to all residential
development as set forth in this section for which applications for building permits have
been made within six months prior to the date this Ord. No. 05-05 takes effect.
§ 330-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-213
1:733
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
the "d" variance application, the floor area for purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
floor area permitted by right during that two-year period
preceding the filing of the "d" variance application.
(2) Optional participation.
(a) Residential; developer's agreement. The Township of Vernon
may collect fees exceeding those permitted in this section for
residential developments; provided, however, that the
Township of Vernon enters into a voluntary, written agreement
with a residential developer, and provided further that such
written agreement sets forth a financial incentive that shall
include, but not be limited to, a tax abatement, reduction in the
development design standards, waiver of off-tract
improvement requirements and/or waiver of certain fees for
the residential site of the developer. No agreement may
provide for an increased voluntary residential developer fee
without also providing for a comparable offsetting financial
incentive. All such agreements are subject to COAH approval.
(b) Nonresidential; developer's agreement. The Township of
Vernon may collect fees exceeding those permitted in this
section for nonresidential developments; provided, however,
that the Township of Vernon enters into a voluntary, written
agreement with a nonresidential developer, and provided
further that such written agreement sets forth a financial
incentive for paying higher fees. The financial incentive may be
in the form of a tax abatement, increased commercial/
industrial square footage, increased commercial/industrial lot
coverage, increased commercial/industrial impervious
coverage and/or increased building height than permitted in
the zoning ordinance for the reduction in the development
design standards, waiver of off-tract improvement
requirements and/or waiver of certain fees for the residential
site of the developer. No agreement may provide for an
increased voluntary residential developer fee without also
providing for a comparable offsetting financial incentive. All
such agreements are subject to COAH approval.
B. Collection of fees.
(1) The following procedures shall be followed with respect to the
collection of development fees:
(a) When a cash development fee is to be made in a sum
determined by applying a percentage figure against the
equalized assessed value of the property, the following rule
shall apply: The value of the property shall be the equalized
assessed value of each dwelling unit at the time of project
§ 330-213 VERNON CODE § 330-213
1:734
completion or, where feasible, completion of the unit in
question.
(b) The developer shall pay 50% of the calculated development
fee, which is nonrefundable, to the Township of Vernon at the
issuance of building permits. The development fee shall be
estimated by the Tax Assessor prior to the issuance of building
permits based upon construction costs.
(c) The developer shall pay the remaining fee to the Township of
Vernon at the issuance of certificate of occupancy. At the
issuance of certificates of occupancy, the Tax Assessor shall
calculate the equalized assessed value and the appropriate
development fee. The developer shall be responsible for paying
the difference between the fee calculated at the time of
issuance of the certificate of occupancy and the amount paid at
the time of issuance of the building permit.
(d) Payments shall be certified check or bank money order to the
Township of Vernon and shall be deposited in a separate
interest-bearing Housing Trust Fund account established by
this section.
(2) Mandatory provisions relating to the application of funds payable
to the Township of Vernon Fair Share Housing Trust Fund. The
following mandatory provisions required by COAH regulations are
hereby made applicable to the Vernon Township Fair Share
Housing Trust Fund:
(a) The Township of Vernon shall establish a separate interestbearing
Housing Trust Fund account for the purpose of
receiving development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers with a financial interest otherwise qualified for the
investment of public funds at the time the account is
established. The Township shall provide the financial
institution with the written authorization required by N.J.A.C.
5:93-8.15 permitting COAH to direct disbursement of
development fees pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.18 and 8.19. All
development fees paid by developers pursuant to this section
shall be deposited in this account. No money shall be expended
from this Housing Trust Fund account unless the expenditure
conforms to the municipal spending plan approved by COAH
for the Township of Vernon.
(b) If COAH determines that the Township is not in conformance
with COAH's development fee rules, COAH is authorized to
direct the manner in which all development fees collected from
developers shall be expended. Such authorization is pursuant
to the Township of Vernon ordinance, COAH's rules on
development fees and the written authorization from the
§ 330-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-213
1:735
Township Council to the financial institution in which the
Housing Trust Fund is maintained.
C. Use of funds. The following mandatory provisions required by COAH
regulations are hereby made applicable to that separate interestbearing
Housing Trust Fund account established in this section:
(1) Money deposited in the separate interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund account may be used for any activity approved by COAH for
addressing the Township of Vernon's low- and moderate-income
housing obligation. Such activities may include, but are not limited
to, housing rehabilitation, new construction, regional contribution
agreements, the purchase of land for low- and moderate-income
housing, extension and/or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to low- and moderate-income housing sites,
assistance designed to render units to be more affordable to lowand
moderate-income persons (such as the write-down/buy-down
program) and administrative costs necessary to implement the
Township of Vernon's housing element. The expenditures of all
money from that separate interest-bearing Housing Trust Fund
account shall conform to a spending plan approved by COAH as per
its regulation. The expenditure of all money from that separate
interest-bearing Housing Trust Fund account may be expended
with the approval of and resolution of the Township Council in
accordance with the regulations governing any expenditure of
funds.
(2) At least 30% of the revenues collected shall be devoted to render
units more affordable. Examples of such activities include, but are
not limited to, down payment assistance, low interest loans and
rental assistance. This requirement may be waived in whole or in
part when the Township demonstrates the ability to address
requirements of affordability assistance from another source.
(3) No more than 20% of the revenues shall be expended on
administrative costs necessary to develop, revise or implement the
housing element. Examples of eligible administrative activities
include personnel, consultant services, space costs, consumable
supplies and rental or purchase of equipment.
(4) Development fee revenues shall not be expended to reimburse the
Township for housing activities that preceded substantive
certification.
D. Exemption and partial exemption from development fees.
(1) Developers of low- and moderate-income housing units shall be
exempt from paying development fees.
(2) Developers that have received preliminary or final approval prior to
the effective date of this section shall be exempt from paying a
development fee unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
§ 330-213 VERNON CODE § 330-213
1:736
the approval. Substantial changes may include, but are not limited
to, a substantial alteration in the site layout, development density
or types of uses within the development. The granting by the
Planning Board of an approval of a general development plan for
a planned development under the provisions of § 330-40, Planned
developments, shall not constitute a preliminary or final approval
as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.12(d).
(3) Emergency services shall be exempt from paying development fees.
(4) Alterations/expansions to existing single-family residences, twofamily
residences, multifamily residences (including residences in
mixed-use buildings) and/or permitted accessory structures shall
be exempt from paying development fees.
(5) Alterations/expansions to existing retail buildings, office buildings,
public utilities, financial institutions, eating establishments and/or
industrial buildings under 5% of the total gross floor area of the
existing building or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less, shall be
exempt from paying development fees.
(6) Alterations/expansions to existing institutional uses under 5% of
the total gross floor area of the existing building or 1,000 square
feet, whichever is less, shall be exempt from paying development
fees.
E. Continuing ability to collect and implement fees.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.18, if any of the conditions set forth
below occur, COAH shall be authorized to direct the manner in
which development fees shall be dispersed:
(a) Failure to submit a plan pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1(c) within
the time limits imposed by COAH.
(b) Failure to meet deadlines for information required by COAH in
its review of a housing element, development fee ordinance, or
plan for spending fees.
(c) Failure to proceed through COAH's administrative process
toward substantive certification in a timely manner.
(d) Failure to address COAH's conditions for approval of a plan to
spend development fees within the deadlines imposed by
COAH.
(e) Failure to address COAH's conditions for substantive
certification within the deadlines imposed by COAH.
(f) Failure to submit accurate monitoring reports within the time
limits imposed by COAH.
§ 330-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-213
1:737
(g) Failure to implement the plan to spend development fees
within the time limits imposed by COAH, or within reasonable
extensions granted by COAH.
(h) Revocation of certification.
(i) Other good cause demonstrating that the revenues are not
being used for the intended purpose.
(j) Such revenues shall immediately become available for
expenditure once COAH has notified the Township Clerk and
Chief Financial Officer that such a condition has occurred. In
furtherance of the foregoing, the Township shall, in
establishing a bank account pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.15,
ensure that it has provided whatever express written
authorization may be required by the bank to permit COAH to
direct the disbursement of such revenues from the account
following the delivery to the bank of the aforementioned
written notification provided by COAH to the Township Clerk
and Chief Financial Officer.
(k) COAH may, after a hearing pursuant to the Administrative
Procedure Act, N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et seq., revoke development
fee ordinance approval if the Township fails to comply with the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.1 et seq.
(l) Neither loss of development fees, nor loss of the Township's
ability to impose and collect development fees, shall alter its
responsibilities pursuant to substantive certification.
(2) Monitoring. The Township of Vernon shall complete and return to
COAH all monitoring forms relating to the collection of
development fees, expenditures of revenues and implementation of
the plan certified by COAH. Quarterly financial reports, annual
program implementation reports, auditing reports and such other
reports as required by COAH shall be on forms designed and
designated by COAH.
F. Expiration. This § 330-213 shall expire if:
(1) COAH dismisses or denies the Township's petition for substantive
certification;
(2) COAH revokes substantive certification or this section;
(3) The substantive certification expires prior to the Township's filing
an adopted housing element with COAH, petitioning for
substantive certification or receiving COAH's approval of this
section.
§ 330-213 VERNON CODE § 330-213
1:738
ARTICLE XV
(Reserved)108
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 478, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control; and Ch. 483, Soil Removal.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-213
1:739

ARTICLE XVI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 330-214. Enforcement.109
The Township Council shall enforce this chapter and any regulation
hereunder. A zoning permit, or other permit, certificate or authorization
as provided in this chapter and as may be appropriate, shall be required
as a condition precedent to the erection, construction, alteration, repair,
remodeling, conversion, removal or destruction of any building or structure;
the use or occupancy of any building; structure or land; and the subdivision
or resubdivision or any land. The Zoning Officer, Code Enforcement Officer
or such other administrative officer and office as shall be established by
the Township Council shall be responsible for the issuance of such permits,
certificates and authorizations upon the submission of such data, materials,
plans, plats and information as is authorized under this chapter and upon
the express approval of the appropriate state, county or Township agencies.
The fees to cover administrative costs for the issuance of such permits,
certificates and authorizations are provided in Chapter 250, Fees and
Escrows, Article II. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or
land is used in violation of this chapter, any proper Township authority
or any interested party, in addition to any other remedies, may institute
an appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy
of said building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.110
§ 330-215. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail
to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who
shall erect, structurally alter, enlarge, rebuild or move any building or
buildings or any structure, or who shall put into use any lot or land in
violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted hereunder, or who
shall refuse reasonable opportunity to inspect any premises shall be
liable for a fine of not more than $500 or to imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day
such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct
violation.
B. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof,
where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist,
and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
110. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1602, Selling before approval; penalty; suit by Township; Sec.
1603, Certificates showing approval; contents; and Sec. 1604, Right of owner of land
covered by certificate, which previously followed this section, were deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See §§ 330-63, 330-64 and 330-65.
§ 330-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-215
1:741
employed in connection thereof and who assists in the commission of
such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense, and, upon
conviction thereof, each shall be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or
both, specified in Subsection A above.
§ 330-215 VERNON CODE § 330-215
1:742
ARTICLE XVII
Schedules, Appendixes, Checklists and Forms
§ 330-216. Schedules and appendices.
The schedules, appendixes, checklists and forms contained in this article
shall be and are hereby made part of this chapter and are incorporated as
provisions of the text to which they correspond.
§ 330-217. Checklists and other forms.
The maps, materials, documents, data, studies and other information
described in the development checklists and forms contained herein are
intended to provide the Board with sufficient information and data to assure
compliance with this chapter and all specifications contained herein, and to
insure that the proposed development meets the design and improvement
standards contained in this chapter. The specification of documents to be
submitted is based on the type of development and particular stage of
development application. At the request of the applicant, one or more of
the submission requirements may be waived, in which event the Board or
its authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days.
Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation
to prove in the application process that he is entitled to approval of the
application.
§ 330-216 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-217
1:743

ARTICLE XVIII
Lot Development Permit
[Added 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-12; amended 10-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-33; 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-05; 3-11-2004 by Ord. No.
04-09]
§ 330-218. Lot development permit; when required.
Prior to the issuance of a construction permit by the Construction Official
for any new structure on any undeveloped residential lot or for an addition
or accessory structure larger than 500 square feet on a developed
residential lot or any commercial lot not subject to planning and zoning
approval, a lot development permit (LDP) shall be applied for and issued by
the Township Engineer.
§ 330-219. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOT, UNDEVELOPED RESIDENTIAL — Any lot, in a residential zone or
lot where a residential structure will be built, upon which no principal
structure is located or which a principal structure is located but is to
be removed or abandoned as a condition or in furtherance of a plan for
development of said lot.
§ 330-220. Scope and purposes.
The requirement for an LDP is to safeguard against adverse consequences
of uncontrolled surface water drainage, degradation of freshwater wetlands
and transition areas, pollution of streams, watercourses and water bodies
and negative impact to surrounding properties by development on private
and public lands; and to provide for safe and suitable location of driveways.
§ 330-221. Procedure for obtaining lot development permit;
limitations.
A. Consideration of issuance of an LDP shall be made upon submittal of an
application form and five copies of an LDP, which shall be subject to
review by the Township Engineer.
B. Action on the application and LDP shall be taken within 20 business
days of receipt of all plan elements.
C. If approved, the Township Engineer shall issue an LDP. If disapproved,
the applicant shall be so notified and the Township Engineer shall
furnish a written statement for the reasons of disapproval.
D. LDP's shall be good for one full year after the date of issuance, after
which such permit shall expire, but may be extended for a period not to
exceed one year by the Township Engineer for good cause.
§ 330-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-221
1:745
§ 330-222. Plan details and requirements for new residential
construction and commercial development.
The LDP shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State
of New Jersey and drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 30 feet.
The LDP shall be prepared in sufficient detail to show the following:
E. A septic system permit shall not be issued until the Township Engineer
issues an LDP permit.
A. Key map based on the Official Tax Map of the Township of Vernon.
B. A topographic map of the subject lot and adjoining street with two-foot
contour intervals, based upon a field survey, and not USGS maps.
C. To the greatest extent possible, the applicant shall comply with
§ 330-83 of this chapter in regard to environmentally sensitive areas.
D. The location of any existing streams, watercourses, ponds, storm
sewers, delineated wetlands, delineated wetland transition areas,
stormwater management facilities, and extent of slopes greater than
15% and environmentally sensitive areas.
E. The location of all existing and proposed new structures, including, but
not limited to, buildings, swimming pools, tennis courts, garages,
sheds, retaining walls, decks, patios, walkways and stairs.
F. The location, alignment, dimensions and construction details for any
existing or proposed driveways, parking and turnaround areas.
Driveways shall be located a minimum of 125 feet from an intersecting
street, be 12 feet wide, have a maximum slope of 15%, not exceed 5%
within 25 feet of a roadway or dwelling, and contain vertical curves for
smooth transitions. Driveways, which exceed 8% in grade, shall be
paved with two inches FABC mix I-5 over a base course consisting of
four inches of dense graded aggregate, thoroughly rolled and
compacted, or an equivalent.
G. A driveway profile shall be submitted for each proposed driveway.
H. The elevation of the finished garage floor, first floor and lowest floor of
the proposed structures.
I. Measures to mitigate the increase in runoff from impervious surfaces in
accordance with the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection Best Management Practices, such as swales, natural
retention areas and dry wells. When used, dry wells shall be
constructed of precast concrete and be sized to store three inches of
rainfall over the area of the structure, shall be equipped with overflow
piping, and shall be backfilled on all sides and bottom with 12 inches of
1 1/2 inches washed gravel, be surrounded with filter fabric and
connected to the dwelling with six inches PVC.
§ 330-221 VERNON CODE § 330-222
1:746
§ 330-223. Plan details and requirements for existing residential
lots.
J. The location of all roof leader drains, dry wells, water supply wells,
overhead and underground utility lines, and any individual subsurface
sewage disposal systems.
K. Proposed grading at two-foot contour intervals.
L. Required building setback lines showing the building envelope and
required buffers from environmentally sensitive areas.
M. Proposed retaining walls shall be accompanied by top and bottom of
wall elevations and construction details with a note stating that the
maximum exposed wall height is four feet. Walls with heights exceeding
four feet shall be accompanied by stability calculations performed by a
New Jersey licensed engineer.
N. Proposed soil erosion and sediment control areas.
A. Submission and approval requirements for improvements on existing
residential lots shall be dependent on the extent of the improvement
and the physical characteristics of the residential lot. The Township
Engineer shall review the initial documentation submission prepared by
the owner or architect and visit the site to determine the complexity of
the proposal. If, in the sole discretion of the Township Engineer, the
improvement and/or disturbance caused by the improvement cause
minimal impact to the environment or neighboring properties, the
Township Engineer can waive the requirement for the submission of a
formal LDP application. Notwithstanding this provision and unless
prohibited by site constraints in the sole opinion of the Township
Engineer, the Township Engineer may require at least one standard dry
well or other infiltration measure to be installed to mitigate the effects
of increase in impervious area. The initial document submission under
this section shall consist of the following:
(1) A survey of the property showing all improvements existing on the
property, all proposed improvements and the location of water
supply wells, dry wells and subsurface sewerage disposal facilities,
to scale.
(2) Any and all documents required for the development of the
property by the Construction Official and Department of Health
and Human Services, including, but not limited to, the building
plans and specifications of the architect or contractor who will
construct the improvement.
B. Upon review of the submission as set forth in this provision, the
Township Engineer, in his or her sole discretion, may issue the lot
development permit or may require any, or all, of the plan details or
requirements set forth in § 330-222.
§ 330-222 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-224
1:747
§ 330-224. Inspections.
§ 330-225. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 330-226. Exemptions.
A. In order to assure compliance with the terms of the LDP, a total of three
periodic inspections of the site development operations shall be made
by the Township Engineer or his representative as required during the
course of the work. In the event that additional site visits are necessary,
the Township will bill the developer for additional fees directly in
accordance with the Engineer's hourly rate schedule approved by the
Township.
B. The failure of an owner of property to comply with an approved LDP for
such property, including any temporary measures to be taken during
the performance of lot development activity or construction work, shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and property such owner will be
subject to penalties as per § 330-215 of this chapter.
A. A final zoning approval shall not be issued by the Zoning Official for any
property which is the subject of an LDP until the Township Engineer has
inspected the property and has certified in writing that the property
conforms to the LDP. The Township Engineer or his representative shall
make a final inspection and issue a report within five days after
notification from the Construction Official of an application for a
certificate of occupancy. When field conditions require substantial
deviations from the plan submitted, as-built drawings shall be furnished
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. In the event that the Township Engineer determines that current
weather conditions do not permit the completion of the required work
to effectuate full compliance with the LDP, the Township Engineer may
authorize the Zoning Official to issue a final zoning approval upon the
posting with the Township of a cash deposit in an amount equal to 120%
of the estimated cost of the work remaining to be performed. The
Township Engineer shall determine the cost of the remaining work to be
performed. In the event the work is not completed in a timely fashion,
the Township of Vernon has the right to have the work performed and
the cost thereof paid from the cash deposit pursuant to the terms of the
cash deposit agreement.
A. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, the requirement
for obtaining a lot development permit shall not apply to:
(1) An existing developed lot except as otherwise required in § 330-218
herein.
(2) Nonresidential lots which have already received site plan approval.
(3) Activities exempt under the Right to Farm Act.
§ 330-224 VERNON CODE § 330-226
1:748
§ 330-227. Appeals. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
§ 330-228. Fees.
Upon submission of a lot development plan to the Township of Vernon,
the applicant shall furnish a review and inspection fee in the amount of
$700 for new residential or commercial development or $250 for existing
residential lots (unless an LDP is required under § 330-222, in which case
(4) Property owned by the Township of Vernon.
B. The exemptions provided by this § 330-226 shall not be construed to
preclude the obligation for compliance with any other municipal,
county and/or state regulations as required by law.
A. Whenever the Township Engineer disapproves an application for an
LDP, the applicant may appeal such action to the Mayor. All such
appeals shall be filed with the Land Use Administrator in writing. No
filing fee shall be required. Unless the appeal is filed within 20 days
following the action by the Township Engineer, the disapproval shall be
deemed final.
B. For good cause shown, the Mayor may direct the issuance of an LDP in
cases where the plan details do not conform to the standards
established by §§ 330-222 and 330-223. As used in this section, the term
"good cause" shall mean that the applicant has demonstrated that, by
reason of the unique shape, shallowness or narrowness of the lot, or by
reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting the lot, the strict application of said plan detail
standards would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties
to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the lot owner. The burden of
establishing the existence of good cause shall be upon the applicant
who shall also establish to the satisfaction of the Mayor that the
issuance of the LDP will not substantially impair the purposes set forth
in § 330-220 and that the LDP may be issued without substantial
adverse impact upon the surrounding properties and neighborhood.
C. In the event that the Mayor feels that the issues relating to an LDP
appeal are beyond his or her ability to judge due to technical matters,
the Mayor may direct the appeal to the Zoning Board. In such cases, the
appeal shall be scheduled for a Zoning Board agenda within 30 days, or
as soon thereafter that it can be scheduled, at no cost to the applicant.
The applicant is required to provide written notice to all property
owners within 200 feet of the applicant's property by certified mail,
stating when and why the hearing will be held.
D. In no case shall the Mayor or Zoning Board direct the issuance of an
LDP where the LDP is inconsistent with the terms of any prior
subdivision or site plan approval with regard to protection of critical or
environmentally sensitive areas, or in conflict with county, state or
federal regulations.
§ 330-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-228
1:749
an additional fee of $200 shall be required), payable to the Township of
Vernon. In the event that more than three plan revisions or three site visits
are required by the Engineer or his representative, the Township of Vernon
shall bill the developer directly in accordance with the Engineer's hourly
rate schedule approved by the Township. All outstanding fees shall be paid
prior to issuance of a final zoning approval.
§ 330-228 VERNON CODE § 330-228
1:750
ARTICLE XIX
Highlands Preservation Area Land Use Ordinance111
[Adopted 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 330-229. Title, Purpose, Scope.
§ 330-229.1. Short title.
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Township of Vernon
Highlands Preservation Area Land Use Ordinance."
§ 330-229.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to effectuate the policies, goals and
objectives of the Township Master Plan, in particular the Highlands
Preservation Area Element of the Master Plan, while at the same time
advancing the purposes of zoning as set forth in the New Jersey Municipal
Land Use Law ("MLUL", N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), addressing the
substantive goals and intents of the Highlands Water Protection and
Planning Act ("Highlands Act," N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.), and satisfying the
goals, requirements and provisions of the Highlands Regional Master Plan
(RMP).
§ 330-229.3. Scope.
The provisions of this Ordinance pertain to the use and development of
all lands located strictly within the Township Highlands Preservation Area.
The Highlands Preservation Area comprises that portion of the municipality
for which the applicable provisions of the Township Master Plan, land
use ordinances and other pertinent regulations have been deemed by the
New Jersey Highlands Water Protection and Planning Council ("Highlands
Council") to be in conformance with the Highlands RMP. This Ordinance
governs land uses, development and redevelopment activities, and
management and protection of resources, including but not limited to water
resources, natural resources, agricultural resources, and scenic resources.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply in conjunction with all other
applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the municipality. In the
event of conflicting or less restrictive alternate provisions, the provisions of
this Ordinance shall supersede. Exempt development activities (see Article
2) however, shall remain subject solely to the underlying municipal zoning
and development regulations.
§ 330-229.4. Statutory authority.
This Ordinance is adopted under the authority of the MLUL and the
Highlands Act. The Highlands Act provides authorities and responsibilities
111. Editor's Note: Appendices and Exhibits may be found at the end of this Chapter.
References to the Highlands Preservation Area Land Use Ordinance (Ord. No. 2014-09), as
amended, have been retained as "this ordinance" in Article XIX.
§ 330-229 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-229.4
1:751
for municipal planning and development regulation that are complementary
to those set forth under the MLUL. The MLUL gives authority to New Jersey
municipalities to govern land use and development within their borders.
The Highlands Act augments that authority to allow the municipality the
power to enforce the goals, policies, objectives and programs of the
Highlands RMP. The Highlands Act is designed to protect the natural and
agricultural resources of the Highlands through a coordinated system of
regional land use controls. The Highlands Act creates a system in which a
regional plan is implemented primarily through local government units. The
Highlands Act and the RMP together provide the regional perspective from
which local decisions and actions will emanate.
§ 330-229.5. Severability.
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding shall in no way affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or of
any other portion thereof.
§ 330-229.6. Effective date.
This Ordinance shall take effect after final passage and publication in the
manner required by law.
§ 330-230. Applicability.
§ 330-230.1. Applicability.
The requirements of the Highlands Preservation Area Land Use Ordinance
shall apply to the use and development of all lands located within the
Township Highlands Preservation Area. Development review provisions
shall apply in the case of any project for which a permit or approval from, or
a determination by, the municipality is required, including any Application
for Development as defined under the MLUL (see Definitions, § 330-231.2).
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply in conjunction with and as
a supplement to the existing Zoning Ordinance, development regulations,
and all other rules, codes and regulatory provisions governing the use
and development of land in the municipality. In the event of conflicting
provisions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall supersede. Where
provisions differ only by degree, the more restrictive of the applicable
requirements shall supersede.
§ 330-230.1.1. Exclusions.
A. This Ordinance shall not apply to any improvement to a single-family
dwelling in lawful existence as of the effective date of this Ordinance,
provided that such improvement: a) is related and dedicated solely to
the single-family residential use of either the dwelling or the property
upon which it is situated; b) results in the ultimate disturbance of less
than one (1) acre of land; and c) produces a cumulative impervious
§ 330-229.4 VERNON CODE § 330-230.1.1
1:752
surface area of less than one-quarter (1/4) acre; where the phrases
"ultimate disturbance" and "cumulative impervious surface area" are
defined as provided at § 330-231.2.
B. This Ordinance shall not apply to the reconstruction, within the same
footprint, of any building or other structure lawfully existing as of the
effective date of this Ordinance, in the event of its destruction or partial
destruction by fire, storm, natural disaster, or any other unintended
circumstance.
C. This Ordinance shall not apply to the repair or maintenance of any
building or other structure lawfully existing as of the effective date of
this Ordinance. This exclusion shall not be construed to permit repairs
or maintenance activities that alter the footprint of such building or
structure.
D. This Ordinance shall not apply to the interior improvement,
rehabilitation, or modification of any building or other structure
lawfully existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance. This
exclusion shall not be construed to permit activities that alter the
footprint of such building or structure.
E. Unless specifically indicated otherwise, and in that case only to the
specific extent indicated, the provisions of this Ordinance shall not
apply to any change in use of a building or other structure lawfully
existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance. This exclusion shall
not be construed to permit activities that alter the footprint of such
building or structure.
F. This Ordinance shall not apply to the attachment of signs or other
ornamentation to any building or structure, to the installation of
windows, doors, chimneys, vents, shafts, heating, ventilation, or air
conditioning equipment, or to any other such improvement to a building
or structure provided it occupies a surface area footprint of not more
than 50 square feet. This exclusion shall not be construed to permit
ultimate disturbance or cumulative impervious surface in excess of that
provided at A., above, for single-family dwellings.
G. This Ordinance shall not apply to any improvement or alteration to a
building or other structure lawfully existing as of the effective date of
this Ordinance, where such improvement or alteration is necessary for
compliance with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act,
or to otherwise provide accessibility to the disabled.
H. Unless specifically indicated otherwise, and in that case only to the
specific extent indicated, the provisions of this Ordinance shall not
apply to Agricultural or Horticultural Use and Development (as defined
at § 330-231.2).
§ 330-230.1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-230.2
1:753
§ 330-230.2. Major Highlands Development.
Any proposed project, development or activity that meets the definition of
a Major Highlands Development (see Definitions, § 330-231.2) is subject to
all applicable requirements and provisions of the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) Highlands Water Protection and
Planning Act Rules ("NJDEP Preservation Area Rules," N.J.A.C. 7:38-1 et
seq.). By definition, such projects, developments and activities pertain
solely to the Preservation Area of the Highlands Region. Nothing in this
Ordinance shall be construed to waive, obviate, modify or otherwise exempt
any covered project, development or activity, or any person(s) proposing or
involved in such initiatives, from the provisions of the NJDEP Preservation
Area Rules.
§ 330-230.3. Non-Major Highlands Development.
Non-Major Highlands Development constitutes any project, development
or activity not defined as a Major Highlands Development. Any project,
development or activity proposed within the Preservation Area that does not
meet the definition of a Major Highlands Development shall remain subject
to the provisions of this Ordinance, as provided (with specified exclusions)
pursuant to § 330-230.1 above.
§ 330-230.4. Exemptions.
A. The activities, improvements and development projects listed below are
herewith exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, as specifically
provided by the Highlands Act (at N.J.S.A. 13:20-28). These exemptions
apply only to the specific activities, improvements and projects as
described and listed herein, and with the exception of the exemption
regarding federal military installations (no. 16), shall not be construed
to apply across-the-board to any lot, tract or other division of land,
whether existing or proposed at the time of passage of the Highlands
Act. Neither shall such exemptions be construed to alter, obviate or
waive the requirements of any other applicable state or local law, rule,
regulation, development regulation or ordinance. This would include,
for example, the bulk requirements of the municipal zoning ordinance
(e.g., yard and area requirements), the rules and regulations applicable
to issuance of building permits, or the requirements of any municipal
ordinance regulating the operation and maintenance of on-site septic
systems.
(1) The construction of a single family dwelling, for an individual's own
use or the use of an immediate family member, on a lot owned by
the individual on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act
(August 10, 2004) or on a lot for which the individual entered into a
binding contract of sale to purchase on or before May 17, 2004.
(Note: the Highlands Act defines "an immediate family member" as
a "spouse, child, parent, sibling, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, first
cousin, grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-
§ 330-230.2 VERNON CODE § 330-230.4
1:754
in-law, daughter-in-law, stepparent, stepchild, stepbrother,
stepsister, half-brother, or half-sister, whether the individual is
related by blood, marriage, or adoption.")
(2) The construction of a single family dwelling on a lot in existence on
the date of enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004),
provided that the construction does not result in the ultimate
disturbance of one acre or more of land or a cumulative increase in
impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more.
(3) A Major Highlands Development that received, on or before March
29, 2004:
(a) One of the following approvals pursuant to the MLUL:
[1] Preliminary or final site plan approval;
[2] Final municipal building or construction permit;
[3] Minor subdivision approval where no subsequent site plan
approval is required;
[4] Final subdivision approval where no subsequent site plan
approval is required; or
[5] Preliminary subdivision approval where no subsequent
site plan approval is required; and
(b) At least one of the following permits from the NJDEP, if
applicable to the proposed Major Highlands Development:
[1] A permit or certification pursuant to the "Water Supply
Management Act," P.L.1981, c.262 (C.58:1A-1 et seq.);
[2] A water extension permit or other approval or
authorization pursuant to the "Safe Drinking Water Act,"
P.L.1977, c.224 (C.58:12A-1 et seq.);
[3] A certification or other approval or authorization issued
pursuant to the "The Realty Improvement Sewerage and
Facilities Act (1954)," P.L.1954, c.199 (C.58:11-23 et seq.);
or
[4] A treatment works approval pursuant to the "Water
Pollution Control Act," P.L.1977, c.74 (C.58:10A-1 et seq.);
or
(c) One of the following permits from the NJDEP, if applicable to
the proposed Major Highlands Development, and if the
proposed Major Highlands Development does not require one
of the permits listed in subparagraphs [1] through [4] of
subparagraph (b) of this paragraph:
§ 330-230.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-230.4
1:755
[1] A permit or other approval or authorization issued
pursuant to the "Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act,"
P.L.1987, c.156 (C.13:9B-1 et seq.); or
[2] A permit or other approval or authorization issued
pursuant to the "Flood Hazard Area Control Act," P.L.1962,
c.19 (C.58:16A-50 et seq.).
The exemption provided in this paragraph shall apply only
to the land area and the scope of the Major Highlands
Development addressed by the qualifying approvals
pursuant to subparagraphs (a) and (b), or (c) if applicable,
of this paragraph; shall expire if any of those qualifying
approvals expire; and shall be deemed to have expired if
construction beyond site preparation did not commence
within three years after the date of enactment of the
Highlands Act (August 10, 2004).
(4) The reconstruction of any building or structure for any reason
within 125% of the footprint of the lawfully existing impervious
surfaces on the site, provided that the reconstruction does not
increase the lawfully existing impervious surface by one-quarter
acre or more. This exemption shall not apply to the reconstruction
of any agricultural or horticultural building or structure for a nonagricultural
or non-horticultural use.
(a) For purposes of this Ordinance, this exemption shall not be
construed to permit multiple 125% footprint expansions, but
rather, to permit one or more reconstruction activities
cumulatively resulting in a maximum 125% increase in the
footprint of the impervious surfaces lawfully existing on the
site, provided they do not cumulatively exceed the one-quarter
acre limitation.
(b) For purposes of this Ordinance, the applicable date of lawful
existence shall coincide with the date of enactment of the
Highlands Act (or August 10, 2004).
(c) For purposes of this Ordinance, these provisions shall not be
construed to exempt any change in use of such reconstructed
building or structure from the applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
(5) Any improvement to a single family dwelling in existence on the
date of enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004),
including but not limited to an addition, garage, shed, driveway,
porch, deck, patio, swimming pool or septic system.
(6) Any improvement, for non-residential purposes, to a place of
worship owned by a nonprofit entity, society or association, or
association organized primarily for religious purposes, or a public
or private school, or a hospital, in existence on the date of
§ 330-230.4 VERNON CODE § 330-230.4
1:756
enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004), including but
not limited to new structures, an addition to an existing building or
structure, a site improvement, or a sanitary facility.
(7) An activity conducted in accordance with an approved woodland
management plan pursuant to section 3 of the "Farmland
Assessment Act," P.L.1964, c.48 (C.54:4-23.3) or the normal
harvesting of forest products in accordance with a forest
management plan approved by the State Forester.
(8) The construction or extension of trails with non-impervious
surfaces on publicly owned lands or on privately owned lands
where a conservation or recreational use easement has been
established.
(9) The routine maintenance and operations, rehabilitation,
preservation, reconstruction or repair of transportation or
infrastructure systems by a state entity or local government unit,
provided that the activity is consistent with the goals and purposes
of the Highlands Act and does not result in the construction of any
new through-capacity travel lanes.
(10) The construction of transportation safety projects and bicycle and
pedestrian facilities by a state entity or local government unit,
provided that the activity does not result in the construction of any
new through-capacity travel lanes.
(11) The routine maintenance and operations, rehabilitation,
preservation, reconstruction, repair or upgrade of public utility
lines, rights of way, or systems, by a public utility, provided that the
activity is consistent with the goals and purposes of the Highlands
Act.
(12) The reactivation of rail lines and rail beds existing on the date of
enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004).
(13) The construction of a public infrastructure project approved by
public referendum prior to January 1, 2005 or a capital project
approved by public referendum prior to January 1, 2005.
(14) The mining, quarrying, or production of ready mix concrete,
bituminous concrete, or Class B recycling materials occurring or
which are permitted to occur on any mine, mine site, or
construction materials facility existing on June 7, 2004.
(15) The remediation of any contaminated site pursuant to P.L.1993,
c.139 (C.58:10B-1 et seq.).
(16) Any lands of a federal military installation existing on the date of
enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004) that lie within
the Highlands Region.
§ 330-230.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-230.4
1:757
§ 330-230.5. Exemption determinations.
Any applicant seeking approval of a permit or development application
involving any activity, improvement, or development project listed above as
a Highlands Act Exemption, shall, as a condition of completeness where
applicable, and in any case prior to review of such application by the
applicable Board or other municipal authority, provide sufficient proofs, as
set forth under § 330-237.1.2 of this Ordinance, that the proposed activity,
improvement, or development project qualifies as a Highlands Act
Exemption.
§ 330-230.6. Prior development approvals.
Any developer/owner/applicant (as applicable) associated with a
development application that has received lawful approval(s) pursuant to
the MLUL since the date of enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10,
2004) but prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, shall retain all of
the rights and protections accorded and prescribed under the MLUL with
regard to such approval(s). These protections shall apply to the specific land
area and scope of the approvals granted, in accordance with any conditions
attached thereto, subject to the approvals of any applicable state, county
or other outside agency having jurisdiction thereon including the NJDEP
and specifically, the NJDEP Preservation Area Rules (NJAC 7:38) applicable
to the Highlands Preservation Area, and shall expire if (and in such event,
when) such approval expires. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not
be construed to alter or infringe upon such unexpired approvals, and any
nonconforming development ultimately resulting from such approvals shall
be permitted to continue in accordance with all applicable MLUL provisions
concerning nonconforming uses, buildings and structures (pursuant to
§ 330-230.7, below).
§ 330-230.7. Nonconforming uses, buildings and structures.
Any nonconforming use, building or structure lawfully existing at the time
of passage of this Ordinance shall be permitted to continue upon the lot or
within the structure it so occupies, and any such structure may be restored
(17) A Major Highlands Development located within an area designated
as Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan), or Planning Area 2 (Suburban),
as designated pursuant to the "State Development and
Redevelopment Plan," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.) as of
March 29, 2004, that on or before March 29, 2004 was the subject
of a settlement agreement and stipulation of dismissal filed in the
Superior Court, or a builder's remedy issued by the Superior Court,
to satisfy the constitutional requirement to provide for the
fulfillment of the fair share obligation of the municipality. The
exemption provided pursuant to this paragraph shall expire if
construction beyond site preparation has not commenced within
three years after receiving all final approvals required pursuant to
the MLUL.
§ 330-230.4 VERNON CODE § 330-230.7
1:758
or repaired in the event of its partial destruction, in accordance with the
provisions of the MLUL and the underlying municipal Zoning Ordinance.
For purposes of this Ordinance, the words, "restored" and "repaired," shall
in no case be construed to mean "expanded."
§ 330-231. Definitions.
§ 330-231.1. Word usage.
Terms used in the body of this Ordinance which are defined by the
Highlands Act are intended to have the same definitions as provided in
the Highlands Act. Unless expressly stated to the contrary or alternately
defined herein, terms which are defined by the MLUL are intended to
have the same meaning as set forth in the MLUL. For purposes of this
Ordinance, the terms "shall" and "must" are indicative of a mandatory
action or requirement while the word "may" is permissive.
§ 330-231.2. Definitions.
For purposes of this Ordinance the following definitions shall apply:
Editor's Note: Appendices referred to herein may be found at the end of this
article.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Construction
for the purposes of supporting common farmsite activities, including but
not limited to, the production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging,
processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants,
animals, and other related commodities and the use and application of
techniques and methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization,
weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage
and water management, and grazing.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USE — The use of land for common
farmsite activities, including but not limited to, the production, harvesting,
storage, grading, packaging, processing, and the wholesale and retail
marketing of crops, plants, animals, and other related commodities and
the use and application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and
management, fertilization, weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm
waste, irrigation, drainage and water management, and grazing.
AGRICULTURAL IMPERVIOUS COVER — Agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures or facilities with or without flooring, residential
buildings and paved areas, but not meaning temporary coverings.
APPLICANT — Any entity applying to the Board of Health, Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment, Zoning Officer, Construction Official or other
applicable authority of the municipality for permission or approval to
engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions of this Ordinance.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
§ 330-230.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-231.2
1:759
variance, or direction of the issuance of a permits pursuant to section 25 or
section 27 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-34 or C.40:55D-36).
AQUIFER — A geologic formation, group of formations, or partial formation
containing saturated permeable rock, sand or gravel sufficient to store and
transmit usable quantities of water to wells and springs.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Any material remains of past human
life or activities which are of archaeological interest, such as tools,
structures or portions of structures, pit houses, rock paintings, rock
carvings, intaglios, graves, human skeletal materials, or any portion or
piece of any of the foregoing items.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Structural or nonstructural
methods used to prevent or reduce the movement of sediment, nutrients,
pesticides and other pollutants from the land to surface or ground water.
BUILDING PERMIT — Used interchangeably with the term "Construction
Permit;" see definition below.
CADB — County Agriculture Development Board
CARBONATE ROCK — Rock consisting chiefly of calcium and magnesium
carbonates, such as limestone and dolomite.
CLEAR-CUTTING — A forestry or logging practice in which most or all of
the trees in a harvest area are cut down.
CLUSTER/CONSERVATION DESIGN DEVELOPMENT — A development
design technique where principal buildings and structures are grouped
together on a portion of the Cluster Project Area, while the remaining land
area is permanently deed-restricted in agricultural use, for conservation
of environmental resources, or as open space for environmental protection
including public recreational use.
CLUSTER/CONSERVATION DESIGN DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES —
Guidelines for cluster/conservation design development provided by the
Highlands Council to guide municipalities in implementing cluster
development projects and in assisting in local development review and
Highlands Project Review.
CLUSTER PROJECT AREA — All of the individual parcels from which
development is clustered including the area set aside for preservation and
the area set aside for development.
COMMUNITY BASED ON-SITE WASTEWATER FACILITIES — Sanitary
sewerage treatment facilities (i.e., domestic treatment works) that
discharge treated wastewater to ground waters as regulated by a NJPDES
permit under N.J.A.C. 7:14, which provide service to one or more parcels
that are approved and constructed as a single development or planned
development.
CONDITIONAL WATER AVAILABILITY — The amount of water availability
allowed in a deficit HUC14 subwatershed, subject to certain mitigation
requirements, as determined by the Highlands Council.
§ 330-231.2 VERNON CODE § 330-231.2
1:760
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, Chapter 23 of Title 5 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.), providing authorization to
begin work subject to the conditions and requirements established under
the provisions therein.
CONSUMPTIVE WATER USE — Any use of water that results in its
evaporation, transpiration, incorporation into products or crops,
consumption by humans or animals, or removal by any other means from a
watershed or subwatershed, other than by conveyances as untreated water
supply, potable water, or wastewater.
CONTAMINANT — A substance capable of causing contamination of a water
supply.
CONTAMINATION — The presence of any harmful or deleterious
substances in the water supply, including but not limited to hazardous
substances, hazardous wastes, and substances listed in the New Jersey
Administrative Code at N.J.A.C. 7:9C (Ground Water Quality Standards),
N.J.A.C. 7:9B (Surface Water Quality Standards) and N.J.A.C. 7:10 (NJ Safe
Drinking Water Act Regulations), and as these regulations may be amended
from time to time.
CULTURAL RESOURCES — Sites, artifacts, or materials that relate to the
way people live or lived, for example, archaeological sites, rock carvings,
ruins, and the like. These resources are generally defined based on existing
documentation or artifacts discovered relating to activities of people who
lived, worked, or recreated in an area during a period in history.
CURRENT DEFICIT AREA — A HUC14 subwatershed characterized by
negative Net Water Availability, meaning that existing consumptive and
depletive water uses exceed the capacity of the ground water supply to
sustain them.
DEFORESTATION — The conversion of forested areas to non-forested
areas, whether for use as urban land or any other non-forest land use;
disturbance of an area characterized as "forest" pursuant to the procedures
provided in APPENDIX A, herein, the extent or effect of which is to
disqualify the area from such designation.
DEPLETIVE WATER USE — Use of water whereby it is withdrawn from
a HUC14 subwatershed and transported outside of the subwatershed
(through utility conveyances as untreated water supply, potable water, or
wastewater), resulting in a net loss of water to the subwatershed from
which it originated.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of
land to be developed; or if defined by the underlying municipal Zoning
Ordinance, as provided therein.
DENSITY, SEPTIC SYSTEM — The gross acreage of land area required per
individual septic system to physically contain and support its functions in
keeping with the specified wastewater design flow.
§ 330-231.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-231.2
1:761
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to the MLUL.
DEVELOPMENT SET ASIDE OF CLUSTER PROJECT AREA — All of the
individual parcels within the area set aside for residential development
including the infrastructure, open space, and utilities necessary to support
the development pursuant to the requirements of § 330-236.1.3.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission, unless
pursuant to and in compliance with the conditions of a valid and effective
federal or state permit, resulting in the releasing, spilling, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance into the
waters or lands of the state or into waters outside the jurisdiction of the
state when damage may result to the lands, waters or natural resources
within the jurisdiction of the state.
DISSOLUTION — A space or cavity in or between rocks, formed by the
solution of part of the rock material.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation. (Pursuant to § 330-234.2.5 B of this Ordinance, when
considering land for conversion to non-agricultural land uses in a Highlands
Open Water buffer, historic or current agricultural land uses shall not be
considered "land improvements," "development," "land disturbances," or
"land uses" for purposes of calculating the previously disturbed area.)
DISTURBANCE, ULTIMATE — The total existing or proposed area of
disturbance of a lot, parcel, or other legally designated (or otherwise legally
recognized) tract or subdivision of land, for the purpose of, and in
connection with, any human activity, property improvement, or
development, including the surface area of all buildings and structures,
all impervious surfaces, and all associated land disturbances such as
excavated, filled, and graded areas, and all lawn and landscape areas.
Ultimate disturbance shall not include areas of prior land disturbance which
at the time of evaluation: a) contain no known man-made structures
(whether above or below the surface of the ground) other than such features
as old stone rows or farm field fencing; and b) consist of exposed rock
outcroppings, or areas which, through exposure to natural processes (such
as weathering, erosion, siltation, deposition, fire, flood, growth of trees
or other vegetation) are no longer impervious or visually obvious, or
ecologically restored areas which will henceforth be preserved as natural
areas under conservation restrictions.
ENDANGERED SPECIES — Species included on the list of endangered
species that the NJDEP promulgates pursuant to the Endangered and
Nongame Species Conservation Act, N.J.S.A. 23:2A-13 et seq., and the
Endangered Plant Species List Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.151 et seq., and any
species or subspecies of wildlife appearing on any federal endangered
§ 330-231.2 VERNON CODE § 330-231.2
1:762
species list or any species or subspecies of plant designated as listed,
proposed, or under review by the federal government pursuant to the
Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531 et seq.
EXISTING CONSTRAINED AREAS — Stream flows within any HUC14
subwatershed(s) upstream of a Current Deficit Area.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — A site-specific plan that prescribes needed
land treatment and related conservation and natural resource management
measures, including forest management practices, that are determined
to be practical and reasonable for the conservation, protection, and
development of natural resources, the maintenance and enhancement of
agricultural or horticultural productivity, and the control and prevention of
non-point source pollution.
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — A parcel or parcels of land, whether
contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural or horticultural
products, and operated as a single enterprise.
FARMLAND SOILS, IMPORTANT — Soils based on soil data prepared by the
USDA NRCS including the following four classifications: Prime Farmland
Soils, Farmland Soils of Statewide Importance, Unique Farmland Soils, and
Farmland Soils of Local Importance.
FARMLAND SOILS OF LOCAL IMPORTANCE — Farmland of local
importance includes those soils that are not prime or of statewide
importance and are used for the production of high value food, fiber or
horticultural crops.
FARMLAND SOILS, PRIME — Prime Farmlands include all those soils in
NRCS Land Capability Class I and selected soils from Land Capability Class
II. Prime Farmland is land that has the best combination of physical and
chemical characteristics for producing food, feed, forage, fiber and oilseed
crops and is also available for these uses. It has the soil quality, growing
season, and moisture supply needed to economically produce sustained
high yields of crops when treated and managed according to acceptable
farming methods, Prime Farmlands are not excessively erodible or
saturated with water for a long period of time, and they either do not flood
frequently or are protected from flooding.
FARMLAND SOILS OF STATEWIDE IMPORTANCE — Farmlands of
statewide importance include those soils in NRCS Land Capability Class II
and III that do not meet the criteria as Prime Farmland. These soils are
nearly Prime Farmland and economically produce high yields of crops when
treated and managed according to acceptable farming methods. Some may
produce yields as high as Prime Farmland if conditions are favorable.
FARMLAND SOILS, UNIQUE — Soils used for special crops (such as
cranberries in the New Jersey Pinelands). Unique soils are determined on a
statewide basis by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
FARMSITE — A Farm Management Unit as defined above.
§ 330-231.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-231.2
1:763
FLOOR AREA — The area of each floor of a building lying within the inside
perimeter of its exterior walls excluding vent shafts, courts, and unfinished
areas such as basements or attics having ceiling heights less than that
required for habitable space under the building code.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or
structures compared to the total area of the site; or if defined by the
underlying Zoning Ordinance, as provided therein.
FOREST — A biological community as determined by the method set forth
under APPENDIX A, as adapted from NJDEP Preservation Area Rules, at
N.J.A.C. 7:38-3.9.
FOREST AREA, UPLAND — A biological community that is a "forest," as
defined above, and that is not located in an area designated as Highlands
Open Waters (i.e., not a forested wetland or other Highlands Open Waters).
FOREST AREA, TOTAL — The percentage of total area that is covered in
forest.
FOREST, CORE — The area and percent of a forest patch that is greater
than 300 feet from a forest edge.
FOREST INTEGRITY — An expression of the application of landscape
metrics to evaluate the effects of forest fragmentation across the landscape,
thereby recognizing the ability of forests to provide essential ecosystem
functions.
FOREST PATCH — A contiguous tract of forest bordered by either altered
land or a road.
FOREST PATCH, MEAN DISTANCE TO CLOSEST (MDCP) — The average
edge-to-edge distance between distinct forest patches located within a
1,000-foot search radius of one another. The MDCP provides a measure of
forest patch isolation within the landscape area of interest.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A written guidance document describing
the forest resources present on a property, the landowner's management
goals and objectives, and the recommended practices or activities to be
carried out over time on the land. This tool is used to evaluate a forest
land's current state and provide a management process which, over time,
meets the landowner's objectives, while maintaining health and vigor of
the resource. Forest Management Plans are typically written for a ten year
period.
GROUND WATER — Water contained in the interconnected voids of a
saturated zone in the ground. A saturated zone is a volume of ground in
which the voids in the rock or soil are filled with water greater than or equal
to atmospheric pressure.
GROUND WATER AVAILABILITY — The total amount of water assigned
by the Highlands Council to a HUC14 subwatershed that can be used for
consumptive and depletive water uses by water uses that do not draw from
water supplies with a NJDEP-approved safe yield.
§ 330-231.2 VERNON CODE § 330-231.2
1:764
HABITAT VALUE — The value of an ecosystem area for maintenance of a
healthy population of a species as determined by quantity, quality, type, and
function.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance designated under 40 CFR
116 pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 [Clean Water Act] (Public Law 92-500; 33 U.S.C. 1251
et seq.), the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.ll et
seq., or Section 4 of the New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act (N.J.S.A.
58:10A-1 et seq.) and as these regulations may, from time to time, be
amended. Substances listed include petroleum, petroleum products,
pesticides, solvents and other substances.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste that is defined or identified as
a hazardous waste pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A.
13:1E et seq., N.J.A.C. 7:26-8, or 40 CFR Part 261.
HIGHLANDS APPLICABILITY DETERMINATION — The determination
made by the NJDEP of whether a project proposed for the Preservation
Area is a major Highlands development, whether any such major Highlands
development is exempt from the Highlands Act, and whether the project is
consistent with the applicable Areawide Water Quality Management Plan.
HIGHLANDS HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCE INVENTORY — The
listing of historic, cultural and archaeological resources within the
Highlands Region, including but not limited to: all properties listed on the
New Jersey or National Register of Historic Places; all properties which
have been deemed eligible for listing on the New Jersey or National
Register of Historic Places; and all properties for which a formal opinion of
the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) has been issued.
HIGHLANDS OPEN WATERS — All springs, streams including intermittent
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface water, whether natural or
artificial, located wholly or partially within the boundaries of the Highlands
Region, but not including swimming pools. Highlands Open Waters include
seeps, lakes, ponds, and vernal pools; all categories (including springs,
streams, and wetlands) as described and defined in the Township
Environmental Resource Inventory.
HIGHLANDS OPEN WATERS BUFFER — In the Preservation Area, a
300-foot buffer adjacent to Highlands Open Waters in which no disturbance
is permitted, except as provided in N.J.A.C 7:38-3.6. In the Planning Area,
a 300-foot buffer around all Highlands Open Waters from the edge of
the discernible bank of the Highlands Open Waters feature, or from the
centerline of that feature where no discernible bank exists. With respect
to wetlands and other Highlands Open Waters features, the feature shall
include a protection buffer of 300 feet, measured from the mapped wetlands
(not from the wetlands buffer) delineated in a Letter of Interpretation
or Highlands Resource Area Determination, as applicable, as provided by
NJDEP.
HIGHLANDS PRESERVATION AREA APPROVAL (HPAA) — A permit to
engage in a regulated activity in the Highlands Preservation Area issued by
§ 330-231.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-231.2
1:765
the NJDEP pursuant to the Highlands Act and the NJDEP Highlands Water
Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38), including an HPAA that
contains a waiver pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:20-33b. Highlands Preservation
Area Approval includes Highlands general permits issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:20-33d and promulgated at N.J.A.C. 7:38-12. HPAA, when used
in this Ordinance, includes Highlands general permits unless explicitly
excluded.
HIGHLANDS PUBLIC COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — Public
water supply systems in the Highlands Region that pipe water for human
consumption to at least 15 service connections or that regularly serve at
least 25 year-round residents.
HIGHLANDS REDEVELOPMENT AREA — A property, portion of a property,
or group of properties designated as such by the Highlands Council and
which includes one or more of the following: a) a brownfield site; b) a
grayfield site; and c) any previously developed site in the Highlands Region.
A Highlands Redevelopment Area may include the intervening or
surrounding lands which are significantly affected by or necessary to
support such sites, and is subject to a Highlands Council-approved
redevelopment plan setting forth the scope and details of any
redevelopment project(s) and/or activities permitted to occur.
HIGHLANDS RESOURCE AREA DETERMINATION (HRAD) — A formal
determination issued by the NJDEP that confirms the presence or absence
of a Highlands Resource Area on a site, and if present, its location and
applicable boundary lines. A person may apply for an HRAD only, or in
connection with an application for an HPAA.
HIGHLANDS SCENIC RESOURCE INVENTORY — The inventory of
regionally significant lands within the Highlands Region that encompasses
elements of high scenic quality worthy of protection, as approved by the
Highlands Council.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC RESOURCES — Buildings, structures, objects, districts, sites,
or areas that are significant in the history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering or culture of a place or time.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration of any portion or group of the foregoing of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic, or architectural significance.
HUC — Hydrologic Unit Code; identification number developed by the
USGS to designate drainage basins including watersheds and
subwatersheds.
HUC14 SUBWATERSHED — A delineated subwatershed area identified by
a 14-digit HUC, within which water drains to a particular receiving surface
water body.
§ 330-231.2 VERNON CODE § 330-231.2
1:766
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, including, but
not limited to, porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks,
patios, elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or
improvements.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES, CUMULATIVE — The total area of all existing or
proposed impervious surfaces situated or proposed to be situated within the
boundary lines of a lot, parcel, or other legally recognized subdivision of
land, expressed either as a measure of land area such as acreage, or square
feet, or as a percentage of the total lot or parcel area.
INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system
regulated under N.J.A.C. 7:9A for disposal of sanitary sewage into the
ground which is designed and constructed to treat sanitary sewage in a
manner that will retain most of the settleable solids in a septic tank and
to discharge the liquid effluent to a disposal field, disposal bed, or disposal
trench or trenches. The term "septic system" is equivalent in meaning.
KARST — A distinctive topography that indicates solution of underlying
carbonate rocks (such as limestone and dolomite) by surface water or
ground water over time, often producing surface depressions, sinkholes,
sinking streams, enlarged bedrock fractures, caves, and underground
streams.
LIGHT DETECTION AND RANGING (LiDAR) — Technology that uses an
active sensor, similar to radar that transmits laser pulses to a target and
records the time it takes for the pulse to return to the sensor receiver. This
technology is used for high-resolution topographic mapping.
LINEAR DEVELOPMENT — Infrastructure, utilities and the associated
right-of-ways therefor, including but not limited to such installations as
railroads, roads, sewerage and water supply pipelines, stormwater
management pipes and channels, natural gas and liquid fuel pipelines,
electric, telephone and other transmission lines, and in all cases, the
associated right-of-ways therefor.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — An environmentally sensitive approach to
land use planning that uses a variety of landscape and design techniques to
manage development activities to mitigate potential adverse impacts on the
natural environment.
MAJOR HIGHLANDS DEVELOPMENT — Except as otherwise provided
pursuant to subsection a. of section 30 of the Highlands Act ("Exemptions"):
(1) any non-residential development in the Preservation Area; (2) any
residential development in the Preservation Area that requires an
environmental land use or water permit from the NJDEP or that results
in the ultimate disturbance of one acre or more of land or a cumulative
increase in impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more; (3) any activity
undertaken or engaged in the Preservation Area that is not a development
but results in the ultimate disturbance of one-quarter acre or more of
forested area or that results in a cumulative increase in impervious surface
by one-quarter acre or more on a lot; or (4) any capital or other project
§ 330-231.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-231.2
1:767
of a state entity or local government unit in the Preservation Area that
requires an environmental land use or water permit from the NJDEP or
that results in the ultimate disturbance of one acre or more of land or a
cumulative increase in impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more.
Major Highlands Development shall not include any agricultural or
horticultural development or agricultural or horticultural use. Solar panels
shall not be included in any calculation of impervious surface. (As defined
by the Highlands Act, N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq., as amended.)
MAJOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES (PCS) — Land uses and
activities determined by the Highlands Council to pose a major risk of
ground water contamination (see APPENDIX B).
MASTER PLAN — For purposes of this Ordinance, all references to the
"Township Master Plan," "master plan," or "Master Plan," refer to the
municipal master plan, as adopted by the Township Land Use Board.
MASTER PLAN, HIGHLANDS REGIONAL (RMP) — For purposes of this
Ordinance, all references to the Highlands Regional Master Plan (RMP),
shall be by use of the words "Highlands Regional Master Plan," "Highlands
RMP," "Regional Master Plan," or "RMP."
MINOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES (PCS) — Land uses and
activities determined by the Highlands Council to pose a minor risk of
ground water contamination (see APPENDIX C).
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW (MLUL) — The New Jersey Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NAICS — North American Industry Classification System
NJDA — New Jersey Department of Agriculture
NJDA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE HIGHLANDS RULES —
The regulations established by the NJDA to implement requirements of the
Highlands Act, titled and codified at N.J.A.C. 2:92.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
NJDEP PRESERVATION AREA RULES — The regulations established by the
NJDEP to implement requirements of the Highlands Act, titled "Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Act Rules," and codified at N.J.A.C. 7:38-1 et
seq.
NJDOT — New Jersey Department of Transportation
NJPDES — New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the NJDEP authorizing certain
discharges to ground or surface waters of the State of New Jersey pursuant
to the New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., as
amended, and its implementing rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NJ SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ACT RULES — Regulations
adopted by the State Soil Conservation Committee at N.J.A.C. 2:90-1,
incorporating requirements for Best Management Practices regarding
temporary and permanent soil erosion control.
§ 330-231.2 VERNON CODE § 330-231.2
1:768
NONCONFORMING LOT — Any lot having an area, dimension or location
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Any structure having a size, dimension
or location which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of a municipal zoning ordinance, but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NON-PUBLIC WELL — Any water supply well used for potable purposes
other than a public community or non-community water supply well.
NON-STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — Techniques and
practices devised to manage stormwater runoff and reduce pollution levels,
without extensive construction efforts. Non-structural management
strategies often mimic the natural hydrology of a site and utilize site
planning and design to accomplish stormwater control.
NRCS — Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture
OPERATIONS AND CONTINGENCY PLAN — A management plan prepared
in support of an existing or proposed Major or Minor Potential Contaminant
Source (PCS), that: a) documents the specific PCS(s) existing or proposed
for a particular site; b) describes the types and quantities of substances and/
or wastes expected to be used, discharged or stored on the site; c) indicates
the means by which spillage, leakage or discharge of such materials will
be prevented; d) provides the means or methods to be used to contain or
remedy any accidental spill, leak, discharge or migration of such materials
from the site directly or indirectly into ground water, surface water bodies,
or the land surfaces that provide recharge to the underlying aquifer; e)
indicates the procedures to be undertaken to notify the appropriate
administrative authorities, including but not limited to the NJDEP and the
Board of Health, regarding any accidental spillage or discharge of such
materials; and f) demonstrates that best management practices have been
incorporated into the design and management of both the site and the
particular PCS(s) it contains to ensure against such discharges.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, owner or operator, political subdivision of
this State, and any state, federal or interstate agency or an agent or
employee thereof.
PLANNING AREA — Lands within the Highlands Region that are not located
in that portion designated by the Highlands Act as the "Preservation Area"
(see metes and bounds description at N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b).
§ 330-231.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-231.2
1:769
POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCE (PCS) — Activity or land use that
may be a source of a contaminant that has the potential to move into ground
water withdrawn from a well.
PRESERVATION AREA — Lands within the Highlands Region that are
located in that portion designated by the Highlands Act as the "Preservation
Area" (see metes and bounds description at N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b). For purposes
of this Ordinance, this terminology shall also be used to refer to
Preservation Area lands located solely within the Township.
PRESERVATION SET ASIDE OF CLUSTER PROJECT AREA — All of the
individual parcels within the area set aside for preservation that must be
deed-restricted against further subdivision pursuant to the requirements of
§ 330-236.1.4.
PUBLIC COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A public water system which
serves at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents or
regularly serves at least 25 year round residents.
PUBLIC COMMUNITY WELL — A well that provides water to a public water
system serving at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents
or regularly serving at least 25 year-round residents.
PUBLIC NON-COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A public water system that
is not a public community water system and is either a "public non-transient
non-community water system" or a "public transient non-community water
system" as defined herein.
PUBLIC NON-COMMUNITY WELL — A well that is not a public community
well and that provides water to a public water system regularly serving at
least 25 individuals for at least 60 days in any given calendar year.
PUBLIC NON-TRANSIENT NON-COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A public
water system that is not a public community water system and that
regularly serves at least 25 of the same persons for more than six months in
any given calendar year.
PUBLIC TRANSIENT NON-COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A public
water system that is not a public community or a public non-transient noncommunity
water system and that serves at least 25 transient individuals
for at least 60 days in any given calendar year.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system for the provision to the public of water
for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances, if
such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least
25 individuals daily for at least 60 days out of the year. Such term includes
any collection, treatment, storage and distribution facilities under control
of the operator of such system and used primarily in connection with such
system, and any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under such
control which are used primarily in connection with such system. A public
water system is either a "public community water system" or a "public noncommunity
water system" as defined herein.
RARE SPECIES — Wildlife species that are not endangered or threatened
wildlife species but are considered by the NJDEP to be species of special
§ 330-231.2 VERNON CODE § 330-231.2
1:770
concern as determined by a panel of experts, or that are ranked S1
(critically imperiled in New Jersey because of extreme rarity), S2 (imperiled
in New Jersey because of rarity), S3 (rare in New Jersey), G1(critically
imperiled globally), G2 (imperiled globally because of rarity) or G3 (globally
very rare and local throughout its range or found locally in a restricted
range) in the Natural Heritage Database, and Plant Species of Concern
listed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:5C-3.1.
REFORESTATION — The restoration (replanting) of a forest that has been
reduced by fire, cutting, or any other cause.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A site-specific conservation
system plan that: (1) prescribes needed land treatment and related
conservation and natural resource management measures, including forest
management practices, for the conservation, protection, and development
of natural resources, the maintenance and enhancement of agricultural
and horticultural productivity, and the control and prevention of non-point
source pollution; and (2) establishes criteria for resources sustainability of
soil, water, air, plants, and animals.
REVIEWING BOARD — The municipal Land Use Board established pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 respectively, or any committee
formally designated and authorized to act on behalf of such Board pursuant
to other provisions of the MLUL (e.g., Minor Subdivision Committee).
RIPARIAN AREA — Areas adjacent to and hydrologically interconnected
with Highlands Open Waters rivers and streams consisting of flood prone
areas, wetlands, soils that are hydric, alluvial, or have a shallow depth to
ground water, and including wildlife passage corridors within 300 feet of
surface Highlands Open Waters features.
RIPARIAN AREA, FLOOD PRONE PORTION — Areas delineated by the
Highlands Council based on NJDEP flood prone and FEMA Q3 flood area
mapping (NJDEP 1996, FEMA 1996) including USGS documented (by prior
flood events) and undocumented flood prone areas and Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain.
RIPARIAN SOILS — Soils associated with Highlands Open Waters that are
hydric, alluvial, or exhibit a shallow depth to seasonal high water table.
RIPARIAN AREA WILDLIFE CORRIDOR — A 300-foot corridor on each
mapped stream bank or from the stream centerline if no stream bank is
mapped.
RIPARIAN AREA INTEGRITY SCORE — The value (High, Moderate, Low)
of Highlands Riparian Areas within each Highlands HUC14 subwatershed
as established by the Highlands Council through an analysis of the relative
amount of impervious cover, agricultural land use, density of roadway
stream-crossings, vegetative condition, and habitat for wetland/waterdependent,
threatened, and endangered wildlife species of the Riparian
Areas (see Township Environmental Resource Inventory).
SADC — State Agriculture Development Committee
§ 330-231.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-231.2
1:771
SCD — Soil Conservation District, as established in accordance with the Soil
Conservation Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
SCENIC RESOURCES — Sites and landscapes that are distinctive and
remarkable for their geology, topography, history, culture, and aesthetics
or can be representative of the defining character of a community. They
may include prominent ridgelines, mountainsides or hillsides, panoramic
vistas, community gateways and landmarks, river valleys, and agricultural
landscapes.
SEDIMENTATION — The process of deposition of a solid material from a
state of suspension or solution in a fluid (usually air or water).
SEPTIC SYSTEM — A system regulated by N.J.A.C. 7:9A for disposal of
sanitary sewage into the ground which is designed and constructed to
treat sanitary sewage in a manner that will retain most of the settleable
solids in a septic tank and to discharge the liquid effluent to a disposal
field, disposal bed, or disposal trench or trenches. The term "Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System" is equivalent in meaning.
SEWER SERVICE AREA (SSA) — The land area identified in an Areawide
Water Quality Management Plan from which generated wastewater is
designated to flow to a domestic treatment works or industrial treatment
works. A distinct sewer service area is established for each domestic
treatment works and industrial treatment works.
SHORELINE — The Ordinary High Water Mark, or point on the bank or
shore up to which the presence and action of the water is so continuous
as to leave a distinct mark either by erosion, destruction of terrestrial
vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
SITE DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure
or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
SLOPE (or "GRADE") — An area of land forming an incline; a measure used
to describe the degree of inclination of an area of land; the difference in
vertical elevation ("rise") of a land area occurring over a specified horizontal
distance ("run"). For example, a land area having a one (1)-foot vertical rise
over a 10-foot horizontal run, has a slope of 10%. A 10-foot vertical rise over
a 25-foot horizontal run indicates a slope of 40%.
SLOPE, STEEP — Any slope having a grade of 15% or more, or if situated in
a Riparian Area, of 10% or more.
SLOPES, CONSTRAINED — All non-Riparian Area lands having a slope of
15% to less than 20% which are non-forested and exhibit one or more of the
following characteristics: a) highly susceptible to erosion; b) shallow depth
to bedrock; or c) a Soil Capability Class indicative of wet or stony soils.
SLOPES, LIMITED CONSTRAINED — All non-Riparian Area lands having
a slope of 15% to less than 20%, which are non-forested, are not highly
susceptible to erosion, and do not have a shallow depth to bedrock or a Soil
Capability Class indicative of wet or stony soils.
§ 330-231.2 VERNON CODE § 330-231.2
1:772
SLOPES, MODERATELY CONSTRAINED — All forested non-Riparian Area
lands having a slope of 15% to less than 20%.
SLOPES, SEVERELY CONSTRAINED — All lands having slopes of 20%
or greater and all lands within Riparian Areas having slopes of 10% and
greater.
SOIL CAPABILITY CLASS — Soil class designated by the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) "Soil Survey," available from the Natural
Resource Conservation Service and containing descriptions of soil series
on a county-by-county basis (available online at
www.soildatamart.nrcs.usda.gov).
SOLAR PANEL — An elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or array thereof,
that captures and converts solar radiation to produce power, and includes
flat plate, focusing solar collectors, or photovoltaic solar cells and excludes
the base or foundation of the panel, plate, canopy, or array. (As defined by
the Highlands Act, N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq., as amended.)
SPECIES OF SPECIAL CONCERN — Wildlife species identified by the
NJDEP that warrant special attention because of evidence of population
decline or inherent vulnerability to environmental deterioration or habitat
modification that would result in the species becoming threatened if
conditions surrounding the species begin or continue to deteriorate. The
term includes species for which there is little knowledge of current
population status in the state.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT RULES — NJDEP rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8 that
set forth the required components of regional and municipal stormwater
management plans, and establish the stormwater management design and
performance standards for new (proposed) development.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBSIDENCE SINKHOLES — Sinkholes formed by the downward
settlement of unconsolidated overburden into openings in underlying,
soluble bedrock.
SURFACE WATER — Any waters of the State of New Jersey which are not
ground water.
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE — An integrated system of plant and animal
production practices having a site-specific application that will over the
long-term: (a) satisfy human food and fiber needs; (b) enhance
environmental quality and the natural resource base upon which the
agricultural economy depends; (c) make the most efficient use of
nonrenewable resources and on-farm resources and integrate, where
appropriate, natural biological cycles, and controls; (d) sustain the
economic viability of farm operations; and (e) enhance the quality of life for
farmers and society as a whole (1990 Farm Bill).
§ 330-231.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-231.2
1:773
TECHNICAL SERVICE PROVIDER (TSP) — Professionals from outside of
the United States Department of Agriculture that are certified by the NRCS
to assist agricultural producers in applying conservation measures.
THREATENED SPECIES — An indigenous nongame wildlife species of New
Jersey designated pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species
Conservation Act, N.J.S.A. 23:2A-13 et seq., and its implementing rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:25-4.17, as most recently amended.
TIME OF TRAVEL — The average time that a volume of water will take to
travel through the zone of saturation from a given point to a pumping well.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — The pollutant loading that a
surface water body may assimilate without violating NJDEP Surface Water
Quality Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9B) and a determination of the extent to
which pollutant loadings to a water body must be reduced to restore that
water body to a water quality that complies with the Surface Water Quality
Standards. A TMDL includes an allocation of allowable pollutant loads to
specific point sources (Wasteload Allocations) and categories of non-point
sources (Load Allocations), after subtraction of a Margin of Safety and,
where appropriate, a Reserve Capacity (for future pollutant loads).
VIEWSHED — An area of land, water or other physical features visible from
a fixed vantage point.
WASTEWATER UTILITY — A publicly, privately, or investor-owned utility
that collects and may treat sanitary wastewater, as regulated by the NJDEP.
WATER AVAILABILITY, CONDITIONAL — The amount of water availability
allowed in a deficit HUC14 subwatershed, subject to certain mitigation
requirements, as determined by the Highlands Council.
WATER AVAILABILITY, NET — The value assigned by the Highlands Council
to a HUC14 subwatershed resulting from subtracting consumptive and
depletive surface and ground water uses from ground water availability.
WATER CONSERVATION — Implementation of BMPs to ensure maximum
water use efficiency and reduction in water use and losses; measures may
include low impact development techniques, water conserving fixtures,
water valves, beneficial re-use systems and capture of stormwater.
WATER DEPENDENT USES — Any use or activity that cannot physically
function without direct access to the body of water along which it is
proposed. An activity that can function on a site not adjacent to the water
is not considered water dependent regardless of the economic advantages
that may be gained from a waterfront location.
WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (WQMP) — A plan prepared
pursuant to sections 208 and 303 of the Federal Clean Water Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., (33 U.S.C. § 1288 et seq. and 1313 respectively) and
the Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq., including the
Statewide WQMP, or Areawide or County WQMP as defined under N.J.A.C.
7:15.
§ 330-231.2 VERNON CODE § 330-231.2
1:774
WATER USE AND CONSERVATION MANAGEMENT PLAN — A planning
document approved by the Highlands Council to ensure the sound use and
management of water resources. Water Use and Conservation Management
Plans document the current state of water availability and use in the
subwatersheds of interest, set priorities for the use and protection of
available water, and establish methods to reduce and, where feasible,
eliminate net water availability deficits where they exist.
WELLHEAD — The well, borehole, and appurtenant equipment for a public
community well, public non-community well, or non-public well within a
cluster of non-public wells.
WHPA — Wellhead Protection Area
ZONE OF SATURATION — A layer within or below the soil profile which is
saturated with ground water either seasonally or throughout the year.
§ 330-232. Establishment of Highlands districts.
§ 330-232.1. Highlands preservation area and planning area.
The Highlands Act establishes the Preservation Area and Planning Area of
the Highlands Region. It describes the varied attributes of each and sets
forth the major land use planning goals that pertain to the lands located
within each. The Act defines the geographic extent of the Highlands Region
to include the aggregated land area making up its constituent municipalities
(N.J.S.A. 13:20-7a). It provides a physical delineation of the Preservation
Area by use of a specific metes and bounds description (N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b),
designating all remaining lands within the Highlands Region as the
Planning Area.
§ 330-232.1.1. Highlands Preservation Area.
The Township Master Plan incorporates the Highlands Preservation Area
inclusive of the goals applicable to it, as an integral component of the
planning and land use policies of the municipality. For purposes of this
Ordinance, this Area is herewith designated the Township Highlands
Preservation Area, also referred to herein as the Highlands Preservation
Area, or Preservation Area.
§ 330-232.1.2. Preservation Area Adopted.
The Preservation Area, to the full extent of its limits within the Township, is
herewith adopted and established as an overlay to municipal zoning.
§ 330-232.2. Highlands zones and sub-zones.
The Highlands RMP establishes three primary zones (the Protection Zone,
Conservation Zone and Existing Community Zone) and four sub-zones
(Wildlife Management Sub-Zone, Conservation Zone — Environmentally
Constrained Sub-Zone, Existing Community Zone — Environmentally
Constrained Sub-Zone and Lake Community Sub-Zone) each with its own
§ 330-231.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-232.2
1:775
purpose, application and development criteria. Delineation of Highlands
Zones finds basis in the underlying natural resources, the extent of existing
development and supporting infrastructure, and the potential to support
new development and redevelopment. Highlands Zones are intended to
ensure that the density and intensity of future development and
redevelopment do not exceed the capacity of the land, natural resources
and existing infrastructure to support them. The Township Master Plan
incorporates the Highlands zones and sub-zones as an integral component
of the planning and land use policies of the municipality.
In keeping with the Land Use Plan of the Township Master Plan, the
following Highlands Zones and Sub-Zones are herewith established as
overlays to existing municipal zoning:
§ 330-232.2.1. Protection Zone.
The Protection Zone contains the highest quality natural resource value
lands of the Highlands Preservation Area. Lands in the Protection Zone
are essential to maintaining water quality, water quantity and sensitive
ecological resources and processes and have limited or no capacity to
support human development without adversely affecting overall ecological
function. Land acquisition is a high priority for lands in the Protection Zone
and development activities will be extremely limited. Any development will
be subject to stringent limitations on consumptive and depletive water use,
degradation of water quality, and impacts to environmentally sensitive lands
and natural resources.
§ 330-232.2.2. Wildlife Management Sub-Zone.
The Wildlife Management Sub-Zone, a sub-zone of the Protection Zone,
consists of areas managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service as
part of the National Wildlife Refuge System, and lands within the Wildlife
Management Area System administered by the NJDEP Division of Fish &
Wildlife's Bureau of Land Management. These areas are part of a network
of lands and waters for conservation, management, and where appropriate,
restoration of fish, wildlife and plant resources and their habitats. Lands
within the Wildlife Management Sub-Zone are intended for compatible
wildlife-dependent recreational uses such as hunting, fishing, wildlife
observation and photography, and environmental education and
interpretation.
§ 330-232.2.3. Conservation Zone.
The Conservation Zone consists of areas with significant agricultural lands
interspersed with associated woodlands and environmental features that
should be preserved when possible. The Conservation Zone is intended
primarily for agricultural use and development, including ancillary and
supporting uses and activities. Non-agricultural development activities will
be limited in area and intensity due to infrastructure constraints and
§ 330-232.2 VERNON CODE § 330-232.2.3
1:776
resource protection goals. Where non-agricultural development does occur
it must be compatible with agricultural uses.
§ 330-232.2.4. Conservation Zone — Environmentally Constrained
Sub-Zone.
The Conservation Zone — Environmentally Constrained Sub-Zone consists
of lands containing significant environmental features within the
Conservation Zone that should be preserved and protected from nonagricultural
development. Development activities will be limited and subject
to stringent limitations on consumptive and depletive water use,
degradation of water quality, and impacts to environmentally sensitive
lands.
§ 330-232.2.5. Existing Community Zone.
The Existing Community Zone consists of areas of concentrated
development representing existing communities. These areas tend to have
limited environmental constraints due to previous development patterns,
and may have existing infrastructure that can support additional
development or redevelopment. Where served by adequate supporting
infrastructure, lands within the Existing Community Zone are suited to
higher densities and intensities of development than other Zones.
§ 330-232.2.6. Existing Community Zone — Environmentally
Constrained Sub-Zone.
The Existing Community Zone — Environmentally Constrained Sub-Zone
consists of significant contiguous Critical Habitat, steep slopes and forested
lands within the Existing Community Zone that should be protected from
further fragmentation. They serve as regional habitat "stepping stones" to
larger contiguous Critical Habitat and forested areas. As such, they are
not appropriate for significant development, and are best served by land
preservation and protection. Development is subject to stringent limitations
on consumptive and depletive water use, degradation of water quality, and
impacts to environmentally sensitive lands.
§ 330-232.2.7. Lake Community Sub-Zone.
The Lake Community Sub-Zone consists of that portion of the Existing
Community Zone that lies within 1,000 feet of all lakes of 10 acres or more
in surface area. The purpose for the sub-zone is to protect and enhance
water quality, resource features, shoreline recreation, scenic quality, and
community character. This sub-zone incorporates unique regulatory
requirements to prevent degradation of water quality, harm to lake
ecosystems, and watershed pollution, while promoting natural aesthetic
values within the Existing Community Zone.
§ 330-232.2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-232.3
1:777
§ 330-232.3. Highlands resource and special protection areas.
The Highlands RMP establishes Highlands Resource Areas and Special
Protection Areas, each delineated based on the existence of one or more
significant Highlands resources or critical or sensitive environmental
characteristics or features. The Township Master Plan incorporates each
of these areas to the extent of their physical limits within the Highlands
Preservation Area, and the specific policies, goals and objectives relating
to their protection as an integral component of the planning and land use
policies of the municipality. In keeping with the Township Master Plan,
the following Highlands Resource Areas and Special Protection Areas are
herewith established as overlays to municipal zoning:
§ 330-232.3.1. Forest Resource Area.
The Forest Resource Area contains high ecological value forest areas
including forested areas having the least fragmentation which are vital
to the maintenance of ecological processes. The Forest Resource Area
includes forested areas characterized by one or more of the following forest
integrity indicators: a contiguous forest patch of 500 acres or more; an
area consisting of 250 contiguous acres or more of Core Forest; or areas
accounting for 45% or more of mean total forest cover.
§ 330-232.3.2. Highlands Open Waters.
Highlands Open Waters consist of all springs, streams including
intermittent streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface water, whether
natural or artificial, located wholly or partially within the boundaries of
the Highlands Region, but not including swimming pools. Highlands Open
Waters include seeps, lakes, ponds, and vernal pools, all categories
(including springs, streams, and wetlands) as described and defined in the
Township Environmental Resource Inventory.
§ 330-232.3.3. Riparian Areas.
Riparian Areas are areas adjacent to and hydrologically interconnected with
Highlands Open Waters rivers and streams. They consist of flood prone
areas, wetlands, soils that are hydric, alluvial, or have a shallow depth to
ground water. Riparian Areas also include wildlife passage corridors within
300 feet of surface Highlands Open Waters features.
§ 330-232.3.4. Steep Slope Protection Area.
The Steep Slope Protection Area is comprised of those portions of the
Highlands Preservation Area encompassing a minimum of 5,000 square feet
of contiguous area, which are characterized either by grades of 15% or
greater, or, if in a Riparian Area, 10% or greater. The Steep Slope Protection
Area includes the following sub-classifications:
A. Severely Constrained Slopes. All lands having slopes of 20% or greater
and lands within Riparian Areas having slopes of 10% and greater.
§ 330-232.3 VERNON CODE § 330-232.3.4
1:778
§ 330-232.3.5. Critical Habitat.
Critical Habitat is comprised of all land areas in the Highlands Preservation
Area designated as Critical Wildlife Habitat, Significant Natural Areas, and
Vernal Pools, including Vernal Pool Buffers. Each of these is established as
an overlay to municipal zoning.
§ 330-232.3.6. Carbonate Rock Areas.
Carbonate Rock Areas consist of those portions of the Highlands
Preservation Area that are underlain by carbonate rock, such as limestone
and dolomite. Inclusion of lands within a Carbonate Rock Area does not
imply the presence of karst features area-wide, but is indicative of the
potential for solution of underlying carbonate rock by surface or ground
water, over time.
§ 330-232.3.7. Lake Management Area.
The Lake Management Area is defined to include the drainage area of all
lakes entirely or partially within the Highlands Preservation Area having a
B. Moderately Constrained Slopes. All forested non-Riparian Area lands
having a slope of 15% to less than 20%.
C. Constrained Slopes. All non-forested, non-Riparian Area lands having a
slope of 15% to less than 20% and exhibiting one or more of the
following characteristics: a) highly susceptible to erosion; b) shallow
depth to bedrock; or c) a Soil Capability Class indicative of wet or stony
soils.
D. Limited Constrained Slopes. All non-forested, non-Riparian Area lands
having a slope of 15% to less than 20%, which are not highly
susceptible to erosion, and do not have a shallow depth to bedrock or a
Soil Capability Class indicative of wet or stony soils.
A. Critical Wildlife Habitat. Critical Wildlife Habitat consists of those areas
within NJDEP's Landscape Project Version 3 (or more recent version as
amended) that are Landscape Rank 2 through 5, including all Highlands
Conservation Ranks.
B. Significant Natural Areas. Significant Natural Areas consist of the 95
NJDEP Natural Heritage Priority Sites, including habitat for
documented threatened and endangered plant species, and lands that
include unique or regionally significant ecological communities and
other significant natural sites and features.
C. Vernal Pools. Areas designated as Vernal Pools consist of NJDEPcertified
vernal pools plus a 1,000-foot wide protection buffer
surrounding the perimeter of each such pool. Vernal Pools consist of
confined, ephemeral wet depressions that support distinctive, and often
endangered, species that are specially adapted to periodic extremes in
water pool levels.
§ 330-232.3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-232.3.7
1:779
total surface area of greater than ten acres. The Lake Management Area
includes the following sub-classifications:
§ 330-232.3.8. Prime Ground Water Recharge Areas.
Prime Ground Water Recharge Areas consist of those lands having the
highest ground water recharge rates within each HUC14 subwatershed (as
indicated by analysis using the GSR-32 methodology of the New Jersey
Geological Survey), and that cumulatively provide forty percent (40%) of the
total recharge volume for the subwatershed.
§ 330-232.3.9. Wellhead Protection Areas.
Wellhead Protection Areas consist of those areas surrounding a public water
system well, from which ground water flows to the well and ground water
contamination, if it occurs, may pose a significant threat to the quality of
water withdrawn from the well. Wellhead Protection Areas are composed
of three tiers reflecting the time required for ground water to flow into the
well, as follows:
A. Shoreland Protection Tier. The Shoreland Protection Tier consists of the
lands surrounding a lake that lie within 300 feet of its shoreline, or
between the shoreline and the nearest property line adjacent to and
alongside of the lake, whichever is the lesser.
B. Water Quality Management Tier. The Water Quality Management Tier
consists of the lands surrounding and draining to a lake that lie within
1,000 feet of its shoreline. This tier includes the Shoreland Protection
Tier.
C. Scenic Resource Tier. The Scenic Resource Tier consists of the lands
surrounding a lake that lie within 300 feet of its shoreline (the
Shoreland Protection Tier) plus any lands within 1,000 feet of its
shoreline that fall within the viewshed observable from the opposite
shoreline. The limits of such viewsheds require mapped delineations
based upon the topography of such lands, with the highest observable
elevations, forming the viewshed perimeter.
D. Lake Watershed Tier. The Lake Watershed Tier consists of the entirety
of the land area draining to a lake, as determined through the
evaluation of drainage areas using LiDAR topographic analysis or other
topographic data where LiDAR data are not available.
A. Wellhead Protection Area Tier 1. That area of land within a Wellhead
Protection Area (WHPA) from which the flow of ground water to the
well has a Time of Travel of 2 years.
B. Wellhead Protection Area Tier 2. That area of land within a WHPA from
which the flow of ground water to the well has a Time of Travel of 5
years.
§ 330-232.3.7 VERNON CODE § 330-232.3.9
1:780
§ 330-232.3.10. Highlands Special Environmental Zone.
The Highlands Special Environmental Zone consists of lands having the
highest priority ranking for preservation based on the Highlands Council
Resource Assessment methodology. This assessment considers five
indicators for the protection of water resources and environmentally
sensitive lands, including: Forest within the Forest Resource Area, Riparian
Corridor Condition High, Highlands Open Water Protection Area, Critical
Habitat, and the Water Quality Management Tier of Lake Management
Areas (excluding those of the Lake Community Sub-Zone). The Special
Environmental Zone is located within the Highlands Conservation Priority
Area and is located solely within the Preservation Area.
§ 330-232.3.11. Agricultural Resource Area.
The Agricultural Resource Area consists of those areas of the most
concentrated and contiguous agricultural uses as determined based on the
prevalence of active farms, contiguous farming units of 250 acres or more,
and the presence of Important Farmland Soils.
§ 330-232.3.12. Highlands Scenic Resources.
Highlands Scenic Resources consist of those properties, sites, and
viewsheds listed in the Highlands Scenic Resources Inventory. These
include but are not limited to national historic landmarks and publiclyowned
federal, state and county parks, forests, and recreation areas.
§ 330-232.4. Adoption of Highlands district maps.
All Highlands Districts as set forth under § 330-232.1 through § 330-232.3,
above, including the Preservation Area, all Zones and Sub-Zones, Resource
Areas and Special Protection Areas, are hereby established by the
designation, location and boundaries as set forth for each respectively, in
the following maps, each of which is hereby declared to be a part of this
Highlands Preservation Area Land Use Ordinance:
Editor's Note: Exhibits may be found in Appendix H
§ 330-232.4.1. Township Highlands Preservation Area, Zones, and
Sub-Zones.
Map titled "Township of Vernon Highlands Preservation Area, Highlands
Zones and Sub-Zones," dated January 11, 2012 depicting the municipality
along with delineation of the Preservation Area and Highlands Zones and
Sub-Zones as provided by the Highlands Council (Exhibit 1).
C. Wellhead Protection Area Tier 3. That area of land within a WHPA from
the flow of ground water to the well has a Time of Travel of 12 years.
§ 330-232.3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-232.4.2
1:781
§ 330-232.4.2. Highlands Resource and Special Protection Areas.
Series of Maps depicting the Resource and Special Protection Areas listed
at §§ 330-232.3.1 through 330-232.3.12 above, and also including related
features and areas as discussed and defined in § 330-234 of this Ordinance;
dated January 11, 2012 (unless otherwise specifically noted), as provided by
the Highlands Council.
A. "Forest Resource Area, Total Forest Area, Forest Subwatershed
Integrity Areas." Map depicting that portion of the Township Highlands
Preservation Area designated as Forest Resource Area (pursuant to
§ 330-232.3.1 above) and including Total Forest Area and Forest
Subwatershed Integrity Areas (as defined at § 330-234.1); map denoted
Exhibit 2.
B. "Highlands Open Waters, Watershed Resource Value Areas, Lake
Management Areas." Map depicting Highlands Open Waters located
wholly or partially within the Township Highlands Preservation Area
(pursuant to § 330-232.3.2 above); Lake Management Areas which
include lakes having a surface area greater than ten acres and
associated lake management tiers, including representative Scenic
Resource Tier (i.e., non-delineated; 1,000-feet from estimated
shoreline) (pursuant to § 330-232.3.7 above); and including Watershed
Resource Value Areas (as defined at § 330-234.2.2); map denoted
Exhibit 3.
C. "Riparian Area, Riparian Subwatershed Integrity Areas." Map depicting
Riparian Areas (pursuant to § 330-232.3.3 above) located within the
Township Highlands Preservation Area and including Riparian
Subwatershed Integrity Areas (as defined at § 330-234.2.3); map
denoted Exhibit 4.
D. "Steep Slope Protection Area." Map depicting those portions of the
Township Highlands Preservation Area having 5,000 square feet or
more of contiguous surface area in steep slopes pursuant to
§ 330-232.3.4 above); map denoted Exhibit 5.
E. "Critical Wildlife Habitat, Significant Natural Areas, Vernal Pools." Map
depicting those portions of the Township Highlands Preservation Area
designated as Critical Wildlife Habitat (pursuant to § 330-232.3.5 A
above); those portions of the Township Highlands Preservation Area
designated as Significant Natural Areas (pursuant to § 330-232.3.5 B
above); and Vernal Pool locations (by center-point only, non-delineated),
including representative Vernal Pool Buffers (1,000-feet from center
point), located within the Township Highlands Preservation Area
(pursuant to § 330-232.3.5 C above); map denoted Exhibit 6.
F. "Carbonate Rock Area, Prime Ground Water Recharge Area, Wellhead
Protection Areas." Map depicting those portions of the Township
Highlands Preservation Area designated as Carbonate Rock Areas
(pursuant to § 330-232.3.6 above); those portions of the Township
Highlands Preservation Area designated as Prime Ground Water
§ 330-232.4.2 VERNON CODE § 330-232.4.2
1:782
§ 330-232.5. Interpretation of district maps boundary lines.
All Highlands District maps, as set forth at § 330-232.4.4 above, have been
developed by the Highlands Council using Geographic Information System
(GIS) digital data. The provisions herein shall apply to the interpretation
and use of Highlands District maps and the boundary lines they specify.
§ 330-232.5.1. Municipal Boundary Lines.
The Highlands Act relies upon municipal boundary lines to designate the
limits of the Highlands Region. The Highlands Council dataset establishing
municipal boundary lines was created by dissolving parcel level polygons
(GIS) for each of the 88 municipalities within New Jersey Highlands. Parcels
from the following counties have a general accuracy of plus or minus
five (5) feet: Bergen, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, and Warren. Data from
Hunterdon and Morris were provided by the counties and may have a
different accuracy level. This dataset is for representative purposes only.
Where the specific delineation of any municipal boundary line comes into
question, municipal information such as metes and bounds surveys shall be
relied upon for any final determination.
§ 330-232.5.2. Township Highlands Preservation Area.
The Township Highlands Preservation Area, Highlands Zones and Sub-
Zones map (§ 330-232.4.1, above) provides the Highlands Preservation Area
Boundary as described by the Highlands Act (N.J.S.A. 13:20-7a). To digitize
the survey description, the Highlands Council used the Highlands Parcel
Base, the NJDEP Hydrographic Layer for 2002, and the NJDOT Local Road
Files from 2005 as references. In accordance with the Highlands Act, any
Recharge Areas (pursuant to § 330-232.3.8 above); and the location of
public water system wells within the Township Highlands Preservation
Area and the associated wellhead protection tiers surrounding them
(pursuant to § 330-232.3.9 above); map denoted Exhibit 7.
G. "Highlands Special Environmental Zone, Agricultural Resource Area."
Map depicting those lands of the Township Highlands Preservation
Area designated by the Highlands Council as Highlands Special
Environmental Zone (pursuant to § 330-232.3.10 above); and those
lands of the Township Highlands Preservation Area designated as
Agricultural Resource Area (pursuant to § 330-232.3.11 above); map
denoted Exhibit 8.
H. "Highlands Historic, Cultural and Archaeological Resources, Highlands
Scenic Resources." Map depicting properties located within the
Township Highlands Preservation Area that are listed in the Highlands
Historic, Cultural, and Archaeological Resources Inventory (pursuant to
§ 330-231.2 above); and properties located within the Township
Highlands Preservation Area that are listed in the Highlands Scenic
Resources Inventory (pursuant to § 330-231.2 above); map denoted
Exhibit 9.
§ 330-232.4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-232.5.2
1:783
natural geographical feature, including a river, stream or brook, used in the
boundary description of the Preservation Area is considered to lie totally
within the Preservation Area, while any road, railroad or railroad right of
way is considered to lie totally outside of the Preservation Area. The use
of property block and lot designations include or exclude property from
the Preservation Area, as described. Where a survey gore exists between a
property boundary depicted upon a municipal tax map and the limits of a
surveyed property noted in the Preservation Area description, the surveyed
property boundary description is considered to constitute the Preservation
Area boundary.
Additionally, the Preservation Area does not include land located within the
boundaries of any regional center or town center designated by the State
Planning Commission pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398
(C.52:18A-196 et al.) as of the date of enactment of the Highlands Act,
except to the extent necessary as set forth in the boundary description of
the Preservation Area to reflect appropriate and nearest practicable, on-theground,
and easily identified reference points.
§ 330-232.5.3. Highlands Zones, Sub-Zones, Resource Areas,
Special Protection Areas.
The boundaries delineated for all Highlands Zones, Sub-Zones, Resource
Areas, and Special Protection Areas were developed by the Highlands
Council based on the factors noted in the description of each, above.
Further discussion is provided in the Township Environmental Resource
Inventory and in the Highlands Element of the Township Master Plan.
§ 330-232.5.4. Mapping Conflicts.
In the event of a conflict concerning the location of any Highlands District
boundary line, the delineations provided by the Highlands Council as
adopted herein, shall be determinative. Modifications may be requested
of the Highlands Council through submittal of an RMP Update, Map
Adjustment, or Highlands Center Designation in such manner as required
by the Highlands Council, or as specifically provided otherwise in this
Ordinance. In the event of any conflict concerning the Preservation Area
boundary line, the metes and bounds description provided by the Highlands
Act shall govern, with any discrepancy or dispute residing under the shared
jurisdiction of the Highlands Council and the NJDEP. In the event of a
conflict concerning the delineation of any parcel plotted by the Highlands
Council using GIS software, a current property survey shall be
determinative.
§ 330-233. Highlands preservation area zone district regulations.
§ 330-233.1. Applicability.
The provisions of this Article modify the regulations applicable to the
underlying municipal Zoning Districts, with specific regard to permitted
§ 330-232.5.2 VERNON CODE § 330-233.1
1:784
uses, conditionally permitted uses, prohibited uses, and densities and
intensities of development.
§ 330-233.2. Use regulations.
All principal and accessory uses permitted or conditionally permitted by the
underlying municipal Zoning Ordinance shall remain in effect as provided
therein, except to the extent that such uses may be modified or eliminated
by the provisions of this section. Any and all principal and accessory uses
prohibited by the underlying Zoning Ordinance shall remain prohibited as
provided therein, unless specifically designated as a permitted use by the
provisions of this section. The lists of permitted, conditionally permitted and
prohibited uses of the underlying Zoning Ordinance are herewith amended
as necessary to provide for the use allowances and use restrictions that
follow. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 330-230.1.1E above, the
provisions of this section shall apply equally to any change in use of a
building or other structure lawfully existing as of the effective date of this
Ordinance.
§ 330-233.2.1. Permitted Uses.
The permitted uses applicable to that portion of any municipal Zoning
District overlain by the Highlands District classifications listed below shall
be modified in accordance with the provisions that follow. In addition, any
use permitted by the underlying zoning that is cited at § 330-233.2.2 or
§ 330-233.2.3 below, shall be amended in accordance with the provisions set
forth therein.
A. All Highlands Zones & Sub-Zones. Where the development of any new
or expanded principal or accessory use that is permitted by the
underlying municipal Zoning Ordinance is made physically infeasible
due to the maximum density of development requirements at
§ 330-233.3, below, such use shall no longer apply as a permitted use.
Where the septic system density allowance calculated pursuant to
§ 330-233.3 would permit a maximum of one (1) dwelling unit for a
given parcel, for example, but the underlying Zoning Ordinance would
permit construction of a multi-family project (such as townhomes or
garden apartments) which by definition would contain more than one
dwelling unit, the permitted use would be made physically infeasible
and must no longer be considered a permitted use. This provision shall
apply only to the extent that the Highlands Zone or Sub-Zone from
which the density requirement derives, intersects with the affected
underlying municipal Zoning District. Where the development type
remains feasible, its status as a permitted use shall remain, provided
that the applicable density allowances shall be those of § 330-233.3.
B. Agricultural Resource Area.
(1) Permitted principal uses shall be supplemented to include the
agricultural and horticultural uses (defined at § 330-231.2)
specified at § 330-234.10.3, below. Accessory uses permitted in
§ 330-233.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-233.2.1
1:785
§ 330-233.2.2. Conditional Uses.
The conditional uses applicable to that portion of any municipal Zoning
District overlain by the Highlands District classifications listed below shall
be modified in accordance with the provisions that follow. In addition,
any use conditionally permitted by the underlying zoning that is cited
at § 330-232.2.1 above or § 330-232.2.3 below, shall be amended in
accordance with the provisions set forth therein.
conjunction with these uses shall include ancillary, incidental or
otherwise related supporting uses and the accessory structures
devoted to such uses.
(2) The permitted principal residential use for any underlying
municipal Zoning District which permits single-family residential
development as a principal use, shall be restricted solely to
residential cluster development in accordance with the Residential
Cluster Development standards as set forth at § 330-236.1, below.
This provision shall apply only if the minimum threshold
requirements for residential cluster development pursuant to
§ 330-236.1 can be satisfied. Where the minimum threshold
requirements of § 330-236.1 cannot be satisfied, permitted
principal residential uses shall remain as permitted by the
underlying municipal zoning ordinance.
(3) Permitted principal uses shall include the continuance of any
lawfully existing residential use permitted by the underlying
municipal Zoning Ordinance as of the date of adoption of this
Ordinance.
C. Highlands Special Environmental Zone. For lands falling within the
Highlands Special Environmental Zone, any principal or accessory use,
and any structure related or devoted to such use, that is permitted by
the underlying municipal Zoning Ordinance shall no longer be a
permitted use or structure unless:
(1) For any non-Major Highlands Development proposal, a Special
Environmental Zone waiver permitting such use is issued by the
Highlands Council; or
(2) For any Major Highlands Development proposal, an HPAA with
waiver is issued by the NJDEP.
A. All Highlands Zones & Sub-Zones. Where the development of any
principal or accessory use that is conditionally permitted by the
underlying municipal Zoning Ordinance is made infeasible by the
density of development requirements of § 330-233.3, below, such use
shall no longer be considered a conditionally permitted use. (See
example at § 330-233.2.1 A, above.) This provision shall apply only to
the extent that a Highlands Zone or Sub-Zone from which the density
requirement derives, intersects with the affected underlying municipal
§ 330-233.2.1 VERNON CODE § 330-233.2.2
1:786
§ 330-233.2.3. Prohibited Uses.
The prohibited uses applicable to that portion of any municipal Zoning
District overlain by the Highlands District classifications listed below shall
be modified as necessary to comport with the provisions that follow. These
provisions shall not apply to Appendix B Major PCS #17 pertaining to
livestock, to Appendix C Minor PCS #12 pertaining to agricultural chemical
storage, or to Appendix C Minor PCS#14 pertaining to livestock.
Zoning District. Where the development type remains feasible, its
status as a conditionally permitted use shall remain, provided that the
applicable density and intensity allowances shall consist of those at
§ 330-233.3.
B. Highlands Special Environmental Zone. Any conditionally permitted
principal or accessory use (or structure related or devoted to such use)
applicable to lands falling within the Highlands Special Environmental
Zone, shall no longer be permitted unless:
(1) For any non-Major Highlands Development proposal, a Special
Environmental Zone waiver permitting such conditional use is
issued by the Highlands Council; or
(2) For any Major Highlands Development proposal, an HPAA with
waiver is issued by the NJDEP.
A. Carbonate Rock Area. The following principal or accessory uses and
structures related or devoted to such uses, where otherwise permitted
by the underlying municipal Zoning Ordinance, are expressly
prohibited from any portion of the Carbonate Rock Area or from any
lands identified as draining into a designated Carbonate Rock Area:
(1) Solid waste landfills;
(2) Hazardous waste storage and disposal facilities;
(3) Hazardous materials storage and handling facilities; and
(4) Underground storage tanks.
B. Prime Ground Water Recharge Area. Any principal or accessory use, or
structure related or devoted to such use, which is designated as a Major
Potential Contaminant Source (PCS) by the Highlands Council (see
APPENDIX B), where otherwise permitted by the municipal ordinance,
is expressly prohibited from any portion of the Prime Ground Water
Recharge Area.
C. Wellhead Protection Area, Tier 1. Any principal or accessory use, or
structure related or devoted to such use, which is designated by the
Highlands Council as a Major or Minor Potential Contaminant Source
(PCS) or as a potential source of pathogenic contaminants (see
APPENDIX B and APPENDIX C), where otherwise permitted by the
§ 330-233.2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-233.2.3
1:787
§ 330-233.3. Density and intensity of development.
The provisions of this section are intended to ensure that development in
the Highlands Preservation Area occurs at densities and intensities that are
appropriate to the water supply and wastewater treatment options available
to support it. These provisions shall serve as a check on the various density/
intensity provisions of the underlying Zoning Ordinance, which shall remain
in effect to the extent not specifically in conflict with these provisions. The
density/intensity allowances of the underlying Zoning Ordinance provisions
reflect the intents and purposes set forth for the municipal zoning districts
as established by the Township Master Plan and the effectuating Zoning
Ordinances. They define and support the intended character and patterns
of development for each district, setting forth the relationship between built
form in a district and the lot or lots on which it is situated. The provisions
of this section relate solely to ensuring that such development: a) does not
exceed the capacity of the land, resources and infrastructure available to
support it; and b) is designed to minimize land disturbance and protect
natural resources.
§ 330-233.3.1. Use of Terms.
For purposes of these provisions, density of development standards refer
to requirements of the underlying Zoning Ordinance that regulate the
permitted number of dwelling units per acre of land, whether specifically
defined as density standards or set forth as minimum lot size requirements
for application to specific zoning districts. Intensity of development
standards refer to those requirements used to define the relationship
between the permitted extent, form and location of development of a lot,
to the size, shape and configuration of the lot on which it is situated (e.g.,
floor area ratio, building coverage, building height, yard setbacks, number
of stories).
§ 330-233.3.2. Applicability.
Changes to the density or intensity standards of the underlying Zoning
Ordinance required pursuant to this section shall not apply to prior
development in the Highlands Preservation Area that is lawfully existing or
development approved as of the effective date of adoption of this Ordinance
(pursuant to § 330-230.7 and § 330-230.6 above, respectively). These
provisions shall apply, however, if modifications or improvements to such
municipal ordinance, is expressly prohibited from any portion of a Tier
1 Wellhead Protection Area.
D. Wellhead Protection Area, Tier 2. Any principal or accessory use, or
structure related or devoted to such use, which is designated as a Major
Potential Contaminant Source (PCS) by the Highlands Council (see
APPENDIX B), where otherwise permitted by the municipal ordinance,
shall be expressly prohibited from any portion of a Tier 2 Wellhead
Protection Area.
§ 330-233.2.3 VERNON CODE § 330-233.3.2
1:788
existing development constitute a Major Highlands Development involving
installation of a new septic system. For Non-Major Highlands Development,
these provisions shall apply if such modifications or improvements result
in either, for residential development (or any residential portion thereof)
an increase in the number of residential units, or, for non-residential
development (or any non-residential portion thereof), an increase in water
demand by an average of 400 gallons per day or more, or for septic system
yield by an average of 300 gallons per day or more. These provisions are
expressly intended to apply to any change in use of an existing structure or
structures, and require a determination as to any net increase. Where such
a change converts a residential use to non-residential use, or vice versa,
equivalent dwelling unit figures shall be applied to determine whether the
change in use will result in a net increase in either water availability or
septic system demand. For septic system demand, the equivalent dwelling
unit wastewater flow shall be an average 300 gallons per day, while for
water availability, the equivalent dwelling unit flow shall be an average 400
gallons per day.
§ 330-233.3.3. Base Mapping.
Base maps regarding water availability and wastewater treatment capacity
appear in the technical information provided in the Conservation and Utility
Services Plans of the Township Master Plan Highland Element. These maps
are combined into one for purposes of this Ordinance, denoted as Exhibit
10 and herewith adopted and incorporated as titled: "Net Water Availability
by HUC14 Subwatershed, Public Community Water Systems and Highlands
Domestic Sewerage Facilities ."
§ 330-233.3.4. Development Subject to Water Availability.
The following density and intensity provisions notwithstanding, all new
development (as defined at § 330-231.3.2) within the Highlands
Preservation Area is subject to the availability of water sufficient in both
quantity and quality to sustainably support it. Any proposed increase in the
demand for water supply deriving from Highlands Preservation Area ground
water sources or from surface water sources that are not associated with a
NJDEP-approved safe yield, shall be accompanied by a finding of sufficient
water capacity, which finding shall be issued by the Highlands Council.
This provision shall apply to all development as defined at § 330-231.3.2,
expressly including any change in use (or modification to an existing use
pursuant to § 330-233.3.2) that entails an increase in the number of
residential units, or for non-residential development (or any non-residential
portion), an increase in the demand for such water supply by an average
400 gallons per day or more. Specific requirements pertinent to new
development reliant upon ground water supplies may be found at
§ 330-234.7. For purposes of determining net increases in water demand
associated with modifications to existing uses pursuant to these
requirements, the following unit/square footage figures shall apply as
400-gallon-per-day equivalents:
§ 330-233.3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-233.3.4
1:789
§ 330-233.3.5. Development Served by Septic Systems.
Development proposals involving new or increased demand for septic
system capacity shall be regulated in accordance with this section. These
provisions shall override any density, intensity, bulk, or other standard of
the underlying Zoning Ordinance that would permit a septic system density
in excess of that as provided herein. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
apply to the replacement or repair of an existing septic system.
A. Residential Uses (All Types) — 1 dwelling unit
B. Office and Commercial Uses — 2,400 square feet of floor area
C. Industrial (Including Warehousing/Distribution) Uses — 18,182 square
feet of floor area
(Excluding Process Wastewater Flow)
A. Major Highlands Development. Any new individual subsurface disposal
system (or aggregate of equivalent disposal units as provided at N.J.A.C.
7:38) proposed to serve a Major Highlands Development shall be
authorized only by the NJDEP in accordance with NJDEP Preservation
Area Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38) and all other applicable requirements. In the
case of any such system proposed in service to a cluster development,
the provisions at B(11)(c) below, shall also apply. The applicable septic
system density requirements appear at A(1), below.
(1) Septic System Density Requirements. A new individual subsurface
disposal system or aggregate of equivalent disposal units where the
sanitary wastewater design flow is 2,000 gallons per day or less
shall be permitted only in accordance with the density limitations,
at (1)(a) through (1)(d), below. Forest under this subsection shall be
identified and calculated as provided at APPENDIX A (from N.J.A.C.
7:38-3). For the purposes of this subsection, "equivalent disposal
unit" means: for residential development, one system serving one
single-family home sized in accordance with the Standards for
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems, Volume of
Sanitary Sewage, at N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4; or for non-residential
development or residential development comprising structures
other than single-family homes, 500 gallons of wastewater per day
generated for the development type, as determined in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4 (provided at APPENDIX G).
(a) On a lot that contains all forest, there shall be no more than
one individual subsurface disposal system or equivalent
disposal unit for each 88 acres of the lot;
(b) On a lot that does not contain forest, there shall be no more
than one individual subsurface disposal system or equivalent
disposal unit for each 25 acres of the lot;
§ 330-233.3.4 VERNON CODE § 330-233.3.5
1:790
(c) For the purposes of this subsection, the acreage of a lot shall
be the total area of the lot(s) on which the proposed
development is located as described by deed(s) or subdivision
plat(s) on file with the municipal or county clerk.
(d) For a lot containing both forest and non-forest areas, the total
number of allowable individual subsurface disposal systems or
equivalent disposal units permitted on the lot shall be
determined by calculating the number of acres of the lot that
are forest (as determined in accordance with APPENDIX A,
from N.J.A.C. 7:38-3.9) and dividing that number by 88;
calculating the remaining number of acres of the lot that are
not forest and dividing that number by 25; and then summing
the results. If the sum results in a fraction, the number shall be
rounded down to the nearest whole number in order to
determine the number of permitted individual subsurface
disposal systems or equivalent disposal units.
(e) For purposes of this section, noncontiguous lots in existence as
of August 10, 2004 may be aggregated such that the number of
individual subsurface disposal systems or equivalent disposal
units that would be permitted under this section on one or
more of the aggregated lots is transferred to one or more of the
aggregated lots provided:
[1] The proposed development on the lot or lots to receive the
transferred individual subsurface disposal systems or
equivalent disposal units complies with all federal, state
and local laws;
[2] The proposed development on the lot or lots to receive the
transferred individual subsurface disposal systems or
equivalent disposal units does not require a waiver of any
requirement of N.J.A.C. 7:38 and is constructed in
accordance with the Highlands Act and N.J.A.C. 7:38,
inclusive of 3% maximum impervious surface limitations;
[3] The lots to be aggregated under this paragraph are all
located in the Preservation Area and within the same
HUC14; and
[4] The lot or lots from which the individual subsurface
disposal systems or equivalent disposal units are to be
transferred are subject to a conservation restriction
against future disturbance provided in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:38-6.3.
(2) Additional Septic System Requirements. In addition to the
requirements above, individual subsurface sewage disposal
systems or equivalent disposal units shall satisfy the Standards for
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems (N.J.A.C. 7:9A)
without extraordinary measures, including replacement of disposal
§ 330-233.3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-233.3.5
1:791
field soil with permeable material or mounding of a disposal field to
achieve the required depth to ground water or confining layer.
B. Non-Major Highlands Development. Development proposals involving
new or increased demand for septic system capacity for non-Major
Development shall be regulated in accordance with this subsection.
These provisions shall apply equally in the case of any agricultural or
horticultural development application proposing a new septic system to
serve a residential dwelling unit (or accessory dwelling unit).
(1) Septic System Density Requirements. Septic system density (gross
acres per septic system) shall not exceed that necessary to ensure
compliance with the nitrate dilution allowances established below,
for each Highlands Zone and Sub-Zone. Development proposals
shall be evaluated on a project-specific basis for compliance with
these requirements, using the methodology provided herein.
(2) Maximum Nitrate Dilution Allowances.
(a) Existing Community Zone (and Sub-Zones) — 2 mg/L
(b) Conservation Zone (and Sub-Zones) — 1.87 mg/L
(c) Protection Zone (and Sub-Zones) — 0.72 mg/L
(3) Nitrate Dilution Model Applicable to Residential Cluster
Development Only To determine the minimum land area required
per septic system (or per unit increase in required septic system
capacity), a drought recharge-based nitrate dilution model shall be
applied. This model is available through the Highlands Council
website (see link within Municipal Instructions for Plan
Conformance, Module 6 at: http://www.highlands.state.nj.us/
njhighlands/planconformance/). It derives from two independent
methods: a mass-dilution (modified Trela-Douglas) model and the
New Jersey Geological Survey's (NJGS) ground-water-recharge
method. The model provides the minimum number of acres
required per septic system (applied as an average density) to
ensure that recharge is sufficient to achieve nitrate dilution
targets.
(4) Input Factors. The following factors, representative of a one-family
household, or average wastewater generation of 300 gallons per
day, shall be used as inputs to the nitrate dilution model:
(a) Household size of four (4) persons;
(b) Average nitrate loading of ten (10) pounds per person per year;
and
(c) Drought ground water recharge for the HUC14 subwatershed
as dilution.
§ 330-233.3.5 VERNON CODE § 330-233.3.5
1:792
(5) Model Output. The model output indicates the minimum acreage of
the developed portion of the site required per septic system, where
that system is designed for a one-family household generating a
maximum flow of 300 gallons of wastewater per day. The resulting
acreage shall be applied as the minimum average acreage
necessary to support every 300 gallons of daily wastewater flow
generated by any proposed use where the unit/square footage
figures below shall be applied as 300 gallon-per-day equivalents.
(6) Minimum Average Lot Size by Highlands Zone - Applicable to all
development applications except those for Residential Cluster
Development. Based on maximum nitrate dilution allowances, the
following table provides the minimum average lot size requirement
per septic system for each of the HUC14 subwatersheds and
Highlands Zones (each including Sub-Zones) located in the
municipal Highlands Preservation Area. In all cases, minimum
average acreage allowances are subject to analysis of site-specific
conditions (e.g., soil characteristics) and a finding that capacity is
available to support the resultant density.
HUC14
Subwatershed
Name
Drought
Recharge
inches/
year
Protection
Zone
acres/septic
system
Conservation
Zone
acres/septic
system
Existing
Community
Zone
acres/septic
system
02020007010030 Franklin Pond
Creek 9.8 25.0 9.6 9.0
02020007010050 Hardistonville
Tributaries 10.2 24.0 9.2 8.6
02020007010070 Wallkill River
(Martins Rd to
Hamburg SW Bdy) 9.3 26.4 10.1 9.5
02020007020070 Papakating Creek
(below Pellettown) 8.4 29.0 11.2 10.4
02020007030010 Wallkill River
(41d13m30s to
Martins Road) 9.2 26.6 10.3 9.6
02020007030030 Wallkill River
(Owens gage to
41d13m30s) 9.3 26.4 10.1 9.5
02020007030040 Wallkill River
(state line to
Owens gage) 9.5 25.8 9.9 9.3
§ 330-233.3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-233.3.5
1:793
HUC14
Subwatershed
Name
Drought
Recharge
inches/
year
Protection
Zone
acres/septic
system
Conservation
Zone
acres/septic
system
Existing
Community
Zone
acres/septic
system
02020007040010 Black Creek
(above/incl Great
Gorge Resort
tributary) 9.8 24.9 9.6 9.0
02020007040020 Black Creek
(below Great
Gorge Resort
tributary) 10.6 23.0 8.9 8.3
02020007040030 Pochuck Creek/
Glenwood Lk &
northern tributary 10.7 23.0 8.8 8.3
02020007040040 Highland Lake/
Wawayanda Lake 9.8 25.1 9.7 9.0
02020007040050 Wawayanda Creek
& tributaries 11.1 22.0 8.5 7.9
02020007040060 Long House
Creek/Upper
Greenwood Lake 11.9 20.7 8.0 7.4
02030103050010 Pequannock River
(above Stockholm/
Vernon Rd) 10.9 22.4 8.6 8.1
02030103050020 Pacock Brook 11.3 21.7 8.3 7.8
02030103050040 Clinton Reservoir/
Mossmans Brook 12.3 19.9 7.7 7.2
(7) Equivalent Yields. The following unit/square footage figures shall
be applied as 300 gallon-per-day equivalents:
(a) Residential Uses (All Types, except as provided below) — 1
dwelling unit
(b) Deed-Restricted Senior Citizen Residential Units, or Mobile
Home Parks with dwelling units less than 500 square feet in
size — 1.5 dwelling units
(c) Office and Commercial Uses — 2,400 square feet of floor area
(d) Industrial (Including Warehousing/Distribution) Uses — 18,182
square feet of floor area
(Excluding Process Wastewater Flow)
§ 330-233.3.5 VERNON CODE § 330-233.3.5
1:794
(e) Specific Non-Residential Uses by Facility Type — In lieu of (c),
or (d), above, 300 gallon-per-day equivalents may be computed
based on the average sewage volumes provided in Appendix G,
from N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4.
(8) Septic System Yield. The maximum septic system yield shall be
determined by dividing the total area of the subject property by the
minimum average acreage required per septic system (or per unit/
floor area equivalent), as determined by Where the development
application proposes unit or floor area equivalents (or any
combination thereof) in a quantity equal to or less than the
calculated septic system yield, it shall be deemed compliant with
this section. If a project site is located within more than one HUC14
subwatershed, the nitrate dilution model shall be run for each
portion of the site using the drought ground water recharge
applicable to each HUC14, respectively, with separate septic
system yields computed accordingly/the average minimum lot sizes
in the chart above shall be applied proportionately in relation to the
area of land located in each HUC14.
(9) Floor Area. For the purposes of this subsection, floor area shall
comprise the area of each floor of a building lying within the inside
perimeter of its exterior walls excluding vent shafts, courts, and
unfinished areas such as basements or attics having ceiling heights
less than that required for habitable space under the building code.
(10) Lot Area. For the purposes of this subsection, the acreage of a lot
shall be the total area of the lot(s) on which the development is
proposed to be located as described by deed(s) or subdivision
plat(s) on file with the municipal or county clerk.
(11) Application of Results.
(a) Detached One- or Two-Family Residential Development. Where
the underlying density (or minimum lot size) allowances of the
municipal Zoning Ordinance would otherwise permit a greater
number of units, the septic system density and septic system
yield resulting from the preceding analysis may be applied as
the minimum lot size and the maximum permitted dwelling
unit yield or subject to the provisions of subsection c., below, as
the minimum average lot size with the septic system yield as
the maximum unit yield. Alternatively, the underlying Zoning
Ordinance allowances may be applied over a portion of the
project area, subject to the limitations of subsection c., below,
to the point at which the calculated septic system yield (by
HUC14) is reached, with the remainder of the lot area left
undeveloped. If the minimum threshold requirements for
Residential Cluster Development can be met (see § 330-236.1),
the applicant may choose to cluster the development project in
accordance with the requirements as provided therein. If the
minimum threshold requirements for Residential Cluster
§ 330-233.3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-233.3.5
1:795
Development can be met (see § 330-236.1) and the project
is located within the Agricultural Resource Area, cluster
development is mandatory as provided at § 330-236.1, and the
preceding options shall not apply.
(b) Multi-Family Residential Development. Where the underlying
density allowances of the municipal Zoning Ordinance would
otherwise permit a greater number of units, the septic system
yield resulting from the preceding analysis shall be applied as
the maximum permitted dwelling unit yield.
(c) Residential Cluster Development. Where residential clustering
or lot averaging dependent upon individual on-site wells for
water supply, is proposed, the septic system density applicable
to the developed portion of a site, or net septic system density,
shall in no case result in a nitrate dilution in excess of 10 mg/L.
This determination shall be made by application of the drought
recharge-based nitrate dilution model as described above,
using 10 mg/L as the nitrate dilution target. For purposes of
this calculation, septic system yield shall be calculated on the
basis of the developed portion of the site only, which shall
consist of a contiguous land area including the following:
[1] All land area proposed to be occupied by buildings,
structures and associated improvements, all land area to
be disturbed in connection with the construction or
installation of such buildings, structures and
improvements, and all of the land area intervening; and
[2] All land area dedicated to any street or roadway providing
public (or common) access to the development, to the
limits of the right-of-way, easement, or other area(s)
designated to contain such common access; and
[3] All land dedicated to a community on-site stormwater
detention facility, or other like facility providing public (or
common) services to the development, each to the limits of
the easement, lot line(s), or other area(s) designated to
contain such common facility.
(12) Aggregation of Septic System Yield. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the aggregation of available septic system
yield from contiguous or noncontiguous parcels within the same
HUC14 subwatershed in support of a new development project on
one or more such parcels, provided that:
(a) The contribution of septic system yield shall occur only where
excess yield is available;
(b) The contribution of septic system yield from any alreadydeveloped
parcel shall be permitted only where sufficient to
equal one (1) dwelling unit or more, or for non-residential
§ 330-233.3.5 VERNON CODE § 330-233.3.5
1:796
§ 330-233.3.6. Development Served by Existing Utility
Infrastructure.
Where lots proposed for development in the Highlands Preservation Area
are served by existing public water and wastewater utility infrastructure
having sufficient available capacity, the density and intensity of new
development shall be consistent with all requirements of the underlying
municipal Zoning Ordinance. For purposes of this provision, "existing"
water and wastewater utility infrastructure refers only to such
infrastructure that is lawfully constructed and operational. In the case
of Residential Cluster Development, however, all requirements shall be
as provided at § 330-236.1, with the maximum unit yield not to exceed
that as determined by calculation of the septic system yield pursuant to
§ 330-233.5.1, above. An increase in units in excess of the calculated septic
system yield shall be permitted only to the extent of any aggregated septic
system yield, as provided in accordance with § 330-233.3.5 A(1) and B(12)
above.
§ 330-233.3.7. New or Extended Utility Infrastructure Prohibited.
New, expanded or extended public water systems, wastewater collection
and treatment systems, and community on-site treatment facilities are
prohibited unless approved through issuance of either a Highlands
Applicability Determination indicating that a project is exempt from the
development, one (1) 300 gallon-per-day floor area equivalent
or more;
(c) All lands contributing to such yield shall be dedicated to the
support of the septic system(s) proposed for the new
development, and no such land shall be counted in the
calculation of septic system yield applicable to any other;
(d) All such lands shall be deed-restricted to prohibit any future
development requiring the availability of septic system yield,
until or unless such yield is either returned from the new
development it was initially deed-restricted to support, or is
obtained (by dedication through deed restriction) from
elsewhere within the same HUC14 subwatershed.
(13)HUC14 Subwatershed Yield. The septic system yield applicable to a
HUC14 subwatershed shall in no case be exceeded; an increase in
any one portion of a HUC14 subwatershed must be offset by an
equivalent decrease elsewhere within the same subwatershed.
(14) Additional Septic System Requirements. In addition to the
requirements above, individual subsurface sewage disposal
systems or equivalent disposal units shall satisfy all standards for
design, installation, and maintenance as set forth in any applicable
Township Health Ordinance and any related and applicable
regulatory requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction.
§ 330-233.3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-233.3.7
1:797
Highlands Act, or a Highlands Preservation Area Approval with waiver
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:38.
§ 330-234. Highlands preservation area resource regulations.
§ 330-234.1. Forest resources.
§ 330-234.1.1. Findings.
Forests are a defining visual and functional feature of the Highlands
Preservation Area. Forests provide habitat and sustenance for a diverse
array of plants and animals and are essential to maintaining biodiversity.
Forests protect against soil erosion, provide filtration for ground water
recharge, and assist in protecting stream water quality. Forests retain
moisture and sequester atmospheric carbon, thus helping to stabilize
weather patterns and mitigate global warming. Forested areas of the
Highlands Preservation Area offer important recreational resources,
contribute to its unique scenic quality, and when managed sustainably, can
provide a long-term source of wood and wood products.
§ 330-234.1.2. Total Forest Area.
All portions of the Highlands Preservation Area identified by the Highlands
Council as containing forest (as defined at § 330-231.2) appear as Total
Forest Area in the map titled "Forest Resource Area, Total Forest Area,
Forest Subwatershed Integrity Areas" (Exhibit 2), adopted and incorporated
as a component of this Ordinance pursuant to § 330-232.4, above. The
Total Forest Area includes forested portions of lands designated as Forest
Resource Area, as provided at § 330-232.1, above.
§ 330-234.1.3. Forest Subwatershed Integrity Areas.
The Highlands Council has evaluated and assigned forest integrity
valuations to each of the HUC14 subwatersheds of the Township Highlands
Preservation Area. These valuations appear as Forest Subwatershed
Integrity Areas in the map titled "Forest Resource Area, Total Forest Area,
Forest Subwatershed Integrity Areas" (Exhibit 2), adopted and incorporated
as a component of this Ordinance pursuant to § 330-232.4, above,, inclusive
of the applicable forest subwatershed integrity classes:
A. High Integrity Forest Subwatersheds. High Integrity Forest
Subwatersheds are predominantly forested and characterized by a high
proportion of forest cover consisting of high value core area, large
patch sizes and short distances between patches.
B. Moderate Integrity Forest Subwatersheds. Moderate Integrity Forest
Subwatersheds are predominantly forested, but do not exhibit a high
proportion of high value core area, large patch sizes, or proximity
between patches.
§ 330-233.3.7 VERNON CODE § 330-234.1.3
1:798
§ 330-234.1.4. Clear-Cutting Prohibited.
Clear-cutting is prohibited in any forested portion of the Highlands
Preservation Area, whether the affected lands are delineated as Total Forest
Area or Forest Resource Area, or consist of lands containing upland forest,
as determined under the procedures provided at APPENDIX A.
§ 330-234.1.5. Preservation Area Standards.
§ 330-234.1.6. Forest Impact Reports Required.
With the exception of forest disturbance authorized pursuant to an HPAA
issued by the NJDEP, any disturbance pursuant to § 330-234.1.5, above,
shall be approved only upon demonstration that the criteria required
therein have been satisfied. In support of such proofs, a Forest Impact
Report shall be submitted containing at minimum, the items listed herein.
C. Low Integrity Forest Subwatersheds. Low Integrity Forest
Subwatersheds are predominantly non-forested or include low values
for proportion of forest cover and patch size, or exhibit high distance to
nearest patch.
A. Prohibitions. Any forest disturbance that by definition constitutes
deforestation (see § 330-231.2), is prohibited within any portion of the
Forest Resource Area, with the exception of that authorized under an
HPAA issued by the NJDEP.
B. Allowances. Forest disturbance in the Forest Resource Area that does
not by definition, constitute deforestation, shall be permitted in the
Preservation Area only where authorized under an HPAA issued by the
NJDEP, or where demonstrated to be the minimum required in
connection with:
(1) The maintenance of any legally pre-existing use or structure,
expressly excluding the expansion of such use or structure; or
(2) Either a permitted non-Major Highlands Development or the
expansion of any legally pre-existing use or structure, where
accompanied by submission, approval and implementation of a
Forest Mitigation Plan designed to minimize the extent of forest
disturbance, protect forest areas adjacent or proximate to the
disturbance area, and mitigate for loss of trees or other forest
vegetation removed during the course of such disturbance.
A. A map of upland forest area located on or within 500 feet of the subject
property, as determined in accordance with Appendix A. A map
indicating any on-site areas designated as Forest Resource Area or
Total Forest (Exhibit 2). Where access is not available to adjacent
properties, the municipal Environmental Resource Inventory and any
updated Highlands Council GIS data delineating the Forest Resource
§ 330-234.1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.1.6
1:799
§ 330-234.1.7. Forest Mitigation Plans.
All Forest Mitigation Plans must be prepared by a State of New Jersey
Approved Forester or other qualified professional. A Forest Mitigation Plan
must include each of the components listed herein.
Area and Total Forest may be relied upon for off-site forest
identification.
B. A description of the nature, density and intensity of the proposed use or
activity.
C. A plan indicating the extent of the forest disturbance area, identifying
the number, location, species and, for trees of greater than six (6)
inches in caliper (measured at 4.5 feet above grade level), the caliper of
any trees proposed for removal.
D. A description of the site alternatives analysis undertaken to, in this
order: a) avoid forest disturbance; b) minimize forest disturbance; and
c) ensure that any forest disturbance that cannot be avoided results in
the least impact.
E. A description of the low impact development practices to be used to
minimize the disturbance area and its impact; design details to be
indicated in development plans, if applicable.
F. A description of the site and the type and integrity class of the existing
forest areas proposed to be disturbed or potentially affected by
disturbance of adjacent or proximate forest areas.
G. If the applicant proposes site-specific forest information that differs
from mapped forest resources, including information based on the
method in APPENDIX A, the information must either be approved by
NJDEP through a Highlands Resource Area Determination, or be
provided in a format and with sufficient information that the findings
may be submitted for verification by the Highlands Council as an RMP
Update.
H. An analysis of the effects (direct and indirect) of the proposed use or
activity upon forests, including the resulting integrity class of forest
areas adjacent or proximate to the disturbance area.
A. Mitigation Priority Area Map. Priority Areas are forested locations
within the site having the highest ecological value to be targeted for
conservation, restoration, or mitigation, including such areas as:
(1) Highlands Open Waters and Buffers
(2) Riparian Areas, including Floodplains and Flood-Prone Areas
(3) Critical Habitat
(4) Steep Slopes and Ridgelines
§ 330-234.1.6 VERNON CODE § 330-234.1.7
1:800
§ 330-234.2. Highlands open waters & riparian resources.
§ 330-234.2.1. Findings.
Highlands Open Waters (Exhibit 3) include all springs, streams (including
intermittent streams), wetlands and bodies of surface water, whether
natural or artificial (excluding swimming pools), located wholly or partially
within the boundaries of the Highlands Preservation Area. Highlands Open
Waters contribute to the water resources of the Highlands Region, and
ultimately to the water supply of millions of New Jersey citizens. They are
essential to the ecologic function of the plant and animal communities of the
Highlands Preservation Area that depend upon them for survival. Highlands
Open Waters are also an important physical feature of the Township,
contributing to its character, aesthetics, history and development, and to its
recreational opportunities.
(5) Core Forests and Contiguous Forest Patches
B. Protection Plan. A plan providing the proposed methodology
appropriate to, and by which the applicable mitigation priority areas
will be protected throughout the period of forest disturbance and
thereafter.
C. Forest Protection Plan. A plan incorporating pre-construction and
construction best management practices to ensure the well-being of
forest areas adjacent or proximate to the disturbance area. Such plans
shall include prescribed limits of disturbance to be mapped, field
marked, and provided with protective fencing prior to the start of any
construction activity. Plans shall indicate installation of tree protection
fencing along the drip line of trees to be protected, with instructions
barring encroachment by machinery or heavy equipment of any kind,
and requiring regular inspection and maintenance of fencing
throughout the construction period.
D. Mitigation Description. A description of the proposed forest restoration,
tree planting plan or other mitigation initiative proposed to provide
equivalent or enhanced forest ecosystem benefit in consideration of the
extent and type of disturbance or deforestation that would result if the
use or activity is approved.
E. Planting Plan. A detailed plan indicating the specific plantings proposed
for restoration, reforestation or mitigation, including size, species,
quantity, location, separation distances, planting details, deer and pest
management protections, and maintenance plans.
F. Maintenance Agreement. A minimum 3-year maintenance agreement
that outlines care-taking responsibilities of the applicant once the
proposed planting has been completed. The maintenance agreement
must include monitoring of newly planted stands, provide for protection
devices in working order for 3 years, and ensure at least a 75% survival
rate after 3 years.
§ 330-234.1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.2.1
1:801
Protection of Highlands Open Waters is vital not only to the municipality,
but to the Highlands Region and the State of New Jersey. The provision
or preservation/enhancement of buffer areas adjacent to Highlands Open
Waters is an integral component to ensuring such protection. Key functional
values that buffers provide or contribute to, include but are not limited
to: habitat for flora and fauna, stormwater and flood water retention and
filtration, water quality protection, temperature moderation, aquatic
ecosystem integrity and channel integrity. Highlands Riparian Areas
(Exhibit 4) are lands associated with and bordering on Highlands Open
Waters, often extending beyond Highlands Open Water buffers. These lands
are likewise essential to providing critical hydrologic, ecologic and pollutant
attenuation functions for Highlands Open Waters. Riparian areas moderate
fluctuations in water temperature, help maintain ground water recharge
and stream base flow, stabilize stream banks, and provide flood storage
areas. During high flow or overland runoff events, riparian areas reduce
erosion and sediment loads to surface water and remove excess nutrients
and contaminants from flood water. Riparian areas also provide habitat for
a variety of animal species and support terrestrial and aquatic food webs
through deposition of woody debris.
It is in the interest of the local community, the Highlands Region, and
the state of New Jersey that the Highlands Open Waters of the Township
Highlands Preservation Area, including associated buffers and Riparian
Areas, receive the highest level of protection possible. The map of
Highlands Riparian Areas (Exhibit 4) includes all Highlands Open Waters
and associated flood prone areas, riparian soils and wildlife corridors.
§ 330-234.2.2. Watershed Resource Value Areas.
The Highlands Council has evaluated and assigned watershed resource
valuations to each of the HUC14 subwatersheds of the Township Highlands
Preservation Area. These valuations appear as Watershed Resource Value
Areas in the map titled "Highlands Open Waters, Watershed Resource Value
Areas, Lake Management Areas" (Exhibit 3) adopted and incorporated as a
component of this Ordinance pursuant to § 330-234.4 above, inclusive of the
three watershed resource value classes listed below.
A. High Resource Value Watersheds. High Resource Value Watersheds
contain predominantly forest lands, include a significant extent of high
quality habitat, and have limited pre-existing developed land.
B. Moderate Resource Value Watersheds. Moderate Resource Value
Watersheds contain forest lands and some habitat suitable for rare,
threatened or endangered species, but typically also contain significant
areas of developed lands.
C. Low Resource Value Watersheds. Low Resource Value Watersheds
contain a low proportion of forest lands, low proportion of habitat
suitable for rare, threatened or endangered species, and higher
proportion of developed land area.
§ 330-234.2.1 VERNON CODE § 330-234.2.3
1:802
§ 330-234.2.3. Riparian Subwatershed Integrity Areas.
The Highlands Council has also evaluated the HUC14 subwatersheds of the
Highlands Preservation Area on the basis of Riparian Area integrity, which
are divided amongst three classes, as listed below. These appear as Riparian
Subwatershed Integrity Areas in the map titled "Riparian Area, Riparian
Subwatershed Integrity Areas" (Exhibit 4) adopted and incorporated as a
component of this Ordinance pursuant to § 330-232.4 above.
§ 330-234.2.4. Highlands Open Waters Protection Buffer.
All Highlands Open Waters shall include a minimum 300-foot wide
protection buffer, as measured from the edge of the discernable bank
of the Highlands Open Waters feature, or from the centerline where no
discernable bank exists. These buffers are included in the map of Highlands
Open Waters at Exhibit 3 with respect to streams, rivers, ponds, lakes
and reservoirs. With respect to wetlands and other Highlands Open Waters
features not mapped in Exhibit 3 (e.g., seeps, springs), each shall include a
300-foot wide protection buffer measured from the delineated limits of the
feature, as indicated by a Highlands Resource Area Determination issued
by the NJDEP.
§ 330-234.2.5. Highlands Open Waters Buffer Standards.
Highlands Open Waters buffers shall be maintained in their undisturbed or
pre-existing condition, unless a disturbance is approved in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
A. High Integrity Riparian Area. The High Integrity Riparian Area consists
of subwatersheds having Riparian Areas that exhibit predominantly
natural vegetation, including high quality habitat for water/wetland
dependent species, and a generally low incidence of impervious area,
agricultural uses and road crossings.
B. Moderate Integrity Riparian Area. The Moderate Integrity Riparian
Area consists of subwatersheds having Riparian Areas that contain a
higher incidence of impervious area, agricultural uses and road
crossings, and a reduced proportion of natural vegetation providing
high quality habitat for water/wetland dependent species.
C. Low Integrity Riparian Area. The Low Integrity Riparian Area consists
of subwatersheds having Riparian Areas that contain a high proportion
of impervious area, agricultural uses and road crossings, and minimal
natural vegetation providing high quality habitat for water/wetland
dependent species.
A. Pre-existing Structures or Improvements. Any lawfully pre-existing
structure or improvement located within a Highlands Open Waters
protection buffer area as of the effective date of this Ordinance may
remain and be maintained or rehabilitated, provided that the existing
area of disturbance attributed to or associated with such structure or
§ 330-234.2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.2.5
1:803
improvement shall not be increased. [Ordinance No. 14-09, codified
herein as Article XIX, was adopted July 14, 2014]
B. Agricultural & Horticultural Land Uses. For purposes of this section,
existing agricultural and horticultural uses, whether or not under active
management or operation, shall not be included in any assessment of
"previously disturbed" buffer areas with regard to proposals for nonagricultural
development.
C. Approvals Subject to Outside Agency Approvals. Approval of any
application involving the disturbance of a Highlands Open Waters
buffer pursuant to this section shall not be construed to relieve the
applicant from the applicable rules, regulations or legal requirements
of any other agency having jurisdiction over such buffers, including but
not limited to: the NJDEP (e.g., Freshwater Wetland Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7,
Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, Flood Hazard Area Rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:13, NJPDES Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A); a Soil Conservation
District pursuant to its authority under New Jersey Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 2:90; or any county or other
regional entity having authority pursuant to a Regional Stormwater
Plan adopted by NJDEP under N.J.A.C. 7:8 and N.J.A.C. 7:15.
D. Municipal Stormwater Management Requirements. Where the
provisions of this section are in conflict with the provisions of an
adopted municipal stormwater management ordinance (Vernon
Ordinance Sections 330-127 to 330-132), the more restrictive of the two
shall apply.
E. Stream Corridor Protection/Restoration Plan. Where the provisions of
this section are in conflict with the provisions of an adopted Stream
Corridor Protection/Restoration Plan the provisions of the adopted Plan
shall override.
F. Protection Buffer Expansion. The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to preclude the imposition of a wider protection buffer
requirement where site-specific analysis and evaluation by a qualified
professional indicates that such expansion is essential to the protection
of Highlands Open Waters, associated Riparian Areas, or the habitat of
water or wetlands-dependent species (particularly in the case of rare,
threatened or endangered species) located therein.
G. Preservation Area Standards.
(1) Major Highlands Development. Any disturbance of a Highlands
Open Water buffer proposed in connection with a Major Highlands
Development shall be authorized and regulated only by the NJDEP
in accordance with NJDEP Preservation Area Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38)
and all other applicable requirements. The pertinent Preservation
Area standards appear at G(3), below.
(2) Non-Major Highlands Development. Any disturbance of a
Highlands Open Water buffer proposed in connection with a
§ 330-234.2.5 VERNON CODE § 330-234.2.5
1:804
development that does not constitute a Major Highlands
Development shall meet the requirements provided at G(3), below
(adapted from NJDEP Preservation Area Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:38),
pursuant to the regulatory authority of this Ordinance and review
by the appropriate municipal entity in accordance with the
application procedures of Article 9.
(3) Disturbance Prohibited Except Linear Development. Development
is prohibited within all Highlands Open Waters and adjacent
300-foot buffers except for linear development, which shall be
permitted only provided that there is no feasible alternative for the
linear development outside the Highlands Open Waters or
Highlands Open Water buffer.
(a) To address the "no feasible alternative for linear development"
standard, the applicant shall demonstrate that there is no
other location, design or configuration for the proposed linear
development that would reduce or eliminate the disturbance to
a Highlands Open Waters feature or the adjacent buffer. For
proposed linear development that would provide access to an
otherwise developable lot the applicant shall in addition, show
that:
[1] The proposed linear development is the only point of
access for roadways or utilities to an otherwise
developable lot; and
[2] Shared driveways are used to the maximum extent
possible to access multiple lots.
(b) For a driveway, the applicant shall, in addition, demonstrate
that:
[1] The applicant has made a good faith effort to transfer
development rights for the lot based on the allocation of
Highlands Development Credits certified by the Highlands
Development Credit Bank, and has not obtained a
commitment from the Highlands Development Credit
Bank, a willing buyer, or a TDR receiving zone municipality
to purchase said Highlands Development Credits;
[2] The lot has been offered for sale at an amount no greater
than the specific fair market value to all property owners
within 200 feet of the lot, and to the land conservancies,
environmental organizations, the Highlands Council and
all other government agencies on a list provided by the
NJDEP (for Major Highlands Development) or the
Highlands Council (for non-Major Highlands
Development), at an amount determined in compliance
with N.J.S.A. 13:8C-26j or N.J.S.A. 13:8C-38j, as applicable;
§ 330-234.2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.2.5
1:805
[3] Said offering under G(3)(b)[2] was made by letter sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, with a copy to the
Highlands Council (using the form provided by the NJDEP
for Major Highlands Development): a) disclosing the
location on the lot of all Highlands resource areas (as
defined in N.J.A.C. 7:38-1.4 for Major Highlands
Development, or as provided by an RMP Consistency
Determination Report developed using the Highlands
Council website for non-Major Highlands Development); b)
stating that an application to develop the lot has been
filed; and c) enclosing a copy of a fair market value
appraisal performed by a state-licensed appraiser based
on the minimum beneficial economically viable use of the
property allowable under local law; and
[4] No reasonable offer for the lot has been received within a
minimum period of 90 days.
(c) Documentation required toward satisfaction of the provisions
of (b)[2] through (b)[4] preceding, shall include:
[1] A list of the names and addresses of all owners of real
property within 200 feet of the lot, as certified by the
municipality, including owners of easements as shown on
the tax duplicate;
[2] A copy of each letter that the applicant sent under this
subsection;
[3] Receipts indicating that the letters were sent by certified
mail;
[4] A copy of all responses received. Each response shall be
submitted to the NJDEP within 15 days after the
applicant's receipt of the response (for Major Highlands
Development) or, for non-Major Highlands Development,
to the reviewing municipal authority at the time of the
application seeking approval for the proposed
disturbance;
[5] A copy of the fair market value appraisal sent to all
property owners within 200 feet as required under (b)[2]
above; and
[6] A copy of a written response or a resolution from the
Highlands Council demonstrating that it has considered
and rejected the offer.
(d) An alternative shall not be excluded from consideration under
this subsection merely because it includes or requires an area
not owned by the applicant that could reasonably be obtained,
§ 330-234.2.5 VERNON CODE § 330-234.2.5
1:806
§ 330-234.2.6. Riparian Area Standards.
The provisions of this subsection shall apply only to those portions of the
Riparian Area that extend beyond the limits of designated Highlands Open
Waters and associated 300-foot Highlands Open Waters buffers.
utilized, expanded or managed in order to fulfill the basic
purpose of the proposed linear development.
(e) After consideration of the information required in (3)(a)
through (3)(d) above, the NJDEP will not issue an HPAA (for
Major Highlands Development) and the reviewing municipal
authority shall not approve any application pursuant to this
subsection if, either: the applicant has refused a fair market
value offer to purchase the property for which the driveway
linear development is sought, or the NJDEP (for Major
Highlands Development) or reviewing municipal authority (for
non-Major Highlands Development), as applicable, finds that
there is a reasonable alternative to the proposed linear
development.
A. Protection Zone and Wildlife Management Sub-Zone.
(1) Prohibitions. Disturbance of any portion of a Highlands Riparian
Area is prohibited except as provided at A(2), below, or where
associated with an approved Riparian Area restoration or
enhancement activity designed to improve the functional value of
the Riparian Area, in accordance with the parameters listed at
§ 330-234.6.7, below.
(2) Allowances. Disturbance of a Highlands Riparian Area shall be
permitted only within portions of such Areas which have been
previously disturbed, as demonstrated by submission of a property
survey in accordance with (2)(a), below. For purposes of this
subsection, a previously disturbed Riparian Area is one in which
one or more functional values, as listed at § 330-234.6.7 below,
have been and remain compromised by prior development activity
(excluding agricultural or horticultural uses) as evidenced by the
existence of buildings or other structures (including parking areas
and driveways, whether paved or gravel), and including associated
graded or compacted areas, areas stripped of natural vegetation,
maintained lawn areas, areas of fill or excavation, and other similar
features. Any new disturbance of such previously-disturbed areas
shall occur only in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection.
(a) All applications proposing a Riparian Area disturbance
pursuant to this subsection shall be accompanied by a property
survey prepared by a licensed New Jersey Land Surveyor,
indicating: the metes and bounds of the subject property; the
location and dimensions of existing buildings and other
§ 330-234.2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.2.6
1:807
structures located thereon; the limits and extent of graded,
compacted, filled or excavated areas; the limits and extent of
areas stripped of natural vegetation, of maintained lawn areas;
and any other site improvements provided in support of the
prior development. The full extent of the proposed area of new
disturbance shall be clearly indicated on the site or parcel plan
submitted with the application, with the previously-disturbed
area(s) illustrated on the same sheet using shaded or shadow
outline features.
(b) Authorization for any new disturbance within a previouslydisturbed
area shall be approved only upon a finding by the
reviewing board or other applicable municipal authority that
the proposal meets the following requirements:
[1] The proposed new disturbance will occur fully within the
previously-disturbed area(s), as evidenced by both the
property survey and the plan proposal submitted in
support of the application;
[2] The proposal incorporates measures that will enhance the
functional value of the affected buffer area by means such
as, but not limited to: reducing impervious coverage,
replacing maintained grass lawns with naturalized areas,
upgrading soil erosion and sedimentation controls, and
providing for planting of native trees, grasses, or other
vegetation appropriate to the riparian environment that
support the functions of the Highland Open Waters buffer;
[3] The proposal incorporates Low Impact Development
techniques (see § 330-235.2) appropriate to the nature of
the activity and the riparian aspects of the buffer area in
question; and
[4] The proposed plan will enhance one or more of the buffer
functions listed at § 330-234.2.7, below; will result in no
net loss of any one of the listed buffer functions; and will
provide an overall improvement in the functional value of
the affected buffer area, when compared with pre-existing
conditions.
(c) The allowances of this subsection shall not be construed to
authorize improvements or development activity of any kind
within any portion of a Highlands Riparian Area if the
previously-disturbed area, or any portion thereof, is proven to
be the result of unlawful activity.
B. All Other Zones and Sub-Zones.
(1) High and Moderate Integrity Riparian Areas. Disturbance shall be
permitted only upon a finding by the reviewing board or other
§ 330-234.2.6 VERNON CODE § 330-234.2.6
1:808
applicable municipal authority that the application includes or
satisfactorily addresses each of the following requirements:
(a) Demonstration that the proposed disturbance can neither be
avoided nor reduced in extent or loss of quality, while
adequately providing for the proposed use;
(b) Demonstration that the proposed disturbance will result in no
net loss of the quality of adjacent Highlands Open Waters, in
accordance with § 330-234.2.7, below;
(c) Demonstration that the proposed improvement plan minimizes
impacts to the other functional values of the affected Riparian
Area, as provided at § 330-234.2.7, below;
(d) Incorporation of Low Impact Development techniques
(pursuant to § 330-235.2) appropriate to both the proposed
activity and the riparian nature of the site, and designed to
minimize Riparian Area disturbances while maximizing
retention of natural features and Riparian Area functional
value; and
(e) Submission, approval and implementation of a Riparian Area
Mitigation Plan providing for restoration of impaired Riparian
Areas located either, or in combination, in the following order
of preference: on the site of the proposed disturbance, within
the same HUC14 subwatershed as the site of the proposed
disturbance, within the nearest interrelated HUC14
subwatershed having impaired or disturbed areas in need of
restoration, or within the nearest unrelated HUC14
subwatershed having impaired or disturbed areas in need of
restoration. Mitigation shall at minimum, be commensurate in
scale, effect and extent with the disturbance approved
pursuant to this subsection. A Mitigation Plan pursuant to this
subsection shall be approved only where it provides
improvements to one or more Riparian Area functions, as listed
at § 330-234.2.7, below, while ensuring no net loss in the
quality or contributory effect of an existing function.
(2) Low Integrity Riparian Areas. In the case of any Riparian Area that
is determined through a functional value assessment performed in
accordance with the parameters at § 330-234.2.7, below, to
contribute significantly to the protection of a Highlands Open
Waters feature, any proposed disturbance shall occur only in
accordance with the provisions at § 330-234.2.6B(1), above, for
High and Moderate Integrity Riparian Areas. Disturbance of any
other Riparian Areas shall be permitted contingent upon
satisfaction of § 330-234.2.6B(1)(d) through B(1)(e), above.
§ 330-234.2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.2.7
1:809
§ 330-234.2.7. Functional Value Assessment Required.
Prior to the approval of any application proposing disturbance of a
Highlands Open Waters buffer (with the exception of any Major Highlands
Development approved pursuant to § 330-234.2.5G(1), above) or of a
Highlands Riparian Area regulated at § 330-234.2.6 above, a functional
value assessment shall be performed to indicate the health and contributory
value of the buffer or Riparian Area under existing conditions. All such
assessments shall be completed by a qualified professional and shall include
a general description and evaluation of each of the components listed herein
below. In addition, assessments shall provide a net gain/loss projection
concerning each of the functional values, as applicable, based upon
anticipated post-disturbance conditions. Such projections shall take into
account all facets of the proposed application to determine anticipated
impacts, whether beneficial or detrimental to functional values. Key
functional values include but are not limited to habitat, stormwater and
flood water retention and filtration, water quality protection, temperature
moderation, aquatic ecosystem integrity and channel integrity.
§ 330-234.3. Steep slopes.
A. Habitat. A reduction in aquatic habitat functional value will occur in the
event of a net loss of in-stream food sources or of access to such
sources. A loss of terrestrial habitat functional value will occur in the
event of a shift to a less valuable overall vegetative condition based on
the following hierarchy from highest value to lowest: forest or wetland,
scrub/shrub, pasture or meadow, agriculture, maintained lawn,
unpaved impervious surface, other structures.
B. Water Quality. A degradation of this functional value will occur if, as a
result of the proposed land conversions, pollutant loads increase to the
Highlands Open Waters.
C. Temperature Moderation. A loss in temperature moderation functional
value will occur if changes to the existing vegetation result in reduced
shading of the Highlands Open Waters feature or of increased
stormwater that discharges to Highlands Open Waters. Further, a loss
in temperature moderation functional value may occur with the heating
of stormwater by new structures and other impervious surface.
Mitigation approaches include removing or relocating impervious
surfaces away from the Highlands Open Water or ensuring that
stormwater temperature is reduced through shading or other
techniques.
D. Channel Integrity. A loss of channel integrity functional value will occur
if the project will result in: the loss of bank stabilizing vegetation; an
increase in the peak rate of stream flow, or in localized scour potential,
which will increase stream bank and stream bed erosion; or the removal
or burial of aquatic habitat in any substantial part of a stream bed.
§ 330-234.2.7 VERNON CODE § 330-234.3.1
1:810
§ 330-234.3.1. Findings.
Disturbance of steep slopes can trigger soil erosion and sedimentation,
resulting in the loss of topsoil. Steep slope disturbance can contribute
to siltation of wetlands, lakes, ponds and streams, which damages and
degrades wetland and aquatic habitats. Steep slope disturbance can also
result in alteration of drainage patterns, which when severe, can result in
land slumping and landslides. Protection of steep slope areas is essential to
the safety and stability of the human and non-human environment. Avoiding
disturbance of steep slopes protects surface water quality, plant and wildlife
habitat, and habitat quality. It also protects ridgelines, hillsides, and
mountainous features that provide variation in the landscape, contribute
to scenic viewsheds, offer unique recreational opportunities, and in many
instances, define the character of an area or region.
The severity and extent of steep slopes, in conjunction with applicable soil
characteristics and type and extent of land cover, all affect the potential
for damages from the disturbance of steep slopes. The provisions of this
section are intended to protect the citizens, buildings and structures, and
the natural environment and living ecosystems of the community from harm
due to disturbance of steep slopes.
§ 330-234.3.2. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to the Steep Slope Protection
Area (Exhibit 5) and to any other portion of the Highlands Preservation
Area determined to consist of 5,000 square feet or more of contiguous
steep slope(s) (as defined at § 330-231.2). For purposes of making such
determinations, slopes shall be calculated for every two-foot contour
interval over the full extent of the existing slope features, regardless of the
location of property or other jurisdictional boundary lines.
§ 330-234.3.3. Steep Slope Standards.
A. Severely and Moderately Constrained Slopes. Disturbance of Severely
Constrained and Moderately Constrained Slopes is prohibited, with the
exception of that required in connection with a linear development.
Such linear development, however, shall be permitted only in the event
that there is no feasible alternative for such development outside of the
Severely Constrained or Moderately Constrained Slopes.
(1) To address the "no feasible alternative for linear development"
standard, the applicant shall demonstrate that there is no other
location, design or configuration for the proposed linear
development that would reduce or eliminate the disturbance of
Severely Constrained or Moderately Constrained Slopes. For
proposed linear development that would provide access to an
otherwise developable lot the applicant shall in addition, show that:
(a) The proposed linear development is the only point of access for
roadways or utilities to an otherwise developable lot; and
§ 330-234.3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.3.3
1:811
(b) Shared driveways are used to the maximum extent possible to
access multiple lots.
(2) For a driveway, the applicant shall, in addition, demonstrate that:
(a) The applicant has made a good faith effort to transfer
development rights for the lot based on the allocation of
Highlands Development Credits certified by the Highlands
Development Credit Bank, and has not obtained a commitment
from the Highlands Development Credit Bank, a willing buyer,
or a TDR receiving zone municipality to purchase said
Highlands Development Credits;
(b) The lot has been offered for sale at an amount no greater than
the specific fair market value to all property owners within 200
feet of the lot, and to the land conservancies, environmental
organizations, the Highlands Council and all other government
agencies on a list provided by the Highlands Council, at an
amount determined in compliance with N.J.S.A. 13:8C-26j or
N.J.S.A. 13:8C-38j, as applicable;
(c) Said offering under A(2)(b) was made by letter sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, with a copy to the Highlands
Council: a) disclosing the location on the lot of all Highlands
resource areas as provided by an RMP Consistency
Determination Report developed using the Highlands Council
website; b) stating that an application to develop the lot has
been filed; and c) enclosing a copy of a fair market value
appraisal performed by a state-licensed appraiser based on the
minimum beneficial economically viable use of the property
allowable under local law; and
(d) No reasonable offer for the lot has been received within a
minimum period of 90 days.
(3) Documentation required toward satisfaction of the provisions of
(2)(b) through (2)(d) preceding, shall include:
(a) A list of the names and addresses of all owners of real property
within 200 feet of the lot, as certified by the municipality,
including owners of easements as shown on the tax duplicate;
(b) A copy of each letter that the applicant sent under this
subsection;
(c) Receipts indicating that the letters were sent by certified mail;
(d) A copy of all responses received. Each response shall be
submitted to the reviewing municipal authority at the time of
the application seeking approval for the proposed disturbance;
(e) A copy of the fair market value appraisal sent to all property
owners within 200 feet as required under (2)(c) above; and
§ 330-234.3.3 VERNON CODE § 330-234.3.3
1:812
(f) A copy of a written response or a resolution from the Highlands
Council demonstrating that it has considered and rejected the
offer.
(4) An alternative shall not be excluded from consideration under this
subsection merely because it includes or requires an area not
owned by the applicant that could reasonably be obtained, utilized,
expanded, or managed in order to fulfill the basic purpose of the
proposed linear development.
(5) After consideration of the information required in A(1) through A(4)
above, the reviewing municipal authority shall not approve any
application pursuant to this subsection if, either: the applicant has
refused a fair market value offer to purchase the property for which
the driveway linear development is sought, or the reviewing
municipal authority finds that there is a reasonable alternative to
the proposed linear development.
B. Constrained or Limited Constrained Slopes. Disturbance shall be
permitted only upon a finding by the reviewing board or other
applicable municipal authority that the application includes or
satisfactorily addresses each of the requirements following:
(1) Demonstration that the proposed steep slope disturbance can
neither be avoided nor reduced in extent, while adequately
providing for the proposed use.
(2) Incorporation of Low Impact Development techniques (pursuant to
§ 330-235.2) appropriate to both the proposed activity and the
steep slope environment, designed to reduce the extent of
disturbance areas, stabilize areas that are disturbed, provide for
stormwater management, and protect adjacent areas during site
construction.
(3) Development layout shall be designed to:
(a) Minimize the need for landform grading and retaining
structures;
(b) Incorporate a cluster development format, where feasible, to
minimize the extent of development on steep slopes; and
(c) Disturb steep slopes (where such disturbance cannot be
avoided) having the minimum potential for slope instability.
(4) Site design shall:
(a) Incorporate stabilization techniques that emphasize
bioengineering;
(b) Ensure minimized soil loss during and after construction
through steep slope-appropriate soil erosion and sediment
control techniques;
§ 330-234.3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.3.3
1:813
§ 330-234.4. Critical habitat.
§ 330-234.4.1. Findings.
Habitat protection is critical to maintaining biodiversity and providing for
the needs of rare, threatened and endangered plant and animal species.
Biodiversity is the variety of plant species, animal species and all other
organisms found in a particular environment, and is a critical indicator of
ecological integrity. This Ordinance establishes three categories of Critical
Habitat in the Highlands Preservation Area, as set forth at § 330-232.3.5,
above. Critical Wildlife Habitat includes lands containing habitat for rare,
threatened and endangered wildlife species. Significant Natural Areas are
those Natural Heritage Program (NHP) Priority Sites within the Highlands
Region that are regionally significant due to the presence of either rare
or endangered plant species or of unusual or exemplary natural ecological
communities. Vernal pools are unique ecosystems that: provide critical
breeding habitat for a variety of amphibian and invertebrate species;
contribute to local biodiversity by supporting plants, animals and
invertebrates that would otherwise not occur in the landscape; and
contribute significant amounts of food to adjacent habitats.
Protection of Critical Habitat is essential to the well-being of a wide variety
of plants and animals making up the unique ecosystems of the Highlands
Preservation Area. Such protection is vital to the survival of numerous rare,
threatened and endangered species. Protection of Critical Habitat is in the
interest of the Township and the Highlands Region, as a whole, not only for
its contributions to ecosystem stability and biodiversity, but for its role in
the health and stability of the human environment, and its contributions to
aesthetic values.
§ 330-234.4.2. Disturbance Prohibited.
Disturbance of any portion of any lands located within designated Critical
Habitat areas of the Highlands Preservation Area (Exhibit 6), including
Critical Wildlife Habitat, Significant Natural Areas, and Vernal Pools,
including the 1,000-foot protection buffer,, is prohibited, with the exception
only of such disturbance as may be authorized by the NJDEP through
issuance of an HPAA for Major Highlands Development in the Preservation
Area. Until or unless the municipality has adopted a Habitat Conservation
and Management Plan (see § 330-234.4.3), relief from this provision shall
remain under the sole authority and jurisdiction of the Highlands Council.
(c) Prevent direct discharge of stormwater into Highlands Open
Waters features;
(d) Provide for control of stormwater velocity and volume such
that no net increase in run-off rates occurs between pre- and
post-conditions; and
(e) Provide for maximum protection of existing trees, woodlands
and surrounding natural vegetated areas.
§ 330-234.3.3 VERNON CODE § 330-234.4.2
1:814
Any application proposing disturbance of Critical Habitat shall be neither
deemed complete, nor reviewed or considered by the municipal Board
or other applicable authority, until such time as authorization has been
obtained from the Highlands Council in the form of a formal notification
from the Executive Director of the Highlands Council, indicating by
reference to specified plan drawings (including date, title, plan sheet
number(s), and plan preparer) that the limits and extent of the disturbance
proposed within the application has been approved.
§ 330-234.4.3. Habitat Conservation and Management Plan.
Upon Township adoption of a Habitat Conservation and Management Plan,
which, inclusive of any accompanying ordinances, rules or regulations,
shall be approved by the Highlands Council, all applications proposing
disturbance of a Critical Habitat area shall be filed, reviewed and
considered in accordance with the provisions and criteria provided therein.
§ 330-234.5. Carbonate rock.
§ 330-234.5.1. Findings.
The Carbonate Rock Area identifies portions of the Highlands Preservation
Area underlain by carbonate bedrock or known to contain karst topography.
Solution (by water) of carbonate rocks such as limestone and dolomite
by surface water or ground water can cause surface depressions and
development of irregular, sub-surface rock topography known as karst.
These conditions make such areas unstable and susceptible to subsidence
and surface collapse. Karst conditions can lead to formation of sinkholes,
sinking streams, enlarged bedrock fractures, caves and underground
streams. Sinkholes function as funnels, directing surface water runoff into
karst aquifers with little or no attenuation of transported contaminants.
Stormwater basins, septic system leach fields, sewers, agricultural runoff,
lawn runoff, underground pipelines, and soil disturbance all can contribute
contaminants directly to ground water through karst features. Soils in
sinkhole bottoms may be thin or non-existent. In addition to potential for
ground water contamination, karst features present a threat to public
safety. Sinkholes and other karst formations can undermine buildings and
structures, including infrastructure facilities, such as roads, natural gas
lines, water supply and sewer lines, septic systems and stormwater basins.
The provisions of this section are intended to protect the citizens, buildings
and structures, and the natural environment, particularly the ground water
resources of the Highlands Preservation Area from the potential for harm or
physical damage associated with land development in the Carbonate Rock
Area.
§ 330-234.5.2. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all proposed development in the
Carbonate Rock Area (Exhibit 7).
§ 330-234.4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.5.3
1:815
§ 330-234.5.3. Geotechnical Investigation Required.
Any Application for Development within the limits of the Carbonate Rock
Area shall be preceded by a Geotechnical Investigation, as provided in this
subsection. No such development application shall be deemed complete or
considered for review by the applicable land use board or other designated
municipal authority until such time as the Geotechnical Investigation
program described herein has been satisfactorily completed, as certified by
the individual(s) designated to review and make such findings on behalf of
the municipality (see C., below).
A. Purpose. The purpose for the Geotechnical Investigation is to locate
karst features that may be affected by the development proposal, to
reveal the potential threats to public health, safety or welfare, or
ground water quality that may result, and to determine the most
appropriate ways to address these issues in the design and
implementation of the project proposal.
B. Professional Required. The Geotechnical Investigation must be
conducted by a qualified professional, such as geologist, soils or
geotechnical engineer, or other licensed professional engineer having
experience in karst area investigations and associated development.
C. Municipal Review. Review and oversight of Geotechnical Investigations
shall fall under the purview of the Municipal Engineer. For purposes of
this subsection, the "Municipal Engineer" shall refer to the qualified
professional engineer or geological expert designated by the
municipality to provide review and recommendations concerning
matters of a geotechnical nature.
D. Program. The investigation shall occur in two phases, wherein the
results of the first shall determine the need for and extent of
requirements, pertinent to the second.
(1) Phase I Investigation.
(a) The investigation shall commence with completion of a Phase I
Geological Investigation which shall identify the geologic
nature of the materials underlying the site. This assessment
shall be based on review of existing available information, such
as prior investigation reports on properties proximate to the
subject parcel(s), aerial photography, as well as on-site field
investigation.
(b) Phase I findings shall be provided in a summary report
including: a description of the site geology; ground water
conditions such as depth to water table and direction of flow;
an evaluation of the potential impact of the project on ground
water quality; and identification of any karst features
observed. In addition, the report shall include the geological
professional's recommendations as to whether, in light of the
proposed development plan, a Phase II Geological
§ 330-234.5.3 VERNON CODE § 330-234.5.3
1:816
Investigation should be prepared and submitted, and whether
any portion of the requirements of the Phase II Investigation
should be waived.
(c) The applicant's geological professional and the Municipal
Engineer shall review the applicant's Phase I findings in the
field.
(d) The Municipal Engineer shall determine whether a Phase II
Investigation shall be required, based on the data submitted
and the recommendation of the applicant's geological
professional. The Municipal Engineer may grant a waiver from
parts of the Phase II geotechnical evaluation or from part or all
of the reporting requirements if in his/her professional opinion,
such aspects are not relevant or necessary in formulating the
proposed development plan for the site or property in question.
(e) In the event that a Phase II Investigation is not required, the
Municipal Engineer shall provide written certification that the
applicant has satisfactorily completed the requirements of the
Geotechnical Investigation. Such certification shall include any
conditions pertinent to the issuance of such certification that
the Municipal Engineer may deem necessary or appropriate to
ensure the geotechnical sufficiency of the proposed
development plan. All materials developed in the course of the
Phase I Investigation, inclusive of the Municipal Engineer's
evaluation report(s) and recommendations, shall be provided
to the municipal board or authority having jurisdiction over the
development application.
(2) Phase II Investigation.
(a) The purpose of the Phase II Investigation is to delineate and
define karst features noted or suspected in the Phase I
Geological Investigation, to evaluate the effects of those
features on the proposed development, and to propose
methods of protection and mitigation if needed.
(b) A Phase II Investigation Plan shall include a narrative
describing the types of features to be investigated, their
locations, the types of direct/indirect methods to be used and
the reasons for their use. Indirect methods include the use of
aerial photography, satellite imagery and geophysical
procedures, such as ground penetrating radar, electrical
conductivity, electrical resistivity, magnetic field, very low
frequency measurement, gravity field recording and seismic
velocity measurements. Direct methods shall include test pits,
test probes, test borings or other appropriate methods. A plan
indicating the areas of investigation, proposed locations of
testing and types of testing shall accompany the Phase II
Investigation Plan.
§ 330-234.5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.5.3
1:817
(c) After the Phase II Investigation Plan has been approved by the
Municipal Engineer, formal notification shall be issued to the
applicant authorizing the commencement of the testing
procedures. The development site shall be subject to
inspection by the Municipal Engineer or designated municipal
inspectors at any time. All testing data and results shall be
made available to municipal officials and inspectors upon
request. Any samples taken shall be properly preserved and
shall be available for examination by the Municipal Engineer
until final action is taken by the approval authority on the
application.
(d) At the completion of the Phase II Investigation, a formal
Geotechnical Evaluation Report shall be submitted which shall
include a geologic interpretation of the observed subsurface
conditions, including soil and rock type, geologic unit, jointing,
faulting, voids, fracturing, grain size and sinkhole formation. In
addition:
[1] The Report shall provide all information gathered in the
course of the testing protocol, including, as applicable:
logs of all borings, test pits, and probes including evidence
of cavities; loss of drilling fluid circulation during drilling;
voids encountered and similar cavities; type of drilling or
excavation technique employed; drawings of monitoring or
observation wells as installed; time and dates of
explorations and tests; reports of chemical analyses of onsite
surface and ground water; names of individuals
conducting tests if other than the applicant's designated
professional; analytical methods used on soils, water
samples, and rock samples; a 1" = 100' scale topographic
map of the site (at a contour interval of two feet) locating
all test pits, borings, wells, seismic or electromagnetic
conductivity or other geophysical surveys; and analysis of
the ground water including any potentiometric maps
constructed from site data or aquifer tests with rate and
direction of flow.
[2] The Report shall include an evaluation of the geotechnical
findings in relation to the proposed development, and
recommendations for the planning, engineering design
and construction techniques to be utilized in
accomplishing the project. All design recommendations
shall minimize, to the greatest extent practical, impacts
upon water quality and structural hazards associated with
carbonate rock formations. The engineering solutions
proposed to minimize environmental and structural
impacts must be clearly detailed.
(e) The Municipal Engineer shall consider the data, formal
reports, maps, drawings and related submission materials and
§ 330-234.5.3 VERNON CODE § 330-234.5.3
1:818
§ 330-234.5.4. Carbonate Rock Drainage Area.
Applicants seeking approval of development activities in subwatersheds
that drain directly to the Carbonate Rock Area shall conduct a Phase
I Geological Investigation. The Phase I investigation and Municipal
Engineer's review shall ensure that any proposed development activity
having potential to alter the types, volumes, or rates of runoff entering
the Carbonate Rock Area, shall be designed to prevent the formation or
enlargement of sinkholes, the introduction of contaminated surface water
into ground water aquifers via sinkholes or cavities, or the lowering of the
water table.
determine whether the proposed design satisfactorily
provides:
[1] Sufficient design, construction and operational
information to ensure that the proposed development of
the tract will not adversely affect the health, safety and
welfare of the community;
[2] Specific details demonstrating that the proposed method
of development of the tract will minimize any adverse
effects on the quality of surface or subsurface water, and
will not alter the character of surface and/or subsurface
water flow in a manner detrimental to known on-site or offsite
conditions;
[3] Specific details ensuring that design concepts and
construction and operational procedures intended to
protect surface and subsurface waters will be properly
implemented; and
[4] Specific details on inspection procedures to be followed
during construction and after project completion.
(f) The Municipal Engineer shall, within 45 days of submission of
the Phase II Geotechnical Evaluation Report, provide the
applicant with a written response, evaluating the adequacy of
the Investigation, the sufficiency of information to make the
necessary findings, and a review and recommendations, if any,
concerning the geotechnical aspects of the proposed
development plan and associated construction and mitigation
techniques.
(g) Upon a finding of sufficiency, the Municipal Engineer shall
certify that the applicant has satisfactorily completed the
Geotechnical Investigation, and all materials developed in the
course of the Investigation process, inclusive of the Municipal
Engineer's evaluation report(s) and recommendations, shall be
provided to the municipal board or authority having
jurisdiction over the development application.
§ 330-234.5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.5.5
1:819
§ 330-234.5.5. Conditions of Development Application Approval.
Where a Geotechnical Investigation is required in connection with a
development application that will subsequently be filed with the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Municipal Engineer shall provide
recommendations to the Board concerning the application during the
course of its review and decision making. For all other applications
requiring a Geotechnical Investigation, the recommendations and
requirements of the Municipal Engineer shall have final force and authority
and shall be incorporated into any approval issued by the reviewing
authority.
A. In no case shall an Application for Development, in either the Carbonate
Rock Area or in a subwatershed that drains directly to the Carbonate
Rock Area, be approved unless the applicant has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the reviewing board or other municipal authority (in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer) that all potential hazards to
public health and safety, structures and ground water are fully
addressed and mitigated, with the maximum emphasis given to
nonstructural measures, such as avoidance of modifications to the karst
features, use of dry swales to divert run-off away from karst features,
minimization of site disturbance, and removal or minimization of
impervious surface.
B. The following conditions shall accompany the approval of any
Application for Development in the Carbonate Rock Area:
(1) The location of all sinkholes, disappearing streams or karst
features shown on documents submitted under the Phase I and/or
Phase II Geologic Investigations shall be drawn on all preliminary
and final plats, site plans and parcel plans. These shall also note
any site remediation techniques to be utilized to stabilize any
solution channels or subsidence karst features.
(2) In the event a previously unidentified carbonate rock feature
posing a geologic hazard is discovered during construction, the
applicant shall:
(a) Report the occurrence of the hazard to the Municipal Engineer
within twenty-four (24) hours of discovery;
(b) Halt construction activities which would affect the geologic
hazard;
(c) Prepare a report on the geologic hazard which analyzes the
impact of the hazard and details a remediation plan for review
and approval by the Municipal Engineer;
(d) After obtaining approval from the Municipal Engineer, perform
necessary remediation of the hazard to prevent or minimize
damage to buildings, structures, utilities, driveways, parking
§ 330-234.5.5 VERNON CODE § 330-234.5.5
1:820
§ 330-234.6. Lake management area.
§ 330-234.6.1. Findings.
The Lake Management Area (Exhibit 3) contains all lakes located within
the Highlands Preservation Area that have a surface area greater than
ten (10) acres and all land areas that drain into lakes in the Highlands
Region of such size, including the three management tiers established
at § 330-232.3.7. Highlands lakes contribute to the character and natural
beauty of the Township, comprising a unique feature that is important to
both the community and the surrounding region. Highlands lakes provide
important recreational opportunities, support aquatic ecosystems, and
moderate local atmospheric temperatures. Lakes represent an important
interconnection in the wider system of rivers, streams and underground
springs and aquifers that support life and contribute to community water
supplies. Lakes can be harmed by pollutant sources in the watershed area
draining to them. Polluted lakes can, in turn, damage downstream streams
and rivers. Overdeveloped, damaged and poorly managed shore land areas
can degrade water quality, harm lake ecosystems, diminish natural
aesthetic values, and cause an overall loss of property values for lake
communities. It is the intent of the provisions of this section to ensure that
Highlands lakes receive the highest level of protection while at the same
time providing for recreational access and opportunity, and development
and redevelopment activities that are compatible with and appropriate to
lake environments.
§ 330-234.6.2. Shoreland Protection Tier.
The Shoreland Protection Tier encompasses the lands within a Lake
Management Area surrounding a Highlands lake that lie within 300 feet
of its shoreline. As such, these lands coincide with and are defined as
Highlands Open Waters buffers pursuant to § 330-234.2.5, above. All
provisions applicable to Highlands Open Waters buffers as provided therein,
shall apply fully to the Shoreland Protection Tier of any lake in the Lake
Management Area.
§ 330-234.6.3. Water Quality Management Tier.
areas, roadways and other site improvements, and to minimize
pollution of the ground water;
(e) Repair any damage to improvements and restore ground cover
and landscaping;
(f) In those cases where the hazard cannot be repaired without
adversely affecting a site plan or subdivision approval, the
applicant shall file an amended application for such approval in
compliance with the provisions of the municipal ordinances.
A. Any application proposing a disturbance within the Water Quality
Management Tier shall be authorized only provided the reviewing
§ 330-234.5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.6.3
1:821
board or other applicable municipal authority finds that the proposal
protects lake water quality, by implementation of the requirements of
this subsection. The Water Quality Management Tier consists of all
Preservation Area lands draining into a Highlands lake that lie within
1,000 feet of its shoreline, subsuming the whole of the Shoreland
Protection Tier. As such, these provisions shall not be construed to
waive or obviate the requirements of either the preceding section
§ 330-234.6.2, or of § 330-234.2.5 above concerning Highlands Open
Waters buffers. Water Quality Protection Requirements. To prevent or
minimize continuous pollutant sources that can contribute pollutants
overland or through ground water to the lake from greater distances
than the Shoreland Protection Tier, the following measures shall be
incorporated into all development proposals:
(1) All disturbed parcels shall be provided with landscape or garden
elements which retain stormwater, minimizing the potential for
increases in the volume, time of concentration, or concentrated
flow of runoff from the property. Such elements shall be designed to
ensure to the maximum extent feasible, that during larger storms,
water is released through overland sheet flow across a vegetated,
naturally landscaped area.
(2) All new development shall direct runoff from roofs, driveways and
patios into landscape or garden elements which retain and filter
stormwater, or to infiltration basins, trenches or other such
appropriate stormwater management devices.
(3) Stormwater management plans shall be designed to direct run-off
away from the shoreline and to avoid stormwater discharges
directly to the lake to the maximum extent feasible.
(4) Stormwater shall be directed to a stormwater treatment train that
cleans and reduces the rate of runoff to the maximum extent
possible. Stormwater treatment trains shall maximize the use of
swales with natural vegetation, infiltration mechanisms or
constructed wetlands, and discharge through a constructed
wetland or other channel that maximizes aeration and cleaning of
water to the maximum extent feasible.
(5) The discharge of stormwater shall be through sheet flow, where
feasible, which may require the construction of an outlet that
disperses the water over a substantial distance at a constant
elevation so that water sheet flows over the top.
B. Approvals Subject to Outside Agency Approvals. Nothing herein shall
be construed to relieve the applicant from the applicable rules,
regulations and design requirements of any other agency having
jurisdiction, including but not limited to the NJDEP (e.g., Freshwater
Wetland Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7, Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:8, Flood Hazard Area Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, NJPDES Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:14A), a Soil Conservation District acting pursuant to Soil Erosion &
§ 330-234.6.3 VERNON CODE § 330-234.6.3
1:822
§ 330-234.6.4. Scenic Resources Tier. [Ord. No. 2014-09 § 6.6.4;
Ord. No. 2014-19]
The Scenic Resources Tier includes Preservation Area lands surrounding
Highlands lakes that lie within 300 feet of the shoreline (the Shoreland
Protection Tier) plus lands within 1,000 feet of the shoreline that fall
within the viewshed observable from the opposite shoreline. The provisions
of this section are applicable to any development otherwise permitted in
the Scenic Resources Tier. These requirements apply in addition to all
requirements applicable to the Shoreland Protection Tier and Water Quality
Management Tier.
Sediment Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 2:90), or any county or other
regional entity having authority pursuant to an adopted Regional
Stormwater Plan.
C. Optional Additional Measures.
(1) The use of green roofs is encouraged in the Lake Management
Zone, to clean and slow the release of stormwater.
(2) Clustering in accordance with the provisions of the Cluster
Development Ordinance (§ 330-236.1) is also encouraged, where it
results in a greater buffer between the lake and any new septic
system or other land disturbance than would otherwise be feasible.
A. Scenic Resources Tier Mapping. For purposes of this section, applicants
may establish and indicate in submission materials that all lands falling
within 1,000 feet of the shoreline of a Highlands lake (coincident with
the Water Quality Management Tier) constitute the designated Scenic
Resources Tier viewshed. In the alternative, the actual limits of the
affected viewshed area must be delineated and mapped for submission
by a licensed Land Surveyor, Professional Engineer, Landscape
Architect, or other qualified professional. Such delineations shall be
based upon the topography of the lands surrounding the Highlands
lake, with the highest observable elevations from the opposing
shoreline forming the viewshed perimeter. For purposes of this
Ordinance, observable elevations shall be those projected by use of
topographic maps, regardless of any intervening building, structure,
tree or other natural vegetation, along sight lines drawn radially from
relevant vantage points along the opposing shoreline; such vantage
points being sufficient in number and location to yield the full extent of
the potential view. The viewshed perimeter shall in no location be less
than the 300-foot depth of the Shoreland Protection Tier.
B. Protection Standards. For all lakes with public access (i.e., with
shorelines that are not entirely privately-held and managed through a
lake association), and for privately-held and managed lakes to the
extent not contrary to statutory law or previously approved lake
community development plans, the applicant must demonstrate that
§ 330-234.6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.6.4
1:823
§ 330-234.7. Water conservation & deficit mitigation.
§ 330-234.7.1. Findings.
The water resources of the Highlands Preservation Area are critical to
supporting the life of the community. Ground water supplies represent
the primary source of potable water in the Highlands Region and provide
base flow to the Region's streams. The importance of ensuring the high
quality and sustainable use of Highlands ground water supplies cannot
be overstated. The availability of clean water for human use is critical
to the life and economic vitality of the Highlands Preservation Area. The
availability of water for ecological purposes is critical to sustaining the
aquatic ecosystems of streams, ponds and lakes as well as the riparian
flora and fauna that depend upon them. When water withdrawals exceed
the rate of recharge, ground water supplies diminish, making access more
difficult, reducing reliability, and ultimately leading to loss of the potable
water source. Overuse of ground water reduces stream base flows, impairs
ecological function and integrity, and threatens the long-term reliability of
potable water supplies that the community depends upon. The provisions of
the protection of visual and scenic resources in the Scenic Resource
Tier is achieved through implementation of the following requirements:
(1) The application must clearly illustrate and assess the extent to
which the proposed development will be visible from the opposite
shore of the lake. If the applicant demonstrates that the proposed
development will be completely obscured from view by virtue of
existing topographic features (specifically excluding buildings,
structures, trees or other vegetation) intervening between the
opposite shoreline and the development site, the remaining
provisions of this subsection shall not apply.
(2) Buildings shall be screened from view by trees and other native
plant material to the maximum extent practicable and compatible
with the existing character of the lake community, to minimize the
visual intrusion on views from the opposing shorelines.
(3) The massing of structures shall be designed and oriented to
minimize lot disturbance, including cut and fill work, and to avoid
blockage of views to the maximum extent possible.
(4) The exteriors of all new or redeveloped buildings shall be designed
and constructed with materials that minimize visual intrusion on
the lake community character.
(5) The clearing of trees shall be limited to the minimum extent needed
to develop the site.
(6) Any exterior lighting shall utilize full cut-off fixtures with light
directed downward and away from the shoreline to the extent
feasible.
§ 330-234.6.4 VERNON CODE § 330-234.7.1
1:824
this section are intended to protect ground water supplies from depletion
resulting from unsustainable use. Where ground water supplies are already
depleted, these provisions require measures to enhance and restore this
vital resource.
§ 330-234.7.2. Applicability.
The provisions of subsection § 330-234.7.3 below, shall apply to all
development within the Highlands Preservation Area. The remaining
provisions of this section shall apply to any development application
proposing a new or increased use of potable or nonpotable water derived
from: a) any ground water source in a Highlands Preservation Area HUC14
subwatershed, whether through a public community or non-community
water supply system well, a non-public well, or an individual private well;
or b) any surface water source in a Highlands Preservation Area HUC14
subwatershed that is not associated with a safe yield determined by the
NJDEP through a water allocation permit. Specifically excluded from these
provisions (§ 330-234.7.4 through § 330-234.7.7), are modifications or
improvements to existing uses and structures that result in neither, for
residential development (or any residential portion thereof) an increase in
the number of residential units, nor, for non-residential development (or any
non-residential portion thereof), an increase in water demand by an average
of 400 gallons per day or more.
§ 330-234.7.3. Water Conservation Requirements.
All development proposals shall incorporate as applicable, the following
water conservation measures to promote sound resource use, reduce supply
deficits, and reduce the need for additional utility infrastructure:
A. Meet all applicable building code requirements for the use of water
conservation fixtures and appliances in new or rehabilitated structures;
B. Provide automatic controls based on rain sensors (or soil moisture) for
all new and replacement lawn irrigation systems, as required by the
electrical subcode at N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.16;
C. Design all non-potable irrigation water uses to ensure that only the
necessary amounts of water are used to achieve optimum plant growth,
to the maximum extent practicable;
D. Provide for internal recycling or beneficial reuse of reclaimed water in
new commercial development projects, to the maximum extent
practicable;
E. Rely on stormwater for irrigation purposes to the maximum extent
practicable, including but not limited to methods recommended by the
U.S. Green Building Council through its Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) program;
F. Reduce water losses to the maximum extent practicable, in the
rehabilitation of on-site water supply utility infrastructure, through
§ 330-234.7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.7.3
1:825
§ 330-234.7.4. Net Water Availability.
Net Water Availability has been calculated by the Highlands Council for
each HUC14 subwatershed located within or partially within the Highlands
Preservation Area (Exhibit 10). Expressed in million gallons per day (MGD),
the values assigned to each HUC14 subwatershed derive from subtracting
consumptive and depletive surface and ground water uses for a baseline
year, from total ground water availability. Where Net Water Availability
figures are negative numbers, the subwatershed is identified as a Current
Deficit Area, meaning existing uses exceed sustainable supplies. The map
of Net Water Availability by HUC14 Subwatershed provided at Exhibit 10 is
herewith adopted and incorporated as a component of this Ordinance.
§ 330-234.7.5. Conditional Water Availability.
For subwatersheds designated as Current Deficit Areas, the Highlands
Council has assigned a limited amount of Conditional Water Availability, the
use of which is conditioned upon satisfying certain mitigation requirements.
Jurisdiction over the use of Conditional Water Availability lies solely with
the Highlands Council and shall apply in the case of Current Deficit Areas
until such time as a Water Use and Conservation Management Plan for such
subwatersheds has been adopted and put into effect.
§ 330-234.7.6. Water Use and Conservation Management Plan.
Where a Highlands Council-approved Water Use and Conservation
Management Plan has been established for a municipality, HUC14
subwatershed, or group of HUC14 subwatersheds, any development
application involving the use of water derived from such subwatershed(s)
shall be regulated fully in accordance with the requirements of such Plan.
Adherence to the provisions of an adopted Water Use and Conservation
Management Plan shall constitute satisfactory compliance with all of the
provisions of this section, including those pertaining to Net Water
Availability and Conditional Water Availability.
§ 330-234.7.7. Absence of Water Use and Conservation
Management Plan.
In the absence of a Highlands Council-approved Water Use and
Conservation Management Plan for a municipality, HUC14 subwatershed,
or group of HUC14 subwatersheds, any development application involving
the use of use water derived from such subwatershed(s) shall be subject to
requirements of this subsection.
such means as application of American Water Works Association/
International Water Association water loss analysis methods (AWWA
Manual M-36 or most recent version).
A. Net Water Availability. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to
any development application proposing the use of Net Water
§ 330-234.7.3 VERNON CODE § 330-234.7.7
1:826
Availability. These requirements shall apply regardless of whether such
water is supplied from an on-site well or through a water supply utility.
(1) Highlands Council Findings Required. No application shall be
deemed complete or considered for review by the applicable Board
until or unless the Highlands Council has determined that the
proposed consumptive or depletive water use will not exceed the
remaining Net Water Availability for the source HUC14
subwatershed(s). Such finding shall be provided by formal
notification from the Executive Director of the Highlands Council,
indicating by reference to specified application submittals (as
required by the Highlands Council) that the Highlands Council has
reviewed the specific development proposal at issue, and
authorizes the increased use of potable or non-potable water
therein specified.
(2) Findings Determinative. Any application revised from that
reviewed by the Highlands Council pursuant to A(1), above, shall in
no case be approved by the reviewing Board unless the proposed
use of Net Water Availability remains equal to or less than that
authorized by the Highlands Council through its formal findings.
Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the applicant from
seeking a revised Highlands Council determination as to Net Water
Availability, however.
B. Conditional Water Availability. The provisions of this subsection shall
apply to any development application proposing the use of Conditional
Water Availability. These requirements shall apply regardless of
whether such water is supplied from an on-site well or through a water
supply utility.
(1) Highlands Council Findings Required. No application shall be
deemed complete or considered for review by the applicable Board
until or unless a finding has been issued by the Highlands Council
indicating that: a) the proposed consumptive or depletive water use
will not exceed the remaining Conditional Water Availability for the
source HUC14 subwatershed(s); b) that the applicant has correctly
determined the associated mitigation requirement; c) that the
proposed development plan will incorporate or otherwise provide
for acceptable methods of deficit mitigation; and d) that the
mitigation measures proposed by the applicant can be reasonably
anticipated to meet the required level of mitigation. Such findings
shall be provided by formal notification from the Executive Director
of the Highlands Council, indicating by reference to specified
application submittals (as required by the Highlands Council) that
the Highlands Council has reviewed the relevant components of the
development proposal and authorizes it to proceed to the municipal
review authority.
(2) Findings Determinative. Any application revised from that
reviewed by the Highlands Council pursuant to B(1), above, shall in
§ 330-234.7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.7.7
1:827
no case be approved by the reviewing Board unless: a) the
proposed use of Conditional Water Availability remains equal to
or less than that authorized by the Highlands Council through its
formal findings; b) the proposed methods of deficit mitigation are
consistent with those so approved; and c) the anticipated levels
of mitigation are sufficient to meet the associated mitigation
requirements. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the
applicant from seeking a revised Highlands Council determination
as to Conditional Water Availability, however.
(3) Deficit Mitigation Requirements. Applicants proposing the use of
Conditional Water Availability shall comply with the deficit
mitigation requirements herein.
(a) The mitigation requirement applicable to any development
project derives from the Highlands Council Scaled Mitigation
Requirements table, provided below (Table 1). The figures
represent the applicable recharge requirement as a
percentage of consumptive/depletive water use.
Table 1. Scaled Mitigation Requirements
Proposed Consumptive or Depletive Water Use (gpd)
Deficit
(MGD) <= 1,000
1,001 —
5,000
5,001 —
10,000
10,001 —
25,000 >25,000
0.0001 —
0.050
125% 125% 125% 150% 150%
0.051 —
0.100
125% 125% 125% 150% 150%
0.101 —
0.250
125% 125% 150% 150% 175%
0.251 —
0.500
125% 150% 150% 175% 200%
0.501 —
1.000
125% 150% 175% 175% 200%
1.000 —
7.100
150% 175% 175% 200% 200%
(b) Deficit mitigation must be provided within the same HUC14
subwatershed as from which the source Conditional Water
Availability derives. If the project and water source are not
located in the same subwatershed, however, only mitigation
measures that benefit the source HUC14 subwatershed may be
utilized to mitigate the deficit.
(c) The approval of any application proposing off-site deficit
mitigation measures, whether through enhanced recharge or
offsets from water conservation, shall be subject to the receipt
§ 330-234.7.7 VERNON CODE § 330-234.7.7
1:828
of approvals from the Highlands Council and any other entities
having jurisdiction over the activities proposed at the off-site
location (whether located within or outside of the
municipality).
(d) On-site deficit mitigation measures, whether from enhanced
recharge or offsets from water conservation shall be subject to
the following criteria:
[1] Water Conservation Measures. Water Conservation
Measures may be credited toward mitigation requirements
only with respect to existing land uses with consumptive or
depletive water uses. (Such measures must be
incorporated into the design of any new improvements, in
accordance with § 330-234.7.3, above.) Approval of any
application proposing such measures shall be conditioned
upon implementation of the measures prior to receipt of
any Certificate of Occupancy or Approval for the project
improvements. If conservation measures include such
methods as reduced irrigation of landscaping, protective
covenants (e.g., homeowner's association by-laws) or other
such legal mechanisms must be established to ensure their
enforceability.
[2] Recharge Measures. The applicant shall include the
proposed mitigation measures in the project stormwater
management plan, stormwater operation and maintenance
manual, and applicable components of site design. The
stormwater management plan and O&M manual shall
achieve permanent maintenance and routine monitoring of
the mitigation measure(s) so that the required rate of
recharge is continuously achieved.
(e) Any application for which deficit mitigation requirements
cannot be achieved, shall not be approved by the reviewing
authority. The applicant may modify any such proposal,
however, to reduce the consumptive or depletive water uses to
a level at which achieving deficit mitigation requirements is
feasible. All applicants shall demonstrate compliance with
these standards through submission of a Deficit Mitigation
Plan, as provided below.
(4) Deficit Mitigation Plans. All applicants proposing deficit mitigation
shall prepare and submit Deficit Mitigation Plans for approval
which shall include the following elements:
(a) Detailed justification for the proposed Conditional Water
Availability use and documentation that the amount of
consumptive or depletive use is minimized (including the
conservation measures outlined in subsection § 330-234.7.3,
above).
§ 330-234.7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.7.7
1:829
(b) Engineering plans and drawings of mitigation facilities
proposed to provide the necessary mitigation in the source
HUC14 subwatershed.
(c) Sufficient information to demonstrate that the mitigation
measures are individually feasible and in the aggregate will
meet or exceed the mitigation requirement.
(d) Sufficient information to substantiate that the facility will
recharge the ground water table such that it reasonably can be
expected (e.g., using general ground water flow models) to
support aquifer recharge, or to support stream flow with a
travel time in excess of one month.
(e) Proposed implementation schedule demonstrating compliance
with the following timeframe targets:
[1] Satisfaction of mitigation requirements within one (1) year
of issuance of building permit(s) if the consumptive or
depletive water use is less than 10,000 gpd, on average.
[2] Satisfaction of mitigation requirements within a longer
time period for larger amounts, up to five (5) years from
issuance of building permit(s), but no later than upon
initiation of the consumptive or depletive water use,
except for projects that involve a combination of high
current water deficits and large proposed consumptive
and depletive water uses as shown in the shaded areas of
the table Scaled Mitigation Requirements (Table 1.,
above), in which case, on-site mitigation shall be
successfully completed prior to initiation of the water use
but may be implemented concurrent with on-site
construction. Off-site mitigation shall be successfully
completed prior to any on-site construction.
[3] Mitigation requirements may be phased in keeping with
the level of consumptive and depletive water use that
actually occurs based on phased construction of a project.
(f) Proposed operation, maintenance and monitoring
requirements to ensure that sufficient recharge is maintained
over time. These requirements shall at a minimum be sufficient
to comply with N.J.A.C. 7:8 stormwater maintenance
requirements.
(5) Conditions of Approval. As a condition of any approval of a
development application, inclusive of the proposed Deficit
Mitigation Plan, pursuant to this subsection, the applicant shall:
(a) Demonstrate that the entity designated to implement the
Deficit Mitigation Plan is qualified and capable of carrying out
the plan, regardless of the timeframe involved.
§ 330-234.7.7 VERNON CODE § 330-234.7.7
1:830
§ 330-234.8. Prime ground water recharge areas.
§ 330-234.8.1. Findings.
Prime Ground Water Recharge Areas are those lands within a HUC14
subwatershed that most efficiently provide, in the aggregate, 40 percent of
total drought recharge volume for the HUC14 subwatershed. Protection of
such areas is vital to maintaining the quality and quantity of the ground
water resources upon which both human and non-human communities in
the Highlands Preservation Area heavily rely. It is the intent of the
provisions herein to ensure that Prime Ground Water Recharge Areas of the
Highlands Preservation Area receive the highest possible protection from
intrusion to protect both the recharge capacity that they provide and the
quality of the ground water supplies that they replenish.
(b) Provide proof of acceptance of all responsibilities for
implementation of the Deficit Mitigation Plan by the
responsible entity.
(c) Provide a cost estimate for implementation of the Deficit
Mitigation Plan, inclusive of a 10% contingency.
(d) Provide performance and maintenance guarantees in
accordance with all municipal and MLUL requirements in
amounts as approved by the municipal engineer, sufficient to
ensure the installation and implementation of all required
Deficit Mitigation Plan measures. Such guarantees shall be
available to the municipality and secondarily, to the Highlands
Council for implementation of the necessary deficit mitigation
measures should the applicant fail to properly implement the
measures according to the Deficit Mitigation Plan schedule. If
the implementing entity is a public agency, the commitment
must be in the form of a binding resolution or ordinance of the
governing body, and the cost of implementation must be
bonded to ensure sufficient resources.
(e) Ensure that the responsible entity shall report annually to the
Highlands Council and the municipality regarding
implementation of the Deficit Mitigation Plan until fully
implemented, unless reporting is achieved through
effectuation of a Water Use and Conservation Management
Plan.
(f) Establish an ongoing system of such reporting which must
operate until the relevant subwatershed is no longer in deficit,
or until the reporting responsibility is absorbed into
implementation of an approved Water Use and Conservation
Management Plan.
§ 330-234.7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.8.2
1:831
§ 330-234.8.2. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to any development application
involving the Prime Ground Water Recharge Area (Exhibit 7).
§ 330-234.8.3. Standards.
Disturbance of Prime Ground Water Recharge Area (PGWRA) by any
regulated development shall be permitted only upon a finding by the
reviewing board or other applicable municipal authority that the proposal
complies with the provisions of this subsection.
§ 330-234.8.4. Potential Contaminant Sources.
Where any use or structure classified as a Minor Potential Contaminant
Source (PCS) (as listed at APPENDIX C) or as a Major PCS #17 (as listed at
APPENDIX B) is proposed to be located or expanded within a Prime Ground
A. Avoidance. The proposed disturbance cannot be avoided. Development
shall not occur in Prime Ground Water Recharge Areas unless either,
the entirety of the subject property is located within a Prime Ground
Water Recharge Area and thus cannot be avoided, or the disturbance
represents the only viable alternate means to avoid Critical Habitat,
Highlands Open Waters buffers, Moderately Constrained Steep Slopes,
or Severely Constrained Steep Slopes, to the extent that these
resources are also present upon the subject property.
B. Minimization. The proposed disturbance cannot be minimized. Where
total avoidance is not feasible, total recharge area disruption (i.e.,
alteration of natural recharge patterns or volumes) shall not exceed
15% of the Prime Ground Water Recharge Area located within the
affected parcels, placed where feasible on those parts of the PGWRA
having the lowest relative recharge rates and the least potential for
aquifer recharge based upon site analysis.
C. Low Impact Development. The proposal incorporates Low Impact
Development practices. Low Impact Development practices (see
§ 330-235.2) shall be used in the design of the development proposal to
reduce total recharge disruption to the minimum feasible, within the
15% cap.
D. Mitigation. The proposal includes a PGWRA Mitigation Plan. Any
development application involving disturbance of a Prime Ground
Water Recharge Area shall be accompanied by a mitigation plan,
providing for an equivalent of 125% of pre-construction recharge
volumes for that portion of the Prime Ground Water Recharge Area that
will be disturbed. The recharge mitigation shall occur within the
following areas, in order of priority: (1) the same development site to
the maximum extent feasible; (2) the same HUC14 subwatershed; or (3)
where no feasible option exists in the same HUC14 subwatershed, an
interrelated HUC14 subwatershed approved by the Highlands Council.
§ 330-234.8.2 VERNON CODE § 330-234.8.4
1:832
Water Recharge Area, the standards of approval provided at subsection
§ 330-234.9.3 below, shall apply in addition to the preceding requirements.
§ 330-234.9. Wellhead protection.
§ 330-234.9.1. Findings.
Protection of ground water resources that directly provide water to potable
water supply wells is vital to the public health, safety and welfare of the
community. It is also of primary importance to ensure continued availability
of clean drinking water to all that rely upon it. Through regulation of land
use, physical facilities and other activities within Wellhead Protection Areas
(WHPAs), the potential for ground water contamination can be reduced by
preventing the introduction and migration of pollutants into ground water
sources that supply water supply wells.
§ 330-234.9.2. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all proposed development
activities in designated Wellhead Protection Areas (Exhibit 7).
§ 330-234.9.3. Potential Contaminant Sources.
Where any permitted use or structure classified as a Major or Minor
Potential Contaminant Source (PCS) (as listed at APPENDIX B or APPENDIX
C) is proposed to be located or expanded within a Wellhead Protection Area,
the standards of this subsection shall apply. These conditions shall not be
construed to waive or obviate any rules, regulations, or other requirements
pertinent to such uses that may derive from outside agencies having
jurisdiction, such as the NJDEP.
A. Best Management Practices. All Potential Contaminant Sources shall be
designed in a manner that prevents the unintentional discharge of toxic
or hazardous pollutants to ground water, surface water bodies, or the
land surface from internal areas, loading and storage areas, transfer
areas, etc. Best management practices include but are not limited to:
primary and secondary containment; and prevention of contact
between pollutants and precipitation, stormwater and flood waters. Any
application involving a PCS shall be approved only upon demonstration
that these provisions have been satisfactorily addressed. Such findings
shall be based upon review and recommendations by a qualified
professional (e.g., Environmental Engineer), unless the application is
accompanied by one of the following permits and authorizations, any of
which shall be considered equivalent to the best management practices
of this Ordinance. As applicable to the PCS involved, these may also be
submitted in lieu of an Operations and Contingency Plan, as otherwise
required under subsection § 330-234.9.3B, following.
(1) A NJPDES permit approved by NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:14A;
§ 330-234.8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.9.3
1:833
(2) An underground storage tank approved by NJDEP under N.J.A.C.
7:14B;
(3) A Discharge Prevention, Containment and Countermeasure Plan
(DPCC) approved by NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:1E;
(4) A hazardous waste remedial action approved by NJDEP pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:26B, 26C, 26D or 26E, or by the United State
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource
Conservation Recovery Act (RCRA) or the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act
(CERCLA);
(5) A hazardous waste facility approved by NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C.
26G;
(6) Approval by the SCD of a Farm Conservation Plan or Resource
System Management Plan pursuant to N.J.A.C. 2:92, (see
§ 330-234.10.4 below and APPENDIX F);
(7) A solid waste facility approved by NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C. 26H;
and
(8) A high-density Animal Waste Management Plan, an Animal Waste
Management Plan, or a Comprehensive Nutrient Management
Plan, as appropriate, developed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 2:91.
B. Operations and Contingency Plans. Unless one of the permits or
approvals listed at § 330-234.9.3 A(1-8), above is provided, as a
condition of approval of any application involving a Potential
Contaminant Source within a WHPA, the applicant shall prepare and
obtain approval of an Operations and Contingency Plan in accordance
with the requirements herein. No Certificate of Occupancy or Approval
(as appropriate) for the development shall be issued until or unless the
qualified professional authorized to administer these provisions verifies
that the Operations and Contingency Plan has been approved and is on
file with the appropriate entities.
C. Approval of Operations & Contingency Plans. The proposed Operations
and Contingency Plan shall be submitted to the Board of Health (or
equivalent acting authority), Fire Department, Police Departments and
Office of Emergency Management, as applicable. These agencies shall
review and make any appropriate recommendations for approval or
modifications of the Operations and Contingency Plan. The applicant
shall incorporate the recommendations to produce a final document, for
review by the designated municipal professional and each of the
participating agencies. The designated municipal professional shall
coordinate the agencies' responses to ensure that the final Plan
addresses all concerns of substance. Upon approval by the designated
municipal professional, the Plan shall be filed with all applicable
entities and put into effect as indicated therein. In the event of any
irreconcilable issue in developing or finalizing the Plan, it shall be
§ 330-234.9.3 VERNON CODE § 330-234.9.3
1:834
provided as proposed, to the reviewing Board, along with the
recommendations of the designated professional, the participating
agencies, and the applicant and applicant's agents and professionals. A
decision by the reviewing Board shall be final.
D. Required Content of Operations & Contingency Plans. An Operations
and Contingency Plan shall be developed, where required under this
Ordinance, for each Potential Contaminant Source or group of Potential
Contaminant Sources (where multiple sources exist within a single
facility owned and operated by a single entity) and shall address the
elements listed herein. An Operations and Contingency Plan for a Minor
Potential Contaminant Source must demonstrate that the potential for a
significant discharge is minimized to the extent practicable. An
Operations and Contingency Plan for a Major Potential Contaminant
Source must demonstrate that the potential for a significant discharge
is the lowest technologically feasible.
(1) Documentation of the Major and Minor Potential Contaminant
Sources for the site;
(2) Types and quantities of hazardous substances or wastes that may
be used, discharged or stored on site;
(3) Means used to prevent the spillage, leakage or discharge of such
materials;
(4) Means to be used to contain or remedy accidental spillage, leakage,
discharge or migration of such materials from the site directly or
indirectly into ground water;
(5) At a minimum, utilize best management practices as defined by
§ 330-234.9.3 and as specified by NJDEP and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, including but not limited to the
regulations and guidance in the following areas: Discharge
Prevention Containment and Countermeasures [N.J.A.C. 7:1E-4.2
(or most current)], Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasures
[40 CFR 112.3 et seq.(or most current)], Stormwater and Non-point
Source Pollution Control Best Management Practices Manual
[NJDEP, April 2004 (or most current)].
(6) Specific training of facility personnel to contain or remedy
accidental spillage, leakage, discharge or migration of such
materials from the site directly or indirectly into ground water, or
surface water bodies or the land surface that provide recharge to
the underlying aquifer.
(7) Procedures for notifying the appropriate administrative
authorities, including but not limited to NJDEP, the local fire and
police, local office of emergency management and the Board of
Health, regarding any spillage or discharge of such materials; and
§ 330-234.9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.9.3
1:835
§ 330-234.10. Agricultural resources.
§ 330-234.10.1. Findings.
The Highlands Preservation Area contains fertile soils, receives plentiful
rainfall, and is characterized by a moderate climate favorable to
agricultural and horticultural production. The agricultural industry is vital
to the state, the region and the community not only for local provision
of agricultural products, but for the economic benefits associated with
(8) Demonstration that the proposed Potential Contaminant Sources
are designed to employ best management practices to the
maximum extent feasible.
E. An Operations and Contingency Plan for the following Potential
Contaminant Sources, where required under this Ordinance, shall not
be required to meet the requirements of D(7) or D(8), above unless the
designated professional determines that the Potential Contaminant
Source constitutes a significant threat to ground water or water supply
quality due to particular site conditions:
(1) Individual Subsurface Disposal System (i.e., septic system) leach
field in Tier 2 or Tier 3 of a WHPA, or within a PGWRA;
(2) Individual Subsurface Disposal System (i.e., septic system) leach
field where such systems are subject to a routine, mandatory
inspection and pumping schedule pursuant to Board of Health
Ordinance ;
(3) Cemeteries that are closed to future interments;
(4) Underground heating oil storage tanks with a capacity of less than
250 gallons;
(5) Sanitary sewer lines and manholes;
(6) Stormwater infiltration basins for non-industrial land uses;
(7) Dry wells for non-industrial land uses;
(8) Stormwater conveyance lines for non-industrial land uses; or
(9) Any category of existing, proposed or replacement Major or Minor
Potential Contaminant Source where the Operations and
Contingency Plan commits to having no potential contaminants
stored, discharged, manufactured or used on-site.
F. Any information included in an Operations and Contingency Plan which
constitutes proprietary commercial or financial information, or is
otherwise protected from disclosure under 7 CFR Part 205.501 and
205.504 or the Open Public Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., shall
be held confidential by all local entities participating in its review or
implementation, subject to the limitations set forth therein.
§ 330-234.9.3 VERNON CODE § 330-234.10.1
1:836
agricultural production and for maintenance of the rural character
associated with agricultural lands. It is the intent of this section to promote
Sustainable Agriculture (as defined at § 330-231.2) in the Highlands
Preservation Area by ensuring the long-term sustainability of agricultural
resources and the viability of the agricultural industry. These provisions
are intended to ensure a healthy agricultural environment and a sufficient
agricultural land base, by protecting farmland and farm soils, promoting
farmland preservation, and providing the allowances necessary to permit
and support farming and farm operations.
§ 330-234.10.2. Applicability.
The provisions of this section apply to agricultural and horticultural uses
in the Highlands Preservation Area and to the lands of the Agricultural
Resource Area (Exhibit 8), specifically. The Agricultural Resource Area
(ARA) consists of the areas of most concentrated and contiguous
agricultural uses in the Highlands Preservation Area and contains major
areas of Important Farmland Soils.
§ 330-234.10.3. Agricultural Resource Area.
A. Agricultural and Horticultural Development. In accordance with the
provisions of § 330-233.2.1 above, permitted uses in the ARA include
agricultural and horticultural uses (as defined at § 330-231.2).
Accessory uses permitted in conjunction with such uses include
ancillary, incidental or otherwise related supporting uses and the
accessory structures devoted to such uses. The specific permitted uses
and other applicable requirements pertaining to agricultural and
horticultural development in the ARA include the following:
(1) Permitted Uses & Accessory Uses. Farming, General Agriculture,
Raising of Livestock, Boarding Stables, Farm Stands/Produce
Stands, Farmer's Markets, Botanical Gardens. Zoological Gardens,
Plant Nurseries, Wineries, Riding Academy/Stables, Agricultural
Tourism, Value-Added Food and Beverage Production, Single
Family Residential, Farm Worker Residences, Bed and Breakfasts
and Inns.
(2) Bulk & Other Requirements. Minimum Lot Size: 5 acres, Minimum
Lot Width: 250 feet, Minimum Front Yard Setback: 75 feet,
Minimum Side Yard Setback: 35 feet, Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
100 feet, Maximum Building Height: 30 feet, Maximum Building
Coverage: 10%, Maximum Lot Coverage: 15%.
B. Residential Development. Pursuant to § 330-233.2.1 above, where the
underlying zoning permits residential development within any portion
of the ARA, the only form of such development permitted is residential
cluster development in accordance with the provisions of § 330-236.1,
below, provided the minimum thresholds (see § 330-236.1) can be
satisfied. Where such thresholds cannot be met, the allowances for
residential development provided in the underlying Zoning Ordinance
§ 330-234.10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-234.10.3
1:837
§ 330-234.10.4. Conditions of Approval.
The approval of any application for agricultural or horticultural
development in the Highlands Preservation Area is subject to specific
requirements of the Highlands Act, as provided at APPENDIX E,
enforceable by the NJDA or the local Soil Conservation District in
accordance with the NJDA Agricultural Development in the Highlands Rules
(N.J.A.C. 2:92, APPENDIX F).
§ 330-234.10.5. Right to Farm.
Nothing in these provisions or in the whole of this Ordinance shall be
construed to alter or compromise the goals, purposes, policies and
provisions of, or lessen the protections afforded to farmers by, the Right
to Farm Act, P.L.1983, c.31 (C.4:1C-1 et seq.), and any rules or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 330-234.10.6. Approvals Subject to Outside Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to alter or obviate
the requirements of any other applicable state or county laws, rules, or
regulations, including specifically N.J.A.C. 2:92, Agricultural Development
in the Highlands, as promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Agriculture, or those of the SADC, the CADB, the Soil Conservation
Districts, or the NJDEP.
§ 330-235. General regulations.
§ 330-235.1. Affordable housing.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to waive, obviate, modify
or otherwise exempt any covered development project, or any person
proposing or involved in such project, from the applicable provisions of the
municipal ordinances and any other regulations adopted consistent with
the Fair Housing Act to ensure opportunity for low- and moderate-income
housing. Neither shall the provisions of this Ordinance be construed to
waive or exempt projects that include such housing, from adherence to the
requirements of this Ordinance. Regulations applicable to the provision of
apply to applications for such development, subject to all density and
resource protection requirements of this Ordinance. Lawfully existing
residential development in the ARA that does not meet the cluster
development requirements of § 330-236.1, is permitted to continue; it
remains under the regulations of the underlying Zoning Ordinance, and
is not made nonconforming by the provisions of § 330-233.2.1.
C. Other Development. Where the underlying Zoning Ordinance provides
for other permitted uses within the ARA, such uses shall remain as
permitted uses, unless eliminated or reverted to a conditional or
prohibited use by the other provisions of § 330-233.2.
§ 330-234.10.3 VERNON CODE § 330-235.1
1:838
low- and moderate-income housing in the municipality may be found at:
Vernon Township Ordinance Sections 133.1-133.9.
§ 330-235.2. Low impact development.
§ 330-235.2.1. Applicability.
The following provisions shall apply to all development applications
involving property in the Highlands Preservation Area.
§ 330-235.2.2. Standards.
A. Applicants shall demonstrate that the project design process
incorporates conservation design planning, including the following
steps:
(1) Preparation of an existing features and site analysis plan, including
identification of Highlands Preservation Area resources and
Resource Areas;
(2) Evaluation of site context through identification of the physical and
community character of the surrounding area;
(3) Selection of open space conservation areas, where applicable, that
maximize the retention of resource values, provide connections to
existing trails, open spaces or greenways, and incorporate natural
features and characteristics as site amenities;
(4) Establishment of development yield (e.g., residential, retail, office)
and apportionment of septic system yield, net water availability,
and water supply and sewer utility availability, as applicable, and in
keeping with all density and intensity requirements of § 330-233.3,
above;
(5) Lay out of building lots, if applicable, and incorporation of low
impact development design techniques for site design, stormwater
management and resource protection; and
(6) Incorporation of resource standards and smart growth guidelines.
B. Development applications must achieve stormwater management in
compliance with § 330-235.4, below, including the municipal
stormwater management ordinance established in compliance with the
municipal stormwater NJPDES permit under N.J.A.C. 7:14A and 7:8,
and all applicable NJDEP standards and requirements.
C. Relief from the strict application of the provisions of the underlying
municipal Zoning Ordinance applicable to site design shall be
considered where necessary to provide for incorporation of smart
growth principles and low impact development techniques such as use
of shared parking and driveway areas, biofiltration swales, rainwater
capture and reuse, and reduced road or driveway widths. Where such
§ 330-235.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-235.2.2
1:839
§ 330-235.3. Conservation restrictions.
§ 330-235.3.1. Applicability.
The following provisions shall apply to all applications involving property
containing any of the following Highlands Resources, Highlands Resource
Areas, or Special Protection Areas: forested portions of the Forest Resource
Area (delineated in accordance with APPENDIX A), Highlands Open Waters,
Highlands Open Waters buffers, Steep Slopes (any area containing 5,000
square feet or more of contiguous Steep Slopes, or any portion of such an
area), Steep Slope Protection Area, Critical Habitat, Prime Ground Water
Recharge Area, and Lake Management Area Shoreland Protection Tier.
These provisions shall apply whether or not any disturbance of such
Resources or Areas is proposed and regardless of the type of application
at issue (e.g., zoning or building/construction permit application requiring
prior resource review and approval, Highlands Resource Permit application,
Application for Development). These standards shall also apply in the case
of any specific requirement for a Conservation Restriction as set forth by
the provisions of this Ordinance. In the case of any application requiring
issuance of an HPAA, however, administration and enforcement authority
deviations will minimize or eliminate adverse impacts to Highlands
natural resources, these benefits shall be given significant weight in the
analysis of approval criteria.
D. The site preparation plan shall limit clearing, grading and soil
compaction to the minimum required to construct the project in
accordance with the approved plans, inclusive of area for construction
equipment maneuvering, while ensuring protection of mature trees and
habitat outside of the site development area.
E. Landscaping shall use native, drought-tolerant (other than where used
in rain gardens, biofiltration swales and other stormwater management
facilities), disease-resistant plants, allowing for natural landscaping
wherever feasible, and shall under no circumstances include invasive
species.
F. Building orientation and design shall be designed to take advantage of
micro-climate conditions, to the maximum extent feasible, to maximize
solar gain for winter heating, and to minimize solar gain during high
temperature summer conditions except where desirable for the
construction of solar energy systems. Other energy-efficient features
shall be considered and incorporated into site layouts and buildings, as
appropriate.
G. The applicant shall ensure reuse and recycling of building materials, to
the extent possible, when development involves demolition.
H. All low impact development features shall be maintained through a
monitoring and maintenance plan, with procedures for replacing such
features as necessary.
§ 330-235.2.2 VERNON CODE § 330-235.3.1
1:840
for these provisions remain under the jurisdiction of the NJDEP. Nothing
herein shall be construed to preclude the imposition of conservation
restrictions in the case of Highlands Resources, Resource Areas, or Special
Protection Areas not listed above or where not specifically required
otherwise, where the reviewing Board or other applicable authority finds
that such restrictions are necessary to protect the particular resource(s)
at issue, or to ensure the public health, safety, or general welfare of the
community.
§ 330-235.3.2. Standards.
Approval of any application shall require that the applicant commit to and
perfect a conservation restriction, subject to the review and approval of the
Land Use Board Attorney, protecting the Highlands Resources, Highlands
Resource Areas, or Special Protection Areas existing (or as remaining after
an authorized disturbance) on the subject property in accordance with the
requirements that follow. In the case of an application pertaining to a singlefamily
home that is neither exempt nor excluded from this Ordinance, such
restrictions shall be so drawn and described as to permit the future use of
any underutilized portion of either, the disturbed area coverage allowance
or the impervious surface area allowance, provided as exclusions pursuant
to § 330-230.1.1, above.
A. The conservation restriction shall run with the land on which the
approved project is located, shall apply to all lots subdivided from that
land and sold or transferred to other persons, and shall be binding upon
the landowner and his or her successors in interest. To ensure that
notice of the conservation restriction is provided to all present and
future interested parties, the landowner or contract purchaser
receiving the approval shall:
(1) Record the conservation restriction(s) in the office of the County
Clerk or Register, as applicable prior to commencement of any
work authorized under the approval; and
(2) Ensure that a copy of the conservation restriction is provided to the
Highlands Council and to the Municipal Clerk with a request that it
be placed in the file for the lot containing the approved project.
B. The conservation restriction(s) shall describe and include all regulated
features on the property, including any required mitigation. The
proposed easement(s) shall be depicted in the proposed plans, inclusive
in the case of major site plans and major subdivisions, of plan notes
specifying the location and construction of clear and permanent on-site
monuments, such as concrete posts, designed to minimize the need for
land clearing and avoid obstruction of wildlife movement.
C. The conservation restriction shall include either:
(1) A survey and a metes and bounds description of the entire
restricted area; or
§ 330-235.3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-235.3.2
1:841
§ 330-235.3.3. Deed Notice for Exemptions.
In the case of any Municipal Exemption Determination authorized pursuant
to § 330-237.1.2 B(2) below, filing of a fully executed, certified deed notice
shall satisfy the requirement that the balance of the property be protected
from future disturbance, provided it incorporates each of the components
listed herein.
(2) A parcel plan showing the survey boundary lines to the full extent
of the subject property, and indicating the limits of the existing
disturbance area, any additionally-approved disturbance area, and
of any area excluded pursuant to § 330-230.1.1, with the indication
that no further development or disturbance shall be permitted; or
(3) In the case of no proposed encroachment upon Highlands
Resources or Areas, and availability of Highlands Council GIS
mappings for all such Resources and Areas present upon the
property, copies of all such mappings applicable to the parcel.
D. In the case of preserved farmland or dedicated open space, the
conservation restriction shall be enforceable by the Highlands Council
and the municipality, and at least one of the following, as appropriate:
the SADC or CADB, the NJDEP Green Acres Program, or a qualified
non-profit land trust organization. All such easements shall require
periodic monitoring to ensure that on-going land use and management
practices remain protective of the subject resources.
E. All other conservation restrictions shall be enforceable by the
municipality, the NJDEP and the Highlands Council.
F. The language to be included in the conservation restriction shall be
reviewed and approved by the Municipal or Board Attorney, as
applicable.
A. Clear identification of the name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) in
fee of the property;
B. Designated tax block and lot number(s), street address(es),
municipality and county of location of the property;
C. Reference to the Municipal Exemption Determination (by date,
numbering if applicable) issued and under which the deed notice is
being filed;
D. Description of the approved area of ultimate disturbance and the
impervious surface area, with verification that these consist of less than
one (1) acre and one-quarter (1/4) acre, respectively;
E. For properties of one acre or more in area, metes and bounds
delineation indicating the portion of the property for which the ultimate
disturbance has been authorized;
§ 330-235.3.2 VERNON CODE § 330-235.3.3
1:842
§ 330-235.4. Stormwater management.
§ 330-235.4.1. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to any development application.
In the case of any application requiring issuance of an HPAA, however,
administration and enforcement authority remain under the jurisdiction of
the NJDEP.
§ 330-235.4.2. Standards.
F. Agreement to abide by the ultimate disturbance and impervious surface
limits imposed, any furtherance thereof rendering the Municipal
Exemption Determination null and void; and
G. Notice that the owner(s) and subsequent owner(s) and lessees shall
cause all leases, grants, and other written transfers of interest in the
property to contain provisions expressly requiring all holders thereof to
take the property subject to the limitations therein set forth.
A. Carbonate Rock Areas. Stormwater management plans shall be
provided in connection with any application proposing development
within a Carbonate Rock Area. Such plans shall be in full compliance
with the provisions of § 330-234.5 above, and shall be approved only
upon demonstration that potential hazards to public health and safety,
structures and ground water quality due to concentrated surface water
flows that dissolve carbonate rock, have been eliminated or otherwise
addressed to the satisfaction of the reviewing engineer (or qualified
professional). Development plans must indicate the means and methods
by which such discharge shall be mitigated, with the maximum
emphasis on use of nonstructural measures and avoidance of
modifications to the karst features.
B. Beneficial Stormwater Reuse. Development applications involving
water demands for recreational uses, non-agricultural irrigation, and
other non-potable uses shall demonstrate maximum practical
stormwater reuse to minimize both the volume of stormwater
discharges and the water demand sought for such purposes.
C. Regional Stormwater Plans. The stormwater management aspects of
any development plan shall comply with all applicable components of
any regional stormwater management plans adopted by NJDEP
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8 and N.J.A.C. 7:15.
D. Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs). Applications shall be designed in
compliance with any TMDL adopted by NJDEP (pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:15) that has also been adopted by the municipality in compliance with
the municipal stormwater management ordinance as established
pursuant to the municipal stormwater NJPDES permit under N.J.A.C.
7:14A and 7:8.
§ 330-235.3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-235.4.2
1:843
E. Prime Ground Water Recharge Areas. Where disturbance of Prime
Ground Water Recharge Area (PGWRA) is permitted under § 330-234.8,
above, the applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all provisions of
§ 330-233.2 and § 330-234.9, above.
F. Water Quality. To the maximum extent feasible, the plan shall ensure
recharge of clean stormwater rather than contaminated stormwater.
Where runoff from contaminated areas is unavoidable, the applicant
shall incorporate Low Impact Development (see H., below) and other
Best Management Practices standards to minimize the discharge of
stormwater-entrained pollutants to ground and surface waters.
G. Wellhead Protection Areas (WHPA). Any stormwater management
structure located within a WHPA shall be permitted only in compliance
with the provisions of § 330-233.2 and § 330-234.9, above.
H. Low Impact Development (LID). To the maximum extent feasible, LID
techniques shall be incorporated into the design of all development
proposals, to preserve, mimic and enhance the natural hydrologic cycle,
drainage patterns and natural land cover existing on the site, including
but not limited to:
(1) Implementation of on-site stormwater management features that
maintain, restore and enhance the pre-existing natural drainage
patterns of the site;
(2) Achievement of an on-site stormwater capture performance
standard of 80% for average annual precipitation, using low impact
development design techniques preferentially, and structural
stormwater measures only to the extent necessary;
(3) Limitations on the amount of impervious cover on a site as a means
to protect and increase stormwater infiltration and reduce
stormwater runoff;
(4) Use of a "design with nature" approach where natural features are
used or enhanced to achieve management of runoff volume, rate
and quality of stormwater;
(5) Use of grass channels, dry swales, wet swales, infiltration basins,
bio-swales and water gardens, green roofs, and other low impact
approaches to attenuate and control stormwater and provide
multiple environmental benefits; and
(6) Minimization of: a) disturbances to natural vegetation and
topography; b) exposure of stormwater runoff to pollutantgenerating
land uses; and c) alterations in the hydrologic response
to precipitation through natural patterns.
(7) Integration of stormwater management design features with public
spaces, existing and proposed landscape features, and buffers, to
the extent applicable.
§ 330-235.4.2 VERNON CODE § 330-235.5
1:844
§ 330-235.5. Special environmental zone.
§ 330-235.5.1. Findings.
Lands within the Highlands Special Environmental Zone are those having
the highest priority ranking for preservation based on the Highlands
Council Resource Assessment. This assessment considers five indicators
for the protection of water resources and environmentally sensitive lands,
including: Forest within the Forest Resource Area, Riparian Corridor
Condition High, Highlands Open Water Protection Area, Critical Habitat,
and the Water Quality Management Tier of Lake Management Areas
(excluding those of the Lake Community Sub-Zone). Preservation of these
lands is vital to: a) protecting Highlands Preservation Area water resources
and environmentally sensitive lands; b) protecting water supply reservoirs
and other critical water features; c) creating large contiguous areas of
environmentally sensitive lands; d) creating habitat corridors; and e)
connecting existing preserved open space.
§ 330-235.5.2. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to any development application
involving property which is located within the Special Environmental Zone
(Exhibit 8).
§ 330-235.5.3. Referral to Highlands Council Required.
Any development application involving a lot or lots located, or partially
located, within the Special Environmental Zone, shall be neither deemed
complete nor reviewed or considered by the municipal authority until or
unless the proposal has been authorized by issuance of either, an HPAA with
waiver from the NJDEP or a Special Environmental Zone waiver from the
Highlands Council. Highlands Council authorization shall be in the form of
a formal notification from the Executive Director of the Highlands Council,
indicating by reference to specified plan drawings (including date, title,
plan sheet number(s), and plan preparer) that the application has received
a waiver from the Highlands Council and may proceed to the municipal
review authority.
§ 330-235.6. Septic system design and maintenance.
The requirements herein apply to proposed development activities reliant
upon installation of individual subsurface septic disposal systems, regarding
the proper operation, design, development, monitoring, placement and
maintenance of septic systems.
A. The design of septic systems shall be in compliance with the Standards
for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems at N.J.A.C. 7:9A and
any applicable Board of Health Ordinance and shall be subject to
approval of the Board of Health.
§ 330-235.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-235.6
1:845
§ 330-236. Planned development regulations.
§ 330-236.1. Residential cluster development.
§ 330-236.1.1. Findings.
The intent of this Article is to provide for cluster and conservation design
development (hereinafter referred to as cluster development) consistent
with the Land Use Plan Element of the Master Plan and as defined at
§ 330-231.2. Cluster development is a development design technique under
which principal buildings and structures are grouped together on a portion
of the Cluster Project Area, while the remaining land area is permanently
deed-restricted in agricultural use, for conservation of natural resources,
B. All applications shall demonstrate that the proposed plan incorporates
the applicable requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9A with respect to soils
suitability, location, size, and separation distances.
C. All applications proposing new septic systems shall incorporate reserve
septic system disposal areas for each septic system, which are sufficient
with respect to soils suitability, location and size to meet the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9A, to ensure the long-term viability of septic
systems in new development.
D. Any application proposing a new septic system (or systems) shall be
conditioned upon filing of a deed restriction(s) or deed notice(s)
protecting the delineated location(s) of the reserve septic system
disposal field(s), prohibiting the placement thereon of any permanent
structure(s), preserving the area (and its soils) for future installation of
a replacement disposal field, and requiring that it be shown on all plans
and referenced within any future applications for permits or
improvements to the property.
E. All new individual septic disposal systems shall be subject to any
applicable septic system management and maintenance requirements
of the Board of Health, including those established in the Board of
Health Ordinance and in compliance with the standards for septic
system maintenance in the Water Quality Management Planning Rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:15.
F. The application shall demonstrate compliance with any adopted Board
of Health Ordinance requiring the maintenance of existing and new
septic systems.
G. New development proposing to use septic systems shall be designed in
a manner that ensures that untreated well water meets state drinking
water quality standards for non-natural contaminants and minimizes
the risk of well contamination due to the flow of septic systems plumes
within or between developed lots, addressing general background
water quality and flow patterns, major fracture systems and other
appropriate geological, geophysical and hydrogeological issues.
§ 330-235.6 VERNON CODE § 330-236.1.1
1:846
or as open space for environmental protection including public recreational
use. Cluster development allows flexibility in the design and lay-out of
development projects, providing opportunity for new construction while
addressing other priorities, such as: protecting environmentally sensitive
areas, preserving large contiguous areas of open space and agricultural
land, supporting the continuation of existing agricultural and/or
horticultural land uses, and developing attractive residential development
consistent with community character.
§ 330-236.1.2. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all lands in the ARA, as provided
at § 330-232.3.11 and as designated in the map entitled "Agricultural
Resource Area" (Exhibit 8). The permitted principal residential use for any
underlying municipal Zoning District in the ARA which permits single-family
residential development as a principal use, is restricted solely to cluster
development in accordance with § 330-233.2.1B, which incorporates all
provisions of this section. Approval of all residential cluster development
within the ARA shall be conditioned upon approval by the Highlands Council
in accordance with the Highlands Council Cluster/Conservation Design
Development Guidelines. Cluster development within the ARA shall be
consistent with the Agriculture Retention/Farmland Preservation Plan
Element of the Master Plan and the provisions of this ordinance by
supporting the preservation of farmland, avoiding conflicts with agriculture,
maintaining and enhancing the sustainability and continued viability of the
agricultural industry, protecting Important Farmland Soils, and meeting
the management and protection provisions of this ordinance for Highlands
Preservation Area Resources. Cluster Project Area Standards
The Cluster Project Area (as defined at § 330-231.2) includes all of the
individual parcels from which development is clustered, including the area
set aside for preservation and the area set aside for development. A Major
Highlands Development in the Preservation Area that proposes or is
required to use cluster development shall comply with § 330-230.2.
Residential cluster development shall be implemented in accordance with
the Highlands Council Cluster/Conservation Design Development
Guidelines, incorporated by reference herein, and shall incorporate the
provisions below for the Cluster Project Area. The use of clustering in
Highlands Zones or Sub-Zones having a high concentration of
environmentally sensitive resources will be limited. The use of noncontiguous
clustering, wherein the development rights of non-contiguous
parcels are aggregated for use upon a single parcel (or group of adjacent
parcels) suited to cluster development, shall be permitted and is
encouraged where it affords a higher level of protection to Highlands
Resources and Resource Areas than would otherwise be the case. Land
management and stewardship, including best management practices and
conservation and/or management plans, for the Cluster Project Area shall
be subject to the provisions of Article 6 for all Highlands Preservation Area
Resources including, but not limited to protection, restoration, maintenance
§ 330-236.1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-236.1.2
1:847
and mitigation, as applicable. Preservation Set Aside of Cluster Project Area
Standards
A. The area set aside for preservation in a Cluster Project Area shall
comprise at least 80% of the total Cluster Project Area, and shall be
preserved in perpetuity for agricultural use or for environmental
protection. If the Cluster Project Area is served by a public or
community on-site wastewater system, the area set aside for
preservation shall comprise at least 90% of the Cluster Project Area to
the maximum extent this is feasible. All land preserved in perpetuity
shall require a conservation restriction that complies with § 330-235.2
and is enforceable and monitored by the Highlands Council, the
Township, and, where requested by the Highlands Council: for
environmental protection, the NJDEP Green Acres or a qualified land
trust non-profit organization, or for agricultural use, the CADB or the
SADC. All Preservation Set Asides shall be deed-restricted against
further subdivision and shall consist of one contiguous parcel, to the
maximum extent feasible, unless non-contiguous clustering is utilized.
B. When agricultural resources are preserved the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) The most productive Important Farmland Soils, determined in
accordance with NRCS USDA soil survey data, NJDA and the local
SCD shall be given priority in determining the area set aside for
agricultural preservation within the Cluster Project Area.
(2) The conservation easement or deed restriction and a legally
enforceable Homeowner's Agreement, where applicable, shall
include Right to Farm Act provisions.
(3) Retention of the original farmstead or construction of new
farmsteads associated with preserved agricultural lands in cluster
developments shall be permitted.
(4) The preserved portion of the Cluster Project Area shall be buffered
appropriately to avoid conflicts between agricultural operations
and adjacent development, including the developed portion of the
Cluster Project Area, and to facilitate compliance with Township
Right to Farm regulations.
(5) This ordinance supports Sustainable Agriculture (as defined at
§ 330-231.2 and consistent with the Agriculture Retention/
Farmland Preservation Plan Element of the Master Plan) and
requires the implementation of best management practices on the
agricultural land, including as a condition of any approval,
development and implementation of a Farm Conservation Plan (as
defined at § 330-231.2 and described at § 330-234.10.4) that
addresses the protection of water and soil resources, prepared by
the USDA NRCS, TSP, appropriate agent or NJDA staff, and
approved by the local SCD.
§ 330-236.1.2 VERNON CODE § 330-236.1.2
1:848
§ 330-236.1.3. Development Set Aside of Cluster Project Area
Standards.
(6) Community supported agriculture businesses shall be permitted
within the preserved portion of the Cluster Project Area to allow
homeowners to take advantage of local agricultural goods and
services and to enhance the viability of the agricultural industry.
(7) Requirements (e.g., bulk standards) applicable to agricultural
development shall be as provided for other agricultural uses at
§ 330-234.10.3.
C. When natural resources are protected the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) Cluster development shall meet the resource management and
protection requirements of the Highlands Preservation Area
Resource provisions at Section 330-234 and shall be consistent
with the policies of the Conservation Plan Element of the Master
Plan.
(2) Where high value natural resources are preserved, the
conservation easement or deed restriction shall prohibit active
recreational uses and facilities, and only allow minimal passive
recreational uses dependent upon the nature of the resources.
(3) Passive recreational trails shall be allowed provided they do not
disturb habitat and shall be natural landscape trails constructed
using native pervious materials. Where feasible, such passive
recreational trails shall link to existing federal, state and local trail
systems, greenways and parks.
(4) Buffering techniques, management and stewardship of natural
resources, and site design for the Cluster Project Area shall be
used, where feasible, to enhance the existing natural resources
protected within the Cluster Project Area.
A. Cluster development shall be designed to avoid or minimize
disturbance of natural resources and agricultural resources (including
ARAs) of the Highlands Region in compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. The total area set aside for development in the Cluster Project Area
shall not exceed 20%. To the maximum extent feasible, the developed
area of the Cluster Project Area shall occupy no more than 10%, if the
project area is served by a public or community on-site wastewater
system.
C. Cluster development yields shall be based on the septic system yields
for the Cluster Project Area at a maximum, as established at
§ 330-233.3.5, or at the development density allowed under Township
zoning, whichever is more restrictive. This provision shall not apply in
§ 330-236.1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-236.1.3
1:849
the event of an application approved by the Highlands Council involving
the use of Highlands Development Credits, where adequate
infrastructure is available, and the development is consistent with the
Development Transfer Plan Element [if applicable] of the Master Plan
and the provisions of this Ordinance at § 330-233.3.
D. Water and wastewater availability, expansion, or creation for cluster
development shall be in compliance with § 330-233.3.6 through
§ 330-233.3.7 and shall meet the resource management and protection
provisions of this Ordinance.
E. Cluster residential development proposing to use septic systems shall
be designed in compliance with § 330-233.3.5, and shall meet the
resource management and protection provisions of this Ordinance.
F. All infrastructure, open space and utilities necessary to support the
residential cluster development shall be located within the
Development Set Aside of the Cluster Project Area (i.e. streets, common
open space areas, wastewater facilities and stormwater management).
G. Where a municipality has developed and the Highlands Council has
approved a plan for the aggregation of cluster developments to
minimize the potential for dispersed clusters, the cluster development
shall be consistent with such plan.
H. Cluster development shall incorporate smart growth principles where
feasible, including but not limited to: a mix of land uses; compact
building design; walkable neighborhoods; a range of housing
opportunities and choices; foster distinctive communities with a strong
sense of place using design techniques illustrated in the Highlands
Cluster/Conservation Design Development Guidelines; preserve critical
natural and agricultural resources; direct development towards
existing infrastructure (i.e. water, wastewater, transportation, and
community facilities); provide a variety of transportation choices (i.e.
pedestrian, bicycle automobile, bus, rail); and encourage community
and stakeholder collaboration in development decisions.
I. Cluster development shall incorporate LID techniques, as set forth at
§ 330-235.2.
J. Cluster development shall be designed to maintain the Highlands rural,
scenic and historic character and shall consider and harmonize with
existing community character with respect to architectural style, scale,
massing and arrangement of buildings. [Ord. No. 2014-19]
K. All buffers and setbacks shall consider and incorporate or harmonize
with existing natural, agricultural, historic and scenic resources and
with community character. Buffers and setbacks shall be designed to
consider and harmonize with the Cluster Project Area and adjacent
existing development. Existing natural resources and vegetation (e.g.,
hedgerows/trees, woodlands or forest, wetlands, streams) shall be
retained and may be enhanced as buffer features whenever feasible.
§ 330-236.1.3 VERNON CODE § 330-236.1.3
1:850
§ 330-236.1.4. Single-Family Dwelling Area, Yard and Bulk
Standards.
Residential cluster development shall be tailored to the characteristics
of the site and its environs, and shall be designed to avoid or minimize
disturbance of existing Highlands Preservation Area Resources. The
following standards shall apply to residential cluster development projects.
Where the cluster development is integrated into an existing
neighborhood or center-type development, the developed area of the
cluster shall be located behind an existing hedgerow (mature trees) or
screened with a new buffer as appropriate, such as a thickly planted
berm of native trees or shrubs that is landscaped in such a manner as
to resemble existing woodlands.
L. Site disturbance shall be restricted to clearing and grading to the
minimum extent necessary to make reasonable use of the designated
building envelopes, including but not limited to compliance with LID
requirements at § 330-235.2 and retention of existing mature trees.
M. Cluster development shall be configured to minimize impervious
coverage.
A. Minimum Threshold Requirements.
(1) Cluster Development reliant upon on septic systems: septic system
yield of 4 residential units.
(2) Cluster Development served by wastewater utilities: yield of 4
residential units.
B. Net Density/Intensity Threshold Requirements.
(1) New single-family residential cluster development shall be subject
to a net septic system density limitation, calculated on the basis of
the developed portion of the Cluster Project Area (as provided at
§ 330-233.5.3). Such density (acres per septic system) shall comply
with a nitrate dilution target for the developed portion of the
Cluster Project of 10 mg/L or less.
(2) Where new single-family residential development is proposed to
rely on existing wastewater utilities the density and intensity
standards shall be in compliance with the underlying municipal
zoning ordinance.
C. Bulk Requirements. Where the applicant demonstrates and the
reviewing Board finds, based upon submission of an analysis of natural
and agricultural resources within the Cluster Project Area, that the site
design shall be enhanced by reducing the bulk requirements of this
subsection (e.g., where existing topography or vegetation provides an
effective visual screen), these requirements may be reduced by up to
50%. Such reductions shall similarly apply to the extent they may be
§ 330-236.1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-236.1.4
1:851
§ 330-237. Application review procedures & requirements.
necessary to ensure compliance with the density or intensity
requirements of B(1) and B(2) above.
(1) Cluster Development reliant upon septic systems:
(a) Minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
(b) Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
(c) Principal Building Setbacks
[1] Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet.
[2] Minimum side yard setback shall be 30 feet.
[3] Minimum rear yard setback shall be 50 feet.
(d) Accessory Building Setbacks
[1] Minimum setback from side or rear line shall be 15 feet; if
a reduction is allowed, it shall be no less than 10 feet.
[2] Minimum setback from other buildings shall be 15 feet; if a
reduction is allowed, it shall be no less than 10 feet.
(2) Cluster Development served by wastewater utilities:
(a) Minimum lot frontage shall be 100 feet.
(b) Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
(c) Principal Building Setbacks
[1] Minimum front yard setback shall be 35 feet.
[2] Minimum side yard setback shall be 20 feet.
[3] Minimum rear yard setback shall be 35 feet.
(d) Accessory Building Setbacks
[1] Minimum setback from side or rear line shall be 10 feet; if
a reduction is allowed, it shall be no less than 5 feet.
[2] Minimum setback from other buildings shall be 15 feet; if a
reduction is allowed it shall be no less than 10 feet.
D. Other Requirements. All other development requirements for singlefamily
dwellings, including any bulk standards not listed above (e.g., lot
coverage, building coverage, building height) shall be as required
pursuant to the underlying municipal zoning/land use ordinances.
Cluster development may be restricted beyond these requirements, by
applicable provisions of NJDEP Preservation Area Rules (e.g., 3%
maximum impervious coverage).
§ 330-236.1.4 VERNON CODE § 330-237.1
1:852
§ 330-237.1. Application procedures.
All procedural requirements regarding applications for zoning permits,
construction permits, certificates of occupancy or approval, variance relief,
site plan approval, subdivision approval, interpretations, appeals, and any
other such application in the Highlands Preservation Area shall remain in
effect as provided pursuant to the underlying municipal land use ordinances
and other applicable codes and regulations in effect at the time of the
application, except to the extent these may be modified by the provisions
set forth herein.
§ 330-237.1.1. When Required.
All requirements stipulating the circumstances under which such permits
or approvals are required, as set forth by the underlying municipal zoning
and land use ordinances, and any other applicable codes and regulatory
requirements shall remain in full force and effect for the Highlands
Preservation Area as provided pursuant to such regulations, inclusive of
the specific definitions used therein to classify applications for review and
consideration by the appropriate municipal authority, including but not
limited to such terms as: "major site plan," "minor site plan," "major
subdivision," "minor subdivision," "use variance," "conditional use
variance," "change in use," "bulk variance," "zoning permit," and "building
permit." In the event that the underlying municipal land use ordinances
do not require issuance of a permit or other approval for any activity,
improvement, or development project covered under the provisions of this
Ordinance, a Highlands Resource Permit shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of § 330-237.1.6, below.
§ 330-237.1.2. Highlands Act Exemptions.
Pursuant to § 330-230.4 above, any application proposing an activity,
improvement or development project that qualifies as a Highlands Act
Exemption is exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance. Any
applicant asserting same, shall, as a condition of application completeness,
and in any case prior to municipal review or approval of the application,
provide evidence that the proposal qualifies as a Highlands Act Exemption.
A. State Agency Determination. State Agency Determinations shall be
required for all applications involving exemptions not listed and
covered by the provisions at B., below. A State Agency Determination
shall consist of a Highlands Applicability Determination (HAD) issued
by the NJDEP indicating that the proposal qualifies as a Highlands Act
Exemption.
B. Municipal Determination. In the case of an application involving any of
the specific exemptions listed in this subsection, the applicant may
request and shall be deemed to have satisfied the evidentiary
requirement by obtaining a Municipal Exemption Determination
indicating that the proposal qualifies as a Highlands Act Exemption. By
authorization of the NJDEP regarding these specific exemptions, the
§ 330-237.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.1.2
1:853
applicant may rely upon the findings of a Municipal Exemption
Determination to the same extent and with the same protections as
would apply in the case of a HAD issued by the NJDEP. Effective as
of the date on which the municipality receives written authorization
from the Highlands Council to proceed, the following Highlands Act
Exemptions shall be subject to Municipal Exemption Determination:
(1) Exemption 1. The construction of a single family dwelling, for an
individual's own use or the use of an immediate family member, on
a lot owned by the individual on the date of enactment of the
Highlands Act (August 10, 2004) or on a lot for which the individual
entered into a binding contract of sale to purchase on or before
May 17, 2004. (Note: the Highlands Act defines "an immediate
family member" as a "spouse, child, parent, sibling, aunt, uncle,
niece, nephew, first cousin, grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepparent, stepchild,
stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, or half sister, whether the
individual is related by blood, marriage, or adoption.")
(2) Exemption 2. The construction of a single family dwelling on a lot in
existence on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act (August
10, 2004), provided that the construction does not result in the
ultimate disturbance of one acre or more of land or a cumulative
increase in impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more.
(a) Municipal Exemption Determinations authorizing applicants to
proceed under Highlands Act Exemption 2 shall require
approval and filing of either a Deed Notice or Conservation
Restrictions providing for the protection of the balance of the
applicant's property, beyond the designated disturbance area
of less than one acre, in accordance with the requirements of
§ 330-235.3 of this Ordinance, "Conservation Restrictions."
Review and approval of proposed Deed Notice or Conservation
Restrictions shall occur as provided at § 330-235.3 of this
Ordinance, with the costs for review and approval of same
provided by the applicant in accordance with the escrow
requirements of § 330-237.3 as applicable to Conservation/
Deed Restrictions. Municipal Exemption Determinations in
such instances shall not take effect until or unless the applicant
has provided proof of filing of the approved deed restrictions.
(3) Exemption 4. The reconstruction of any building or structure for
any reason within 125% of the footprint of the lawfully existing
impervious surfaces on the site, provided that the reconstruction
does not increase the lawfully existing impervious surface by onequarter
acre or more. This exemption shall not apply to the
reconstruction of any agricultural or horticultural building or
structure for a non-agricultural or non-horticultural use.
(a) For purposes of this Ordinance, this exemption shall not be
construed to permit multiple 125% footprint expansions, but
§ 330-237.1.2 VERNON CODE § 330-237.1.2
1:854
rather, to permit one or more reconstruction activities
cumulatively resulting in a maximum 125% increase in the
footprint of the impervious surfaces lawfully existing on the
site, provided they do not cumulatively exceed the one-quarter
acre limitation.
(b) For purposes of this Ordinance, the applicable date of lawful
existence shall coincide with the date of enactment of the
Highlands Act, or August 10, 2004.
(c) For purposes of this Ordinance, these provisions shall not be
construed to exempt any change in use of such reconstructed
building or structure from the applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
(4) Exemption 5. Any improvement to a single family dwelling in
existence on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act (August
10, 2004), including but not limited to an addition, garage, shed,
driveway, porch, deck, patio, swimming pool or septic system.
(5) Exemption 6. Any improvement, for non-residential purposes, to a
place of worship owned by a nonprofit entity, society or association,
or association organized primarily for religious purposes, or a
public or private school, or a hospital, in existence on the date of
enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004), including but
not limited to new structures, an addition to an existing building or
structure, a site improvement, or a sanitary facility.
(6) Exemption 7. An activity conducted in accordance with an
approved woodland management plan pursuant to section 3 of the
"Farmland Assessment Act," P.L.1964, c.48 (C.54:4-23.3) or the
normal harvesting of forest products in accordance with a forest
management plan approved by the State Forester.
(7) Exemption 8. The construction or extension of trails with nonimpervious
surfaces on publicly owned lands or on privately owned
lands where a conservation or recreational use easement has been
established.
C. Procedures. Municipal Exemption Determinations shall be issued by the
Exemption Designee, as indicated at paragraph (4), below, within 45
days of receipt of a request for same. In no case shall failure to meet
this date constitute approval of the exemption. [Ord. No. 2014-19]
(1) Requests for Municipal Exemption Determination shall be
submitted on forms provided by the Planning and Zoning
Department and shall be accompanied by sufficient information
and documentary evidence to demonstrate whether or not the
proposed activity, improvement or development project qualifies, in
all respects, with the applicable exemption. Required submission
materials applicable to each exemption, appear below. The
§ 330-237.1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.1.2
1:855
applicant shall provide a copy of the full application to the
Highlands Council, as instructed within the form.
(2) Insufficient or incomplete information shall form the basis for a
finding that the proposal is not qualified as a Highlands Act
Exemption. Nothing shall preclude the applicant in such an
instance, from re-submission of the application. In addition, where
the Exemption Designee has determined that the required
information is not extensive, s/he may authorize the applicant to
provide supplemental materials under the same application,
subject to the applicant's agreement to an extension of time for
review of the application not to exceed an additional 30 days from
the date of receipt of materials. The Exemption Designee may
consult with the Executive Director (or applicable designee) of the
Highlands Council as needed in making any exemption
determination.
(3) All Municipal Exemption Determinations shall be provided in
writing, shall indicate the findings of the Exemption Designee, and
shall include a statement of the rationale for the final decision,
whether approving or denying the exemption request. All
Municipal Exemption Determinations shall include the effective
date of the Determination, which shall occur on the 20th day after
the date of issuance provided it is not modified or rejected in the
interim by the Highlands Council. The Exemption Designee shall
provide copies of all Municipal Exemption Determinations to the
Highlands Council within five (5) business days of issuance.
(4) Exemption Designee. Municipal Exemption Determinations
regarding Highlands Act Exemptions shall be issued by the Board
Planner, Board Engineer and/or Zoning Officer.
(5) Appeal of Findings. The decision of the Exemption Designee may be
appealed by any affected party in accordance with the provisions of
the underlying land use ordinance, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a).
(6) Submission Requirements. All applications shall be accompanied
by the information listed below, as applicable to the particular
exemption or exemption(s) being sought by the applicant. All
references to professional preparers indicated herein shall be
construed to include any and all qualified individuals licensed,
certified, or otherwise eligible and authorized to complete such
work, in accordance with the applicable laws and legal
requirements of the State of New Jersey including but not limited to
the MLUL (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and Title 13 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Law and Public Safety.
(a) Exemption 1.
[1] A copy of a deed, closing or settlement statement, title
policy, tax record, mortgage statement or any other official
§ 330-237.1.2 VERNON CODE § 330-237.1.2
1:856
document showing that the lot was legally owned by the
applicant on or before August 10, 2004 and indicating the
lot and block as designated by the municipal tax mapping,
the municipality and county in which the lot is located, and
the street address;
[2] If the applicant does not own the lot, a copy of the binding
contract of sale executed by the seller and the applicant on
or before May 17, 2004 for the lot on which the house is to
be constructed;
[3] A certification by the applicant stating that the single
family dwelling proposed for construction on the lot
specified and described therein by tax lot and block,
municipality and county of location, and street address, is
intended for the applicant's own use or the use of an
immediate family member as identified therein by name
and relationship to the applicant; and
[4] A property survey certified by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Land Surveyor indicating the property
boundary lines and overall lot size, and showing what
structures currently exist on the lot, if any.
(b) Exemption 2.
[1] A copy of the recorded deed or plat showing that the lot
was created on or before August 10, 2004;
[2] A property survey certified by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Land Surveyor indicating the property
boundary lines and overall lot size, and showing what
structures currently exist on the lot, if any;
[3] A parcel plan certified by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Engineer showing all existing and proposed
development, including all structures, grading, clearing,
impervious surface and disturbance, and including the
calculations supporting the claim that impervious surfaces
and areas of disturbance are within the limits necessary
for Exemption 2; and
[4] A metes and bounds description of the area of the lot to be
disturbed, limited to less than one acre and a draft
conservation restriction or deed notice to cover the
balance of the lot.
(c) Exemption 4.
[1] A parcel plan certified by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Engineer depicting:
§ 330-237.1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.1.2
1:857
[2] All existing property improvements, including all
structures, grading, clearing, impervious surfaces and
limits of disturbance, existing on the site as of August 10,
2004; and
[3] All proposed development including all structures,
impervious surfaces, clearing limits, and limits of
disturbance, including grading;
[4] Photographs keyed to the site plan; and
[5] A copy of any official documentation indicating the original
date of construction of the building or otherwise
establishing the lawfulness of existing impervious
surfaces.
(d) Exemption 5.
[1] A copy of any official documentation proving the single
family dwelling was in existence on August 10, 2004;
[2] A description of the proposed improvement; and
[3] A certification from the applicant that the property and all
improvements will continue to be used for single family
dwelling purposes.
(e) Exemption 6.
[1] A copy of any official documentation indicating that the
place of worship, public or private school or hospital was
in existence on August 10, 2004;
[2] For improvements to a place of worship, documentation
showing that the entity, society or association, or
association organized primarily for religious purposes has
non-profit status;
[3] A site plan certified by a licensed New Jersey Professional
Engineer depicting:
[4] All existing property improvements including all
structures, grading, clearing, impervious surfaces and
limits of disturbance, existing on the site on August 10,
2004; and
[5] All proposed development including all structures,
impervious surfaces, clearing limits, and limits of
disturbance, including grading; and
[6] A Certificate of Occupancy for existing buildings on the
property.
(f) Exemption 7.
§ 330-237.1.2 VERNON CODE § 330-237.1.2
1:858
§ 330-237.1.3. Approvals Subject to Compliance.
Approval of any land use-related application pertaining to the Highlands
Preservation Area, whether a zoning permit application, building permit
application, Application for Development (as defined at § 330-231.2), or
any other such application, unless deemed a Highlands Act Exemption
pursuant to § 330-237.1.2A or § 330-237.1.2B above, or otherwise excluded
[1] For a private landowner with an approved woodlot
management plan:
[a] A copy of the applicant's tax bill showing that the site
has farmland assessment tax status under the New
Jersey Farmland Assessment Act, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et
seq., if applicable;
[b] A brief description of the total area of woodlands that
is the subject of the approved woodland management
plan;
[c] A brief description of the length of time that the area
to be managed has been in use for woodland
management; and
[d] A copy of the approved woodland management plan.
[2] For a forest management plan approved by the State
Forester:
[a] A brief description of the total area where the normal
harvesting of forest products occurs;
[b] A brief description of the length of time that the area
to be managed has been in use for normal harvesting
of forest products; and
[c] A copy of a forest management plan approved by the
State Forester.
(g) Exemption 8.
[1] A site plan certified by a licensed New Jersey Professional
Engineer showing the proposed trail construction with
details including the location, and width of existing and
proposed trails and those off-site trails to which they
connect, if any;
[2] A written description of the non-impervious materials to be
used; and
[3] For privately owned property, a copy of a deed for the
property, including the language establishing the
conservation or recreational use easement on the property.
§ 330-237.1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.1.3
1:859
from the application of this Ordinance pursuant to § 330-230.1.1 above, is
subject to compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Prior to any
such approval, the reviewing entity shall ensure that the proposed activity,
improvement or development project that is the subject of the application
under its jurisdiction, is either in full compliance with all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance; has received approval(s) from the entity or
entities authorized to grant relief from such provision(s); or by its
conditioned approval, where permitted herein, will remain subject to the
issuance of such approval(s) from the entity or entities authorized to
consider and issue such relief, with such approval(s) to issue prior to
any land disturbance related to the proposed activity, improvement or
development project.
§ 330-237.1.4. Applications Requiring Prior Highlands Council
Approval. [Ord. No. 2014-19]
For any application listed in this subsection, authorization by the Highlands
Council shall be obtained prior to a finding of application completeness,
and prior to any review or approval of the application by the applicable
municipal authority. In all such cases, applications shall be filed with the
A. Building/Construction Permit Applications. Demonstration of
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance shall be
required as a Prior Approval to the issuance of any building permit.
Proof of such compliance shall be provided in writing, as issued by the
applicable reviewing authority or authorities, including but not limited
to the Township Zoning Officer and Land Use Board.
B. Zoning Permit Applications. Demonstration of compliance with all
applicable provisions of this Ordinance shall be required prior to the
issuance of any zoning permit or zoning approval. Where a finding of
compliance requires authority or professional expertise outside the
purview of the Zoning Official, such proof shall be provided in writing
by the applicable reviewing authority or authorities, including but not
limited to the Township Planner, Engineer and/or Land Use Board. . In
such instances, receipt of such findings of compliance shall constitute
mandatory Prior Approvals to the issuance of any zoning permit or
approval.
C. Applications for Development. Prior to granting any approval of an
Application for Development, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as applicable, shall make specific findings of compliance
with regard to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance, such findings
assisted by the advice and recommendations of the reviewing Board's
professionals, including but not limited to the Board Planner, the Board
Engineer, and any specialist, expert or other consultant engaged by the
Board to assist in any field of specialization. The reviewing Board shall
attach certain conditions to any such approval as provided at
§ 330-237.2.3 below, but is by no means limited solely to these in
making its determination on an application.
§ 330-237.1.3 VERNON CODE § 330-237.1.4
1:860
Highlands Council in accordance with its established submission and
procedural guidelines.
§ 330-237.1.5. Applications Requiring Prior NJDEP Approval.
For any applications listed in this subsection, approval by the NJDEP shall
be obtained prior to a finding of application completeness, and prior to any
review or approval of the application by the applicable municipal authority.
§ 330-237.1.6. Findings of Compliance.
With regard to any application, or any specific aspect of an application for
which the Highlands Council or the NJDEP has explicitly issued an approval,
the applicable reviewing authority shall find that, to the extent the approval
specifically addresses the provisions of this Ordinance, the applicant has
demonstrated compliance. Such approvals shall not be construed to waive
or obviate other applicable provisions of this Ordinance or of any other
applicable municipal or non-municipal ordinances, regulations or
requirements. With respect to all other findings of compliance, the
provisions of this subsection shall apply.
A. Special Environmental Zone. Any application involving property located
within, or partially within the Special Environmental Zone, pursuant to
§ 330-235.5 unless an HPAA with waiver has been issued by the NJDEP
authorizing the proposed activity, project or improvement.
B. Critical Habitat. Any application proposing disturbance of an area
designated as Critical Habitat (excluding any for which an HPAA has
been issued by the NJDEP) pursuant to § 330-234.4.
C. (Reserved)
D. Net Water Availability. Any application proposing the use of Net Water
Availability (excluding any for which an HPAA has been issued by the
NJDEP), unless a Water Use and Conservation Management Plan has
been approved by the Highlands Council.
E. Conditional Water Availability. Any application proposing the use of
Conditional Water Availability involving subwatershed in a Current
Deficit Area (excluding any for which an HPAA has been issued by the
NJDEP), unless a Water Use and Conservation Management Plan has
been approved by the Highlands Council.
A. Major Highlands Developments. Any application for a Major Highlands
Development in the Highlands Preservation Area as defined by the
NJDEP Preservation Area rules at N.J.A.C. 7:38.
B. New/Extended Utility Infrastructure. Any application proposing the
installation of new or extended water supply or wastewater collection/
treatment infrastructure in any portion of the Highlands Preservation
Area.
§ 330-237.1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.1.6
1:861
A. Professionals Required. Findings of compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be provided only by individuals qualified to review
and make such determinations. In many but not all instances these shall
require licensed, certified or otherwise qualified professionals such as
scientists, engineers, planners or geologists. Fee and escrow
requirements associated with applications requiring approval under
this Ordinance, shall reflect the reasonable anticipated expenses
associated with processing and reviewing such applications, as
provided at § 330-237.3 below. The following professionals (where the
term "professionals" is construed to include any and all qualified
individuals licensed, certified, or otherwise eligible and authorized to
complete such work, in accordance with the applicable laws and legal
requirements of the State of New Jersey) shall, to the extent of their
applicable licensure, certification, or other appropriate qualifications,
be authorized to review and provide findings pursuant to this
Ordinance, and shall be designated as required, by the municipal
Governing Body or reviewing Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as applicable:
(1) Use, Density, Intensity & Other Bulk Requirements: Professional
Planner; Professional Engineer; Zoning Officer
(2) Forest Resources: Certified Tree Expert; Forester; Forest Scientist/
Ecologist
(3) Highlands Open Waters, Riparian Areas, and Lake Management
Areas: Limnologist, Wetlands or Riparian Scientist/Ecologist,
Environmental Engineer (as required for Water Quality
Management issues)
(4) Steep Slopes: Professional Engineer; Geologist; Topographic
Surveys: Licensed Land Surveyor
(5) Carbonate Rock Areas: Geotechnical Engineer; Geologist; other
Professional Engineer or Geological Expert qualified and
experienced in geological/geotechnical aspects of development
(6) Water Conservation and Deficit Mitigation, Prime Ground Water
Recharge Areas, Wellhead Protection Areas, Stormwater
Management: Hydrogeologist; Professional Engineer; Water
Resources Engineer; Environmental Engineer
(7) Low Impact Development: Landscape Architect, Professional
Engineer; Environmental Engineer; Professional Planner qualified
and experienced in applicable areas
(8) Conservation/Deed Restrictions: Attorney
B. Zoning and Building/Construction Permit Applications. Where a zoning
or building/construction permit application (or request for approval) is
not preceded by an Application for Development under the purview of
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the reviewing
§ 330-237.1.6 VERNON CODE § 330-237.1.6
1:862
official shall rely upon the determination(s) of the individual designated
in A., above for findings of compliance with respect to the applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
(1) All determinations by the qualified professional shall be
determinative in the disposition of any zoning or building/
construction permit application with respect to required Prior
Approvals.
(2) Where the professional determines that an approval may be
granted subject to certain conditions, such conditions shall be
addressed prior to the issuance of any permit or approval by the
building or zoning official, unless in the estimation of the
professional, satisfaction of the required conditions of approval will
not be compromised by issuance of the zoning or building/
construction permit and are ensured by other means, such as
withholding of any final certificates of occupancy or approval.
(3) The findings of the review professional shall be provided in writing
to both the municipal official(s) responsible for the review and
disposition of the zoning or building/construction permit, and to the
applicant. Where such findings indicate that the application is not
compliant with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
review professional shall provide a statement identifying the
reasons therefor. Where the review professional indicates that an
approval may be granted pending satisfaction of certain conditions,
a statement and explanation of the conditions to be attached shall
be set forth as well as the reasons therefore.
(4) The findings of the review professional may be appealed by any
affected party in accordance with the provisions of the underlying
land use ordinance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a).
(5) The professional review process shall occur as follows:
(a) Upon notice from the municipal official(s) responsible for the
review and disposition of the zoning or building/construction
permit that a Prior Approval is required, it shall be the
applicant's responsibility to prepare a request for review and
issuance of such approvals by the designated municipal
professional(s).
(b) The applicant shall provide all of the documents and materials
required for submission under an Application for Development
pursuant to § 330-237.4, below, to the extent they apply with
respect to the particular resources and Ordinance provisions
at issue, for review by the professional.
(c) The professional shall provide a completeness determination in
writing, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application
materials, which in the event of an incomplete application,
shall indicate the reasons therefor. The professional shall have
§ 330-237.1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.1.6
1:863
the authority to waive submission of items he or she finds
unnecessary or irrelevant to the evaluation and the required
report of findings.
(d) The professional shall review and provide a report of findings
to both the municipal official(s) and the applicant within fortyfive
(45) days of the date on which the application is deemed
complete.
(e) In the event of a Carbonate Rock Investigation pursuant to
§ 330-234.6.3, above, the professional report of findings shall
be provided in accordance with the program and scheduling as
provided therein.
(f) The review professional shall have authority to issue such
waivers and exceptions as provided only in accordance with
§ 330-238, below.
C. Highlands Resource Permit Applications. In the event that the
underlying municipal land use ordinances do not require issuance of a
zoning or building permit, or approval of an Application for
Development through which compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance may be demonstrated, the provisions herein shall apply.
(1) Any person proposing an activity, improvement or development
project that will affect a Highlands resource, Resource Area, or
Protection Area, shall obtain a Highlands Resource Permit in
accordance with this section.
(2) Applications shall be made on forms provided by the municipality
requiring identification of the owner of the property or properties
at issue, the tax block and lot, street address, the extent, location
and type of activity proposed, and by submission of a Consistency
Determination Report from the Highlands Council website, an
indication of the resources potentially affected by the proposed
activity.
(3) The designated review authority for such applications shall be the
Township Zoning Officer.
(4) The review and disposition of such applications shall occur as
provided for zoning and building/construction permits, in the
preceding sections, with approvals being issued only upon a finding
of compliance.
D. Applications for Development. With respect to Applications for
Development, findings of compliance shall be provided by the
applicable professional(s) through the process of review and
consideration undertaken by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The reviewing Board (or its committee(s), if applicable)
shall consider all such findings during the course of the Application for
§ 330-237.1.6 VERNON CODE § 330-237.1.6
1:864
§ 330-237.2. Applications for development.
The provisions of this section shall apply to any Application for Development
(see § 330-231.2, above) under the jurisdiction of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 330-237.2.1. Notice & Reporting Requirements.
The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to all requirements
concerning public notice for Applications for Development as provided
under the MLUL and required pursuant to the underlying municipal land
use ordinances.
§ 330-237.2.2. Board Decisions Subject to Highlands Council Call-
Up.
All Board decisions pertaining to Applications for Development involving
the ultimate disturbance of two (2) acres or more of land or a cumulative
increase in impervious surface by one (1) acre or more, are subject to
Development, in conjunction with all other relevant information and
requirements in rendering a final decision in any matter.
A. Notice of Application to Highlands Council. The applicant for any
Application for Development shall provide notice to the Highlands
Council at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the application
is scheduled for consideration by the local Board. A copy of the
complete application shall accompany such notice regarding any
Application for Development involving the potential disturbance of two
(2) acres, or more, or a cumulative increase in impervious coverage of
one (1) acre, or more. The applicant shall provide copies of any
subsequent revisions to such applications to the Highlands Council at
the same time these are provided to the reviewing Board. If such plans
or plats have been prepared in digital form, they shall be provided to
the Highlands Council in a digital format that meets Highlands Council
standards for such submissions.
B. Scenic Resource Notice Requirements. Where a project site falls within
a Highlands scenic resource area designated by the Highlands Council,
or within the Scenic Resources Tier of a Lake Management Area, that
crosses municipal or county boundary lines, public notice requirements
shall, in addition to the applicable notice requirements of the MLUL,
incorporate any supplemental notice provisions as set forth in the
adopted Scenic Resource Management Plan.
C. Notice of Decision Required. The reviewing Board shall provide a
certified copy of the fully-executed resolution memorializing its final
decision regarding any Application for Development to the Highlands
Council within ten (10) days of its adoption. This provision shall apply in
all cases, whether the Board approves the Application for Development,
denies it, or approves it with conditions.
§ 330-237.1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.2.2
1:865
call-up and subsequent review by the Highlands Council in accordance
with procedural requirements and timeframes established pursuant to the
Highlands Act. The Highlands Council may, on notice to the applicant
within 15 days of receipt of the memorializing resolution of the reviewing
Board, review and require a public hearing on the application. In that
case, subsequent to the hearing the Highlands Council may approve the
Application for Development, deny it, or issue an approval with conditions.
§ 330-237.2.3. Conditions of Approval.
The following conditions of approval shall, in addition to any applicable
conditions previously set forth under this Ordinance, be attached to any
Application for Development approved pursuant to the MLUL, and the
provisions of § 330-237.1, above.
A. No Land Disturbance. No land disturbance approved in connection with
an Application for Development involving the ultimate disturbance of
two (2) acres or more of land or a cumulative increase in impervious
surface by one (1) acre or more, shall occur until and unless, either:
(1) The Highlands Council call-up period has expired without issuance
of a notice seeking review of the application by the Highlands
Council; or
(2) The Highlands Council has issued notice, and has reviewed the
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:20-17(a)1 and has determined not
to deny or modify the approval.
B. Amendments. In the event that Highlands Council review of an
approved Application for Development pursuant to § 330-237.2.2 above
results in a finding that the plans must be modified, the applicant shall
amend the application accordingly and submit the amended application
to the reviewing Board for approval. Such submissions shall include the
written findings and notice of decision of the Highlands Council.
C. Conservation Restrictions. The applicant shall commit to and, as a
condition of approval, perfect a conservation restriction on the
undisturbed portions of Highlands Resources, Highlands Resource
Areas, and Special Protection Areas located on the subject property,
pursuant to the provisions of § 330-235.3.
D. Approvals Conditioned on State Approvals. All approvals shall be
subject to the approval of any and all State agencies or other authorities
having jurisdiction over any aspect or aspects of the approved
Application for Development.
E. As-Built Surveys Required. Prior to issuance of any final Certificate of
Occupancy or Approval, or to the release of any performance bonding
held in relation to the approved Application for Development, the
applicant shall provide an "as-built" survey depicting the final site
conditions.
§ 330-237.2.2 VERNON CODE § 330-237.2.3
1:866
§ 330-237.3. Application fee & escrow requirements.
F. Submission of Final Plans/Plats to Highlands Council. The applicant
shall provide a copy of any final site plan or subdivision plat to the
Highlands Council. If such plans or plats have been prepared in digital
form, they shall be provided to the Highlands Council in a digital format
that meets Highlands Council standards for such submissions.
A. The application fee and escrow requirements of this subsection shall
apply in addition to all existing fee and escrow requirements, including
procedural and legal requirements, as set forth in the underlying
municipal land use ordinances. All application fees and escrows shall be
managed and dispensed as prescribed under all applicable state and
local requirements, including but not limited to those of the MLUL and
the Uniform Construction Code. Municipal Exemption Determinations.
The fees provided herein shall apply to applications for Municipal
Exemption Determinations pursuant to § 330-237.1.2 of this Ordinance.
(1) Municipal Exemption Determination: $450.00
(2) Denied Application Amended for Compliance: $250.00
B. Highlands Resource Review. The fee and escrow requirements herein
shall apply to applications for Highlands Resource Permits, and to
Zoning Permit and Building/Construction Permit applications for which
Highlands Resource review is required as a prior approval pursuant to
§ 330-237.1.6.
(1) Highlands Resource Review Fees
(a) Applications involving determinations regarding: permitted/
prohibited uses, carbonate rock phase I investigation, water
use and conservation, wellhead protection, prime ground
water recharge, low impact development, or any combination
of these: $450.00
(b) Applications involving determinations regarding any one or
combination of the following: density or intensity of
development standards, forest resources, Highlands open
waters, riparian areas, lake management, steep slopes,
carbonate rock phase II investigation, water deficit mitigation,
or stormwater management (including stormwater low impact
development):
(c) Applications involving determinations regarding any
combination of items listed in both 1(a) and 1(b), above, shall
be subject to the application fee listed at 1(b).
(2) Escrow Deposit Requirements
(a) Applications requiring compliance determinations pursuant to
any Highlands resource component listed in the following table
§ 330-237.2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.3
1:867
shall be accompanied by the escrow deposits therein indicated.
Where an application involves more than one of the listed
application compliance components, escrow deposits shall be
cumulative.
Application Compliance
Component Escrow Deposit
a) Density or Intensity Standards $1,500.00
b) Forest Resources $1,500.00
c) Highlands Open Waters and/or
Riparian Areas
$1,500.00
d) Lake Management $1,500.00
e) Steep Slopes $1,500.00
f) Carbonate Rock, Phase II
Investigation
$1,500.00
g) Water Deficit Mitigation $1,500.00
h) Stormwater Management and
Stormwater LID
$1,500.00
i) Conservation/Deed Restrictions $1,500.00
j) Operations and Contingency Plans $1,500.00
(b) Escrow deposits shall be used by the municipality to cover the
costs of professional reviews associated with the respective
Highlands resource components. Where any escrow account is
depleted to an amount equaling 25% or less of the original
deposit amount, the status and progress of the application
shall be reviewed by the applicable municipal official(s), and
the professional responsible for Highlands resource review
shall determine whether account replenishment is necessary,
and if so, by what amount. On notice from the municipality of
any such replenishment requirement, the applicant shall
provide the additional escrow accordingly and within such
timeframes as therein stated.
C. Applications for Development. All fee and escrow requirements
pertaining to Applications for Development shall remain as set forth in
the underlying municipal land use ordinances, with the adjustments
provided herein as a supplemental requirement, applicable in the case
of any application for which the reviewing Board requires professional
assistance in making findings of compliance pursuant to § 330-237.1.6.
(1) The required escrow deposit for applications involving
determinations regarding any one or more of the following
resource components shall be calculated by multiplying the
existing escrow deposit requirement by 1.25: carbonate rock phase
§ 330-237.3 VERNON CODE § 330-237.3
1:868
§ 330-237.4. Submission checklist requirements.
All applicants seeking approval for any activity, improvement or
development project covered under the provisions of this Ordinance shall
submit the materials required in this section for review by the applicable
municipal authority. In no case shall an Application for Development (as
defined in Section 330-231) be deemed complete or scheduled for Board
review until such time as the Board has received all required items in
accordance with the provisions herein. Applications for Highlands Resource
Permits and for Zoning Permits and Building/Construction Permits requiring
Highlands Resource review shall not be considered for such review until
such time as the reviewing authority has received all required items in
accordance with the provisions herein. In all cases, the submission
requirements of this section shall be considered supplemental to the
checklist requirements of the underlying municipal land use ordinances.
§ 330-237.4.1. General Submission Requirements. [Ord. No.
2014-19]
All applications shall be accompanied by the following:
I investigation, water use and conservation, wellhead protection,
prime groundwater recharge, low impact development.
(2) The required escrow deposit for applications involving
determinations as to any of the following resource components
shall be calculated by multiplying the existing escrow deposit
requirement by 0.25 for each applicable item, and adding each to
the existing escrow deposit amount: density or intensity of
development standards, forest resources, Highlands open waters,
riparian areas, lake management, steep slopes, carbonate rock
phase II investigation, water deficit mitigation, or stormwater
management (including stormwater low impact development.
(3) The required escrow deposit for any application involving
determinations listed at both C(1) and C(2), above, shall be
calculated by multiplying the existing escrow deposit requirement
by 0.25 and adding the result to the amount determined under
C(2).
A. Application Fees and Escrow Deposits
B. Completed Application Forms (23 Copies)
C. Highlands Act Exemptions. Any applicant claiming eligibility for an
exemption under the Highlands Act shall provide a copy of one of the
following
(1) Municipal Exemption Determination for any eligible exemption
listed at § 330-237.1.2; or
(2) Highlands Applicability Determination from the NJDEP.
§ 330-237.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.4.1
1:869
D. Prior Approvals. All applications requiring prior approvals pursuant to
the provisions of this Ordinance shall provide evidence of receipt of
same, as listed below. All such applications shall be accompanied by
copies of the specific plans, reports and other materials to which such
approval applies.
(1) For any application affecting property in the Special Environmental
Zone pursuant to either § 330-233.2.1 or § 330-235.5.2:
(a) An HPAA with waiver issued by the NJDEP for any application
involving a Major Highlands Development.
(b) A Special Environmental Zone Waiver issued by the Highlands
Council for any application involving a non-Major Highlands
Development.
(2) For any application proposing disturbance of Critical Habitat
pursuant to § 330-234.4.2, Notice of Authorization issued by the
Highlands Council or HPAA issued by the NJDEP.
(3) For any application proposing development within the Carbonate
Rock Area pursuant to § 330-234.5.2, copies of Phase I Geologic
Investigation report, Phase II Geotechnical Evaluation Report if
applicable, associated certification(s) of sufficiency issued by
Municipal Engineer, and all written evaluations, reports,
recommendations issued by the Municipal Engineer pursuant to
§ 330-234.5.3.
(4) For any application proposing development within a Carbonate
Rock Drainage Area pursuant to § 330-234.5.4, copies of Phase I
Geologic Investigation report, associated certification of sufficiency
issued by Municipal Engineer, and all written evaluations, reports,
recommendations issued by the Municipal Engineer pursuant to
§ 330-234.5.3.
(5) For any application proposing an increase in the use of Net Water
Availability or Conditional Water Availability pursuant to
§ 330-234.7, Notice of Findings issued by the Highlands Council
pursuant to § 330-234.7.7 or HPAA issued by the NJDEP.
(6) (Reserved)
(7) For any application for a Major Highlands Development in the
Preservation Area as defined by the NJDEP Preservation Area rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:38, an HPAA issued by the NJDEP.
(8) For any application proposing the installation of new or extended
water supply or wastewater collection/treatment infrastructure in
any portion of the Preservation Area, an HPAA with waiver issued
by the NJDEP.
E. Mapping Instructions. All mapped information shall be provided for the
full parcels affected by the proposed project and a distance of 200 feet
§ 330-237.4.1 VERNON CODE § 330-237.4.1
1:870
§ 330-237.4.2. Permit Applications.
The submission requirements of this subsection shall apply in addition to
those of § 330-237.4.1 above, in the case of all applications for Highlands
Resource Permits and for Zoning or Building/Construction Permits
requiring Highlands Resource Review. Where the reviewing authority or
designated review professional determines that a submission item listed in
this subsection is not applicable to the proposed development project or
is unnecessary to the conduct of such review, the authority or designated
professional may waive the requirement for its submission. A waiver of
submission of any checklist item shall not be construed to preclude the
reviewing entity from ultimately requiring the submission of such item,
however, if during the course of application review, it is found necessary and
relevant in making a determination.
from the outer boundaries of all affected parcels. Where this Ordinance
requires field surveys of resources, the field survey requirement shall
apply only to the affected parcels and shall be conducted by qualified
professionals. These include specifically: contiguous steep slope areas
of 5,000 square feet or more which are not within the Steep Slope
Protection Area; areas defined as Forest via the methodology provided
at Appendix A which are not identified within the Total Forest Area,
or which revise the Total Forest Area; if required pursuant to
§ 330-234.6.4, the applicable limits of the Lake Management Scenic
Resources Tier; and if deemed necessary by the review professional
pursuant to § 330-234.5.4, the boundary lines of any Carbonate Rock
Drainage Area. The area within 200 feet of the affected parcels may be
mapped using existing data and is not subject to field surveys. Where
field surveys are not required for mapping of Highlands resources,
the application shall include Highlands Council GIS data. In addition
to paper plans, initial plan sets shall be submitted on CD (or other
acceptable archival electronic format) in the most recent version of
ESRI Shape files (.shp) and in the most recent version of Adobe
Acrobat® (.pdf) format. The plans must be geo-referenced using New
Jersey State Plane Coordinates NAD83 (or the most current New Jersey
State Plane coordinate system). The final approved version shall be
submitted in the same manner. Plan revisions (subsequent to the initial
plan sets but prior to final approved version) shall be submitted in .shp
and .pdf either in archival electronic format or via e-mail. Projects that
will disturb less than two (2) acres and will create less than one (1) acre
of net impervious surface may be submitted as geo-referenced CAD
files in lieu of the ESRI Shape files.
A. Base Submission Requirements.
(1) Identification of Highlands Zone or Sub-Zone in which the property
is located (available through Highlands Council website).
(2) Identification of Highlands Resource and Protection Areas in which
the property is located, inclusive of Highlands Council maps
§ 330-237.4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.4.2
1:871
indicating the boundary lines of same unless fully encompassing
the property (Highlands Council website).
(3) Existing and proposed use(s) and accessory use(s), including any
proposed Major or Minor PCS (listed at APPENDIX B and
APPENDIX C).
(4) Copy of property survey indicating metes and bounds, existing
buildings, structures, impervious surfaces, significant site features
(e.g. water bodies), easements or other such encumbrances.
(5) Plans showing the proposed area of disturbance for all aspects of
the development, including but not limited to buildings, driveways,
utilities, landscaped areas and all appurtenant structures.
(6) Plans showing the proposed grading, soil conservation plan, and
sediment and soil erosion control plan.
(7) Plans showing proposed conservation restrictions or easement(s)
to be provided pursuant to § 330-235.3.
(8) Plans documenting baseline conditions in all areas designated for
public (or non-profit land trust) open space preservation.
(9) Water Use
(a) For non-Major Highlands Development, existing and proposed
water demand inclusive of calculations based on use and unit/
square footage equivalents listed at § 330-233.3.4.
(b) For any non-Major Highlands Development application
proposing new or increased water use pursuant to
§ 330-234.7.2:
[1] All submission items required pursuant to any adopted
municipal or subwatershed-based Water Use and
Conservation Management Plan (WUCMP).
[2] The following, where a WUCMP has not been adopted and
the application proposes use of Conditional Water
Availability pursuant to § 330-234.7.7B:
[a] Information identifying project water demand data,
water supply source and water utility provider.
[b] Identification of the water supply source HUC14(s) for
the project, deficit status, and conditional availability
as provided by the Highlands Council.
[c] Deficit Mitigation Plan pursuant to § 330-234.7.7B(4).
(10) Septic Systems
§ 330-237.4.2 VERNON CODE § 330-237.4.2
1:872
(a) For applications for non-Major Highlands Development,
existing and proposed septic system demand inclusive of
calculations based on use and unit/square footage equivalents
listed § 330-233.3.5B.
(b) For applications for non-Major Highlands Development,
proposing new or increased septic system demand pursuant to
§ 330-233.3.2, septic system yield calculations based on
§ 330-233.3.5B.
(c) For any application involving aggregated septic system yield
pursuant to § 330-233.3.5:
[1] Septic system yield calculations pertinent to all parcels,
whether contributing or receiving such yield; and
[2] Proposed Conservation Restrictions applicable to all
contributing parcels, pursuant to § 330-233.3.5 and the
provisions of § 330-235.3.
(d) For all applications proposing new septic systems, plans
showing the proposed location and configuration of such
system(s), including designated area(s) for reserve septic
disposal field(s) pursuant to § 330-235.6. Plan notes indicating
that the septic system(s) shall be designed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:9A, and that design plans and details are subject to
the approval of the Sussex County Health Department.
(e) Proposed deed restrictions to be imposed to prohibit the
installation or construction of any permanent improvements
within the reserve disposal area(s) pursuant to § 330-235.6.
(11) Stormwater Management
(a) For applications regulated under municipal or regional
stormwater management plans (or both), all applicable
submission requirements pertinent thereto.
(b) Proposed Low Impact Development management practices to
minimize the creation or increase of stormwater runoff due to
development or disturbance of the site.
(12) Low Impact Development
(a) Description of Conservation Design Planning process,
pursuant to § 330-235.2.2.
(b) Landscape plan (if applicable) indicating proposed type,
species, quantity and location of plantings; planting details.
(c) Description of energy efficiencies incorporated into
building(s), building orientation and site design.
§ 330-237.4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.4.2
1:873
§ 330-237.4.3. Applications for Development.
The submission requirements of this subsection shall apply in addition
to those of § 330-237.4.1 and § 230-237.4.2 above, to all Applications for
Development involving properties containing Highlands Resources or
located within a Highlands Resource Area or Special Protection Area.
Where the reviewing Board determines that a submission item listed in
this subsection is not applicable to the proposed development project or
is unnecessary in the conduct of its review, the Board may waive the
requirement for its submission. A waiver of submission of any checklist
item shall not be construed to preclude the reviewing Board from ultimately
requiring the submission of such item, however, if during the course of
application review, it is found necessary and relevant in making a
determination.
(d) Description of proposed reuse or recycling of building
materials.
(13) Any such additional information as the reviewing authority may
find necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. Highlands Resource Submission Requirements. For applications
involving properties containing any Highlands Resource, Highlands
Resource Area or Special Protection Area, all submission checklist
items required pursuant to each, as provided at § 330-237.4.4 through
§ 330-237.4.13, below.
A. Base Submission Requirements. In addition to the Base Submission
Requirements of § 330-237.4.2 above, the following shall apply:
(1) Existing features and site analysis plan, identifying and mapping:
(a) All Highlands Open Waters and water bodies (including but not
limited to rivers, lakes, ponds, reservoirs, wetlands, seeps,
springs);
(b) All existing structures (including archaeological features, ruins
and stone walls);
(c) All significant physical features; and
(d) Existing trails and greenways, and preserved lands and
farmland.
(2) Architectural elevation renderings, if structures are proposed
(preliminary for subdivision applications).
(3) A list of any pre-existing encumbrances affecting the property (e.g.,
easements, deed restrictions, covenants).
(4) Copies of any related surveys, site plans, professional reports and
environmental site assessments.
§ 330-237.4.2 VERNON CODE § 330-237.4.3
1:874
§ 330-237.4.4. Forest Resources.
§ 330-237.4.5. Highlands Open Waters and Riparian Areas.
B. Highlands Resource Submission Requirements. For applications
involving properties containing any Highlands Resource, Highlands
Resource Area or Special Protection Area, all submission checklist
items required pursuant to each, as provided at § 330-237.4.4 through
§ 330-237.4.13, below.
C. Cluster Development Requirements. For applications proposing Cluster
Development pursuant to Section 330-236, all submission checklist
items required pursuant to § 330-237.4.13, below.
A. Plans identifying forests using the Highlands Council Forest Resource
Area, Forest Integrity Indicators, and Total Forest GIS layers for forest
resources.
B. Information identifying upland forests existing outside of the limits of
the Total Forest Area by use of the Forest Determination methodology
of APPENDIX A (N.J.A.C. 7:38-3.9).
C. Where required in connection with disturbances pursuant to
§ 330-234.1.5 through § 330-234.1.6, Forest Impact Report
(§ 330-234.1.6) and Forest Mitigation Plan (§ 330-234.1.7).
A. Maps showing the location of all Highlands Open Waters, Highlands
Open Waters buffers, and Riparian Areas, as provided in this Ordinance.
B. For linear development pursuant to § 330-234.2.5G(3), all items
required as listed therein.
C. For proposed disturbance of a previously disturbed Riparian Area,
pursuant to § 330-234.2.6A:
(1) A current property survey prepared by a licensed New Jersey Land
Surveyor indicating: the metes and bounds of the subject property;
the location and dimensions of existing buildings and other
structures located thereon; the limits and extent of graded,
compacted, filled or excavated areas, not including agricultural
uses; the limits and extent of areas stripped of natural vegetation
and of maintained lawn areas; and any other site improvements
provided in support of prior development. The full extent of the
proposed area of new disturbance shall be clearly indicated
pursuant to § 330-237.4.2A above, with the previously-disturbed
area(s) illustrated on the same sheet using shaded or shadow
outline features.
(2) Functional values assessment pursuant to § 330-234.2.7.
(3) Proposed Low Impact Development techniques.
§ 330-237.4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.4.5
1:875
§ 330-237.4.6. Steep Slopes.
§ 330-237.4.7. Critical Habitat.
D. For proposed disturbance of High, Moderate or Low Integrity Riparian
Areas pursuant to § 330-234.2.6B:
(1) Functional values assessment pursuant to § 330-234.2.7.
(2) Proposed Low Impact Development techniques.
(3) Riparian Area Mitigation Plan pursuant to § 330-234.2.6B(1)(c).
A. Map showing limits of Steep Slope Protection Area as provided in this
Ordinance.
B. Map showing any additional areas of contiguous steep slopes that,
separately or in combination with the Steep Slope Protection Area,
constitute an area of 5,000 square feet or more, including, for any
proposed disturbance therein, clear delineation of slope classes as
defined at § 330-231.3.2.
C. For any application proposing linear development of a Moderately or
Severely Constrained slope area pursuant to § 330-234.3.3A, all items
as listed and required therein.
D. For any application proposing disturbance of a Constrained or Limited
Constrained slope pursuant to § 330-234.3.3B, a steep slope
development plan indicating proposed Low Impact Development
techniques, slope stabilization techniques, soil erosion and sediment
control measures, stormwater controls, and methods of protection
proposed for existing slope vegetation and trees.
E. For any application proposing to disturb 5,000 square feet or more of
Constrained or Limited Constrained Steep Slopes:
(1) Environmental Impact Statement or Report including specifically:
the impact of the proposed development on Highlands Regional
Scenic Resources; aesthetic impacts related to visibility and
aesthetic quality of the proposed development; the extent of
proposed landform grading, stabilization and retaining structures;
and impacts on other environmental features addressed by the
Steep Slopes provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Hydrology, drainage and flooding analysis report or reports
prepared in support of conformance with the municipal stormwater
management plan and regulations adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8,
or a Flood Hazard Area Control Act application pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:13.
A. Maps identifying Critical Habitat using the Critical Habitat GIS layers
for Critical Wildlife Habitat, Significant Natural Areas and Vernal Pools,
as provided in this Ordinance.
§ 330-237.4.5 VERNON CODE § 330-237.4.8
1:876
§ 330-237.4.8. Carbonate Rock Areas.
§ 330-237.4.9. Lake Management Areas.
§ 330-237.4.10. Prime Ground Water Recharge Areas.
A. Map identifying the limits of Carbonate Rock Area as provided in this
Ordinance.
B. For applications proposing development within any Carbonate Rock
Drainage Area, map identifying the limits of same.
A. Map identifying the Lake Management Area and Lake Management
Tier(s) as provided in this Ordinance.
B. For linear development with a Shoreland Protection Tier (Highlands
Open Waters buffer) pursuant to § 330-234.2.5G(3), all items required
as listed therein.
C. For proposed disturbance of a Water Quality Management Tier, a
stormwater management plan pursuant to § 330-234.6.3.
D. For any proposed development within the Scenic Resources Tier, a
visual assessment survey, tree protection plan, and exterior lighting
plan pursuant to § 330-234.6.4 B.
A. Map identifying Prime Ground Water Recharge Areas as provided in
this Ordinance.
B. For any application proposing to disturb a Prime Ground Water
Recharge Area:
(1) Site analysis and proposed Low Impact Development techniques
pursuant to § 330-234.8.3.
(2) PGWRA Mitigation Plan pursuant to § 330-234.8.3 D.
(3) Hydrology, drainage and flooding analysis report or reports
prepared in support of conformance with municipal stormwater
management plan and regulations pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8 or a
Flood Hazard Area Control Act application pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:13.
(4) Site specific Geologic, Hydrogeologic and Pedologic analysis to
determine the overall recharge rate and volume and to determine
the location with the lowest recharge potential within the PGWRA.
The submitted analysis report shall include appropriately scaled
geologic, hydrogeologic and pedologic maps and cross sections
showing all pertinent geologic, hydrogeologic and pedologic
features. The report shall also present all relevant analytical
results, calculations and graphical data.
§ 330-237.4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-237.4.10
1:877
§ 330-237.4.11. Wellhead Protection.
§ 330-237.4.12. Agricultural Resource Areas (ARA).
§ 330-237.4.13. Cluster/Conservation Design Development.
C. For any existing or proposed Potential Contaminant Source (APPENDIX
B and APPENDIX C), proposed Best Management Practices pursuant to
§ 330-234.9.3 A.
A. Map identifying Wellhead Protection Areas (WHPAs) and time of travel
Tiers as provided in this Ordinance. Where more than one WHPA Tier
intersects an existing or proposed Potential Contaminant Source
(APPENDIX B and APPENDIX C) within a project site, identify the more
protective Tier as the applicable Tier for that Potential Contaminant
Source.
B. Identification and description of each major or minor Potential
Contaminant Source (APPENDIX B and APPENDIX C) on the property,
whether existing or proposed, and for each, the relevant Tier and
proposed Best Management Practices pursuant to § 330-234.9.3 A.
C. Narrative and mapped description of the extent to which the
application is consistent with the Areawide WQMP Plan.
D. Copies of any related hydrogeologic/geologic reports, remediation
reports, results of soil or ground water analyses or other environmental
assessment reports (i.e., Phase I or Phase II reports).
A. Map identifying the limits of the ARA as provided in this Ordinance.
B. Such additional plans and information as may be required in the review
of any agricultural or horticultural development proposal pursuant to
municipal provisions set forth at § 330-234.10.3.
C. For Cluster/Conservation Design Development, all submission checklist
items as provided at § 330-237.4.13, below.
A. Property survey(s) identifying the limits and configuration of the
proposed Cluster Project Area, inclusive of all contributing parcels in
the case of noncontiguous clustering, and indicating all tract or parcel
areas to the nearest one hundredth acre.
B. Development plans applicable to the Development Set Aside of the
Cluster Project Area, including all details as required pursuant to the
municipal subdivision ordinance, to define and describe all proposed
supporting infrastructure, including but not limited to: roadways,
curbing, sight lines, street right-of-ways, utilities (e.g., water, sewer,
gas, electric, telecommunications), stormwater management, lighting,
street tree plantings, common areas, signage and landscaping.
§ 330-237.4.10 VERNON CODE § 330-237.4.13
1:878
§ 330-238. Appeals, waivers, exceptions.
§ 330-238.1. Applicability.
Except to the extent modified by the provisions of this article, the existing
provisions of the underlying municipal land use ordinance with respect to
appeals, waivers and exceptions shall remain in full force and effect. This
article shall not be construed to alter the applicable timeframes, procedural
requirements or criteria for decision-making as set forth under the MLUL,
and as provided consistent therewith in the underlying municipal land use
ordinance.
§ 330-238.2. Appeals.
C. Development plans applicable to the Development Set Aside indicating
proposed buffering, lot lay-out, lot sizes, configurations, and
dimensions, building envelopes, building setbacks and yard areas.
D. Proposed plans applicable to the Preservation Set Aside of the Cluster
Project Area, including:
(1) For ARA applications proposing preserved farmland, information
identifying farmland soil quality on the project site, including
Prime, Statewide, Unique, and Locally Important farmland soils,.
(2) Plans for Agricultural or Horticultural development, including all
information required under § 330-237.4.12 B, above.
(3) Plans for open space preservation, if applicable, including active or
passive recreation amenities.
(4) Proposed conservation restrictions pursuant to § 330-236.1.4,
identifying intended dedications regarding all preserved portions,
including those applicable to any noncontiguous parcels.
E. Identification of any preserved land or land known to be targeted for
preservation (agriculture and open space) located within 200 feet of the
subject property.
A. Administrative Officer Decision. Any order, requirement or decision of
any municipal official made or issued in the course of the enforcement
of the provisions of this Ordinance may be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment in accordance with all applicable provisions of the
MLUL (including but not limited to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a), -70.2, and -72
through -75).
B. Interpretations. Requests for interpretation of the maps and various
provisions of this Ordinance may be made by application to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b). The Board, in
rendering any such decisions shall be guided by the map protocols
listed at § 330-232.4.5 and the specific language of the Ordinance
provisions in question. The Board may seek the advice and counsel of
§ 330-237.4.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-238.2
1:879
the Highlands Council or if applicable to a Preservation Area boundary
line, the NJDEP, in resolving any matter of interpretation and all final
Board decisions shall remain subject to Highlands Council call-up and
review provisions as set forth at § 330-237.2.2.
C. "C" Variances. All MLUL criteria applicable to variance relief under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) shall apply in the consideration of applications
seeking such relief from the provisions of this Ordinance. Such relief
shall apply with respect to the requirements of Section 330-233, Zone
District Regulations, § 330-238.3A, Agricultural and Horticultural
Development, and § 330-236.8.1, Residential Cluster Development,
with the exception that for the items listed at E, below, relief shall in
addition require prior authorization of the Highlands Council. Where
certain deviations from the strict application of the provisions of this
Ordinance or the underlying municipal Zoning Ordinance will minimize
or eliminate adverse impacts to Highlands Resources, Resource Areas,
or Special Protection Areas, these benefits shall be given significant
weight in the analysis of approval criteria.
D. "D" Variances. All MLUL criteria applicable to variance relief under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) shall apply in the consideration of applications
seeking such relief from the relevant provisions of this Ordinance. Such
relief shall apply with respect to the requirements of Section 330-233,
Zone District Regulations, § 330-238.10.3A, Agricultural and
Horticultural Development, and § 330-236.1, Residential Cluster
Development, with the exception that for the items listed at E, below,
relief shall in addition require prior authorization of the Highlands
Council. Where certain deviations from the strict application of the
provisions of this Ordinance or the underlying municipal Zoning
Ordinance will minimize or eliminate adverse impacts to Highlands
Resources, Resource Areas, or Special Protection Areas, these benefits
shall be given significant weight in the analysis of approval criteria. For
purposes of clarification, requests for relief that pertain to specific
provisions of this Ordinance regarding permitted uses shall be
cognizable as requests for "d" variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d).
E. Highlands Council Jurisdiction. Relief from any of the following specific
provisions of Section 330-233 of this Ordinance may be granted by the
reviewing Board or other municipal authority only where a waiver has
been issued by the Highlands Council. No such application shall be
deemed complete or considered for review by the Board or other
municipal authority absent such authorization. Applicants seeking any
such relief shall make application directly to the Highlands Council.
(1) Prohibited Uses. All provisions of § 330-233.2.3.
(2) Mandatory Residential Cluster Development. All provisions of
§ 330-233.2.1.
(3) Special Environmental Zone. All provisions of § 330-233.2.
§ 330-238.2 VERNON CODE § 330-238.2
1:880
§ 330-238.3. Waivers and exceptions.
Relief from any provision of Section 330-234 (with the exception of
§ 330-234.10.3A) or Section 330-235 of this Ordinance shall require
issuance of either a Highlands Act waiver or an exception, as provided in
this subsection. Highlands Act waivers may be issued only by the NJDEP or
the Highlands Council, as appropriate. Exceptions may be granted by the
reviewing municipal Board or authority only where the review standards of
this subsection have been satisfied.
§ 330-238.3.1. Highlands Act Waiver Provisions.
Highlands Act waivers may be issued only by the NJDEP or the Highlands
Council in accordance with the respective rules and criteria established
by each agency in accordance with the provisions of the Highlands Act
and the Highlands Regional Master Plan. A Highlands Act waiver shall
be required in the event of any application proposing the disturbance
of a Highlands Resource, Resource Area or Special Protection Area in
excess of, or not in compliance with, that authorized under the applicable
provisions of Sections 330-234 and 330-235 of this Ordinance. Highlands
Act waivers shall also be required for any application proposing: a) use
of net or conditional water availability in excess of that authorized by the
Highlands Council; b) water deficit mitigation insufficient to comply with
mitigation requirements of the Highlands Council pursuant to § 330-234.7.7
B.; or c) installation or expansion of a use or structure listed as a PCS
at Appendix B or Appendix C (where not otherwise prohibited by use
restrictions of § 330-233.2.3) in a manner inconsistent with all provisions
and conditions of approval of § 330-234.9.3. The issuance of a Highlands Act
Waiver shall in no case be construed to alter or obviate the requirements
of any other applicable State or local laws, rules, regulations, development
regulations, or ordinances.
§ 330-238.3.2. Exception Provisions.
(4) Water Availability Requirements. All provisions of § 330-233.3.4.
(5) Septic System Density. Any application for Non-Major Highlands
Development in the Preservation Area proposing a septic system
density that is greater than that permitted (i.e., fewer acres per
septic system than required).
A. For applications other than those cited at § 330-238.3.1, above, the
reviewing Board or other authority may grant exceptions from the strict
application of the provisions of Sections 330-234 and 330-235 of this
Ordinance only where the applicant demonstrates and the reviewing
entity finds that:
(1) The deviation is unavoidable and represents the minimum feasible
under the particular circumstances surrounding the project
proposal, and the grant of relief is reasonable, necessary and
§ 330-238.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-238.3.2
1:881
§ 330-239. Enforcement, violations, penalties.
§ 330-239.1. Enforcement.
Enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility
of the Township Zoning Officer, Engineer, Health Department, Construction
Code Official and any other officer or entity designated by the Township
Administrator, Manager, or Governing Body, as applicable. Enforcement
shall occur in the case of any activity, improvement, or development project
that violates any provision of this Ordinance, whether or not subject to
a permitting or approval process pursuant to this Ordinance, or the
underlying municipal land use ordinances.
§ 330-239.2. Inspections.
supports the general purpose and intent of the applicable
provisions; or
(2) The literal enforcement of the provision(s) of the ordinance at issue
is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
B. The approval of an exception must be accompanied by a detailed
justification, and is subject to review by the Highlands Council. Any
applicant seeking approval of an exception shall provide such
justification, in writing, including at a minimum an explanation of how
and to what extent the following conditions are addressed:
(1) The exception addresses A(1) or A(2) above;
(2) The exception provides relief only to the minimum extent
necessary;
(3) Other environmental features are not damaged in the process of
protecting the regulated resources; and
(4) No alternative exists that will allow for at least a minimum practical
use of the property (if applicable).
A. Site Inspections. The Zoning Officer is authorized to and shall
periodically inspect all project sites for compliance with development
approvals pursuant to this Ordinance. The Inspector shall in addition:
(1) Verify of baseline conditions in all areas designated for
conservation easements, deed restrictions or other means of
resource preservation.
(2) Sequence compliance inspections to ensure the protection of onsite
and off-site resources, achievement of site construction and
environmental impact requirements, placement of conservation
easement monuments, etc.
§ 330-238.3.2 VERNON CODE § 330-239.2
1:882
§ 330-239.3. Administrative compliance.
The Zoning Officer shall be authorized to issue a stop-work order, revoke
building permits, refuse to approve further work, or deny certificates of
occupancy or approval, and to impose mandatory remedial and corrective
measures including full restoration of any resources that are improperly
disturbed.
§ 330-239.4. Penalties.
Civil and criminal penalties for violations of this Ordinance shall be as
established in accordance with Section 250-21.C.
(3) Verify "as built" conditions to ensure compliance with all approvals,
conservation easements, deed restrictions or other required means
of resource preservation.
§ 330-239.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-239.4
1:883

ARTICLE XX
Tree Preservation
[Adopted 10-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-40]
§ 330-240. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect valuable, desirable, distinctive and
valued trees and woodlands from indiscriminate destruction and damage,
and further to provide erosion and sediment controls, shade, energy
conservation, noise abatement and oxygen production. It is also the purpose
of this article to maintain natural habitats for birds and other wildlife and
also to provide protection for and enhancement of the Township's visual
environment and landscape.
The Township Council recognizes a strong relationship between the
integrity of the Township's woodlands and the quality of the region's water
resources and the damage that can be caused by development on
constrained land (steep slopes, wetlands, depth to groundwater etc.), tree
removal, soil disturbance, stormwater management, and the general
stewardship required for the best use of the land resources. Therefore, the
appropriate management of the Township's resource is an important health,
safety and general welfare issue to be regulated.
§ 330-241. Definitions.
CLEAR CUTTING — Means the removal of all standing trees on a lot or
portion of a lot.
DIAMETER AT POINT OF MEASUREMENT (DPM) — Means the diameter
of a tree measured four and one-half (4 1/2) feet (forestry method) above
the ground level on the downhill side of existing trees, also referred to as
Diameter Breast Height (DBH).
DRIP LINE or TREE CANOPY — Shall mean a limiting line established by
a series of perpendicular drop points marking the maximum radius of the
crown of an existing tree, but not less than six (6) feet from the trunk.
REPLACEMENT TREE — Shall mean a nursery-grown certified tree,
properly balled and burlapped, marked with a durable label indicating
genus, species and variety and satisfying the standards established for
nursery stock and installation as set forth by the American Association of
Nurserymen, of a size two and one-half (2 1/2) caliper DPM.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — Shall mean the removal of larger trees on an
individual basis while leaving trees of lesser size.
SILVICULTURE — Shall mean the management of any wooded tract or lot
of land to insure its continued survival and welfare, whether for commercial
or noncommercial purposes, pursuant to a plan approved by the New Jersey
Department of Forestry.
SPECIMEN TREE — Means any tree with a DPM of twenty-four (24) inches
or greater.
§ 330-240 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-241
1:885
THINNING — Shall mean the removal of undesirable, competitive, diseased
or damaged trees so as to cultivate and improve the remaining trees on the
site.
TREE — Means any tree species which has a DPM of eight (8) inches or
greater.
§ 330-242. Cutting or removal restricted.
With the exceptions of the exemptions established in this article no person
shall cut or remove, or cause to be cut or removed, any existing tree with
a diameter at the point of measurement of eight (8) inch caliper or greater
upon any lands within the Township unless the cutting and removal can be
accomplished in accordance with the provisions set forth in this article or
pursuant to other such preservation regulations as may be set forth in the
Administrative Code of Vernon Township.
§ 330-243. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempted from the requirements of this article:
A. Commercial nurseries or fruit orchards.
B. Christmas tree farms.
C. Any tree which is a part of a cemetery.
D. Trees directed to be removed by the Township, County, State or Federal
authority pursuant to law.
E. Removal of dead, dying or diseased, or damaged trees, or trees whose
angle or growth makes them an immediate hazard to structures or
human life.
F. Pruning or removal of trees within the right-of-way by utility companies
or maintenance of utility wires or pipelines and the pruning of trees
within sight easements.
G. Trees removed in conjunction with the Right to Farm Act, on qualifying
farms.
H. Parcels of land with a forest management plan approved by the NJDEP
Division of Forestry. The approved plan must be submitted to the
Planning & Zoning Department as a matter of record.
I. Single family lots with tree removal within an area of disturbance less
than five thousand (5,000) square feet for the purposes of additions,
accessory structures and expanded yard areas except in restricted
areas such as conservation easements, wetlands, wetland buffers or
stream buffers. Separate tree removal events on a lot over a three (3)
year period, which exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet, are not
exempt.
§ 330-241 VERNON CODE § 330-243
1:886
§ 330-244. Residential lots not subject to application requirements
before either the planning board or zoning board.
§ 330-245. Site plans and subdivisions.
Tree removal on lots which are subject to review by either the Planning
Board or Zoning Board shall not be subject to this article. Nothing in this
J. Parcels of land with preliminary site plan or subdivision approval, major
or minor. Removal of trees prior to Board approval is prohibited, unless
it is part of site investigation such as percolation test for septic system
suitability.
K. Properties that have an approved Lot Development Plan (LDP) from the
Vernon Township Engineering Department.
A. Tree removal on residential lots exceeding an area of disturbance of
five thousand (5,000) square feet shall require an application to the
Vernon Township Engineering Department for review by the Township
Engineer. The Township Engineer shall review the application and,
within 30 days, make a determination regarding the request to remove
trees and notify the applicant.
B. Application form. The application form shall be available at the
Township Engineering Department and shall include the following
information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of owner of the premises.
(2) Block and lot, and address of property where the tree removal is
located.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of person performing the
work.
(4) A list of trees to be removed with a DPM equal or greater than eight
(8) inches identified by size and species, including total number of
each species to be removed.
(5) Purpose of tree removal (construction, driveway, recreation area,
patio, parking area or other similar activity). Note — clear cutting
is prohibited except as required to accomplish these types of
improvements.
(6) A copy of a property survey indicating the area of the tree removal
activity and existing tree line to remain. This may be done by the
applicant on a copy of an existing survey. The Engineering
Department may request additional information if deemed
necessary to complete the review of the application. The
appropriate department shall determine if same is necessary, and if
so, require same of the applicant. Every effort should be made to
avoid such request of applicants.
§ 330-243 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-245
1:887
article shall be construed, however, to prevent the Board from requesting
similar input as on a tree removal application.
§ 330-246. Review and design standards.
§ 330-247. Protection of trees.
Whenever an application for tree removal has been granted after
application as set forth in this article, the following shall apply:
§ 330-248. Violations and penalties.
A. Trees shall be permitted to be removed as necessary to permit the
construction of buildings, structures, decks, pools, driveways, septic
field, lawn area for recreational use for the residents of the dwelling
and any other authorized improvements. Existing vegetation shall be
preserved to the greatest extent feasible.
B. Site or tree protection measures including a field delineated area of
disturbance with a silt fence or construction fence in place prior to
removal and any other measure as deemed appropriate by the Township
Engineer.
C. Healthy trees outside of the building setback requirements should be
retained to maintain resource protection and buffering to neighboring
properties, unless the trees pose a hazard to person or property or
whereby the approved construction grading or disturbance would
cause damage to a tree creating an unsafe condition.
D. Trees and vegetation shall not be removed in wetlands, wetland buffers,
stream buffers or dedicated conservation easements except for
exempted or permitted activities as approved by NJDEP or Vernon
Township, whichever has jurisdiction.
A. Where practical, no material or temporary soil deposits shall be placed
within the drip line of a tree to be preserved.
B. No equipment shall be operated within the drip line of any tree to be
preserved.
A. Where a site has been cleared and/or constructed which results in
accidental or unauthorized tree removal or severe damage which will
result in death of any tree noted for preservation, the owner/developer
shall replace the tree(s) in accordance with the following table:
Caliper of Existing Tree
Removed
# of Replacement Trees 2 1/2"
Caliper
Between 18 and 24 inches 2
Between 24 and 30 inches 3
Between 30 and 36 inches 4
§ 330-245 VERNON CODE § 330-248
1:888
§ 330-249. Permit approval.
§ 330-250. Appeal.
The decision of the Township Engineer shall be appealable to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
§ 330-251. through § 330-259. (Reserved)
Caliper of Existing Tree
Removed
# of Replacement Trees 2 1/2"
Caliper
36 inches or greater 5
(1) Replacement tree(s) shall be located on the site, and in accordance
with the Vernon Township Administrative Code.
(2) The type of replacement tree(s) shall be the same as the species
removed or as approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Penalty. The Township Administrative Code § 1-19 shall apply to any
violation of the tree removal regulations contained in this article.
A. Where tree removal is a part of an application before either the
Planning Board or Zoning Board, the Municipal Land Use Law and
Township Administrative Code, other than this article, governs.
B. No approval shall be granted if the Township, after consideration of the
advice of the Township Engineering Department, finds that the
proposed tree removal is contrary to the best interests of the public
health, safety or general welfare.
C. The applicant must notify the Township Engineer in writing a minimum
of five (5) days prior to start of work.
§ 330-248 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-251
1:889

ARTICLE XXI
Solar Zoning and Standards
[Added 6-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-14]
§ 330-260. Solar: Zoning and Standards. [Amended 6-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-12]
A. Solar or photovoltaic energy facilities and structures are not permitted
uses in any zone within Vernon Township. The Land Use Board shall
approve a site plan for a minor solar or photovoltaic energy facility or
structure and a major solar or photovoltaic energy facility or structure
which shall meet site plan review standards and requirements as set
forth in Article VI "Subdivision and Site Plan Review and Approval, of
this chapter" with the following exception:
(1) A roof-mounted solar system shall be a permitted accessory use in
all zones.
A roof-mounted solar system and all necessary equipment shall not
extend more than 12 inches beyond the edge of the roofline or 12
inches above the highest point of the roof surface or structure. Flat
roofs shall be exempt from the height requirement. However, solar
panels on a flat roof shall not extend more than 5 feet above the
roofline.
B. Ground-mounted minor solar or photovoltaic energy facilities or
structures shall be allowed only in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) Minor solar facilities shall have a setback requirement consistent
with building regulations for accessory structures. Ground arrays
which are accessory to an existing structure shall not be permitted
in any front yard. These systems shall not exceed 15 feet in height
when installed as ground arrays. Cadmium telluride solar panels
shall not be permitted due to the highly carcinogenic nature of
cadmium and the possible detrimental effects on children, wildlife,
water supplies and the environment. Screening of the minor
facilities shall be deemed necessary, in the Board's discretion, to
minimize impacts on adjacent parcels.
C. Major solar or photovoltaic energy facilities or structures shall be
allowed only in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Minimum lot size: 20 acres. Preliminary and final site plan approval
shall be obtained prior to obtaining a zoning permit. In the LI
District, approval for major solar or photovoltaic energy facilities or
structures on lots smaller than 20 acres shall be at the discretion of
the Land Use Board. Solar facilities for non-preserved farmland
shall be a maximum of 10 acres, have a 2 Megawatt (MW) limit and
have a 1:5 ratio, i.e. one acre of the farm in solar use for every 5
§ 330-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-260
1:891
acres of the farmland assessed area in order to continue to
maintain Right to Farm protection.
(2) All major solar or photovoltaic energy facilities or structure
installations shall comply with all applicable State and Federal laws
and regulations.
(3) No soil shall be removed from any site upon which major solar or
photovoltaic energy facilities and structures are constructed unless
approved as per the Vernon Township Soil Removal Ordinance
(Chapter 483). Grading within Prime Farmland and Farmlands of
Statewide Significance shall be limited to only that necessary to
construct access roads, berms for screening and for construction of
inverter and switching equipment pads.
(4) Except pursuant to a permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP), no portion of major solar or
photovoltaic energy facilities and structures shall occupy areas of
land designated and regulated by NJDEP as floodplains, flood
hazard areas, wetlands, wetland transition areas or riparian
corridors. An applicability determination from the NJDEP shall be
provided to document the presence and/or absence of these
regulated areas. Buffer maintenance shall be consistent with the
Municipal, State and Federal regulations. Any Highlands
Preservation Area permits must be obtained prior to any work
being completed on the site.
(5) Major solar or photovoltaic energy facilities and structures shall
not occupy any area beyond the required principal building
setbacks for the zone in which the facility is to be located, exclusive
of poles for interconnection of the facility to the electrical grid. The
minimum vegetated visual and security buffer width for major solar
or photovoltaic energy facilities or structures shall be 50 feet and
shall be provided in all zoning districts. The minimum principal
setbacks shall be increased to 50 feet in any zoning district where
the principal building setback is less than 50 feet. Otherwise
minimum setbacks for principal structures within the zoning
district shall apply. The Board may reduce setback requirements in
the Light Industrial District if the Board finds that such a reduction
will not impact adjacent parcels.
(6) Major solar or photovoltaic energy facilities and structures shall be
visibly screened from the public traveled way (public roads, trails,
navigable waterways, scenic highways and by-ways), open space,
preserved farmland, publicly owned properties and historic
resources, including sites and buildings listed or eligible for listing
on the State and National Registers of Historic Places.
(a) To the extent achievable, solar or photovoltaic energy facilities
and structures shall be sited using the natural topography to
§ 330-260 VERNON CODE § 330-260
1:892
screen the energy project from public view and the view of any
adjoining residences.
(b) If the property is adjacent and contiguous to a permanently
preserved farm, open space and/or public access easements it
shall buffer the farm, open space and/or easements from view.
(c) The following minimum screening requirements shall be met.
However, notwithstanding the minimum requirements, the
applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Land Use
Board that the proposed screening provides a visual screen of
the facility from neighboring properties. Additional screening
may be needed to meet this requirement as determined by the
Board.
[1] Screening shall consist of a combination of native
plantings, to the extent possible. Alternately, an earthen
berm may be employed if existing vegetated screening and
native plantings will not suffice to provide the necessary
buffer and maintain the rural character of the Township.
The need for and location of vegetative screens includes
the identification of appropriate species and varieties of
vegetation to ensure that there is adequate visual
screening throughout the year.
[2] The landscaping plantings shall be designed for enhancing
the quality of the soil and the ability of the land to absorb
rainwater.
[3] Landscaping shall be limited to the extent possible of
native species of deciduous and coniferous trees and
shrubs that are indigenous to the area, as listed in the
Natural Resource Inventory, and shall not include invasive
species as listed in Natural Resource Inventory of Vernon
Township. Such plantings shall be depicted on a plan
prepared by a licensed professional. The applicant shall
rely upon existing vegetation, including existing
hedgerows or windbreaks that provide screening, to the
maximum extent practical. The appropriate height or
caliper of the vegetation to be planted shall ensure that
there is a 75 percent screening of the solar energy
generation facilities within 5 years of completing the
installation of the facilities. A photo simulated exhibit
depicting screening at key locations at the projected
5-year period shall be required.
(d) A barrier shall be installed behind the required screen which
shall:
[1] Secure the facility at all times.
§ 330-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-260
1:893
[2] Restrict access to all electrical wiring that may be readily
accessible.
[3] All electrical control equipment shall be labeled and
secured to prevent unauthorized access.
[4] Conform to the Uniform Construction Code and other
applicable standards.
[5] One or more access gates to the facility shall be provided.
Each access gate shall include a sign identifying the
property owner as well as responsible parties for operation
of the major solar and photovoltaic energy facilities and
structures; for maintenance of the facility; and for
maintenance of the visual screen, landscaping and security
fence. Contact information for all of the above responsible
parties shall be provided on each access gate sign.
[6] No signs shall be posted on a solar facility or any
associated building, structures, or fencing with the
exception of access gate signs, appropriate warning signs,
and manufacturer's or installer's identification.
[7] All transformers and high voltage equipment shall be
situated within a compound, which shall be enclosed
within a security fence and access gate, which shall
remain locked. If appropriate, the entire facility shall be
enclosed within a security fence and access gate.
[8] The height of security fences and access gates shall not
exceed 8 feet. Barbed wire fences are not permitted except
in cases where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Board of jurisdiction that barbed wire fencing is required
for security purposes. In such cases the total height of the
fence and access gates including barbed wire shall not
exceed 8 feet. Approval of barbed wire fencing for solar
facilities is at the discretion of the Board of jurisdiction.
(7) A Maintenance Plan shall be submitted by the applicant for the
continuing maintenance of all required plantings, including a
schedule of specific maintenance activities to be conducted. A
Maintenance Plan narrative shall also be included on the site plans
in note form. Maintenance of the required landscaping and fencing
shall be a continuing condition of any approval that may be
granted. A cost estimate for required plantings shall be presented
as part of any application and a 5-year maintenance bond approved
by the Township Engineer, which posts a minimum of 5 percent of
total landscaping costs, shall be a condition of approval. The
Maintenance Plan shall be environmentally responsible.
(8) All ground areas occupied by a major solar or photovoltaic energy
facility or structure installation that are not utilized for access to
§ 330-260 VERNON CODE § 330-260
1:894
operate and maintain the installation shall be planted and
maintained with shade tolerant grasses for the purpose of soil
erosion control and soil stabilization:
(a) A seed mixture of native, non-invasive shade tolerant grasses
shall be utilized and specified in a landscaping plan that shall
be provided.
(b) If it can be demonstrated by the applicant that an alternative
vegetative ground cover consisting of a seed mix of native, noninvasive
plant species and non-native, non-invasive shade
tolerant species shall be accepted for soil erosion control and
soil stabilization, and the alternative can be better sustained
over the life of the facility, the reviewing Board may approve
such an alternative to the requirement for native, non-invasive
shade-tolerant grasses or mix of grasses.
(c) Roadways within the site shall not be constructed of
impervious materials in order to minimize the amount of soil
compaction, except that driveways into the site shall meet the
Township standards for driveway entrances from public
roadways. Internal roadways shall be constructed to the
minimal extent possible. Roadways within the occupied area
shall be designed as grassed roadways to minimize the extent
of soil disturbance, water runoff and soil compaction. The use
of geotextile fabrics and gravel placed on the surface of the
existing soil for the construction of temporary roadways during
the construction of the solar energy generation facilities is
permitted provided that the geotextile fabrics and gravel are
removed once the solar energy generation facilities are in
operation.
(d) The bed and banks of existing drainage ditches, brooks,
streams and drainage swales shall be maintained in their
natural condition, except that where soil erosion is evident in
these features due to a lack of suitable stabilized vegetation.
The Board may require such areas to be planted and stabilized
in accordance with the recommendations found in Chapter 8,
Restoration Design, of the publication entitled Stream Corridor
Restoration, Principles, Processes and Practices, 10/98
Published Version. Revised 8/2001, prepared by the Natural
Resource Conservation Service and available at
www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/stream_restoration/newtofc.htm.
(e) The components of this plan may be combined with the
requirements of the Grading and Drainage Plan. See
Subsection A(9), below.
(9) The required landscaping plan shall include the provision of
adequate and appropriate drainage features, which shall be
designed such that site grading and construction maximizes the
§ 330-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-260
1:895
natural drainage patterns of stormwater originating within the
property boundaries and beyond property boundaries. If grading
is proposed, then a grading and drainage plan shall be submitted,
which shall demonstrate that the project is in compliance with the
Township's Stormwater Ordinance (Chapter 330, Article XII) and
other applicable State standards.
(a) A grading and drainage plan, including a soil erosion, a soil
stabilization and a soil grading plan shall be submitted under
the seal of a licensed professional engineer prior to any
permits being issued. The plan shall adequately demonstrate to
the Board of jurisdiction's engineer that no stormwater runoff
or natural water shall be diverted as to overload existing
drainage systems or create flooding. Such plan shall also
address the need for additional drainage structures on other
private properties or public lands.
(b) The grading and drainage plan shall show, among other things:
[1] All existing and proposed natural and artificial drainage
courses and other features for the control of drainage,
erosion, and water generally;
[2] The calculated volume of water runoff from the slope and
from the lot in question, as proposed to be improved; the
existence of all natural and artificial drainage courses and
facilities within 500 feet of the lot, which are or will be
used to carry or contain the runoff from the slope and the
lot; and
[3] The effect of any increased water runoff on all adjacent
properties and any other property which will be materially
affected by increased water runoff.
(c) Calculations shall be provided to adequately demonstrate that
existing preconstruction stormwater drainage velocities shall
not be exceeded in the post development condition.
(d) The use of stone shall not be permitted for soil erosion control
and soil stabilization unless as part of an overall plan approved
by the Board of jurisdiction.
(10) In addition to those items required for an application to be deemed
complete, a site plan application shall depict the following:
(a) Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures on the
property.
(b) Location of proposed and existing overhead and underground
utility and transmission lines.
(c) Location of any proposed or existing substations, inverters or
transformers.
§ 330-260 VERNON CODE § 330-260
1:896
(d) Details of solar panels and arrays. Cadmium telluride solar
panels shall not be permitted due to the highly carcinogenic
nature of cadmium and the possible detrimental effects on
children, wildlife, water supplies and the environment.
(e) Details of all inverters and equipment on the site including size
dimensions and noise levels during use.
(f) Description of how the energy generated by the facility will be
connected to the electrical distribution or transmission system
or the electrical system of the intended energy user. This
description shall also address the ability to disconnect the
system in the event of an emergency or maintenance.
(g) Description of shielding of any electric equipment to prevent
interference of radio or television reception at the property
line.
(h) Description of any necessary upgrades or modifications to
existing substations or the necessity for a new substation.
(i) For projects over 2MW, the location and elevations of all
transmission lines, support structures and attachments to a
substation(s).
(j) Location and condition of existing hedgerows and vegetated
windbreaks.
(k) A description of any lighting and its impact on neighboring
residences and properties.
(l) A construction plan to include, but not limited to mounting
techniques and a description of on-site construction.
(m) A description of glare on neighboring properties and
residences.
(n) An as-built plan shall be provided following completion of the
project as a condition of approval for the site plan.
(11) Permitted height — the maximum permitted vertical height above
ground for solar and photovoltaic energy panels shall be 15 feet.
(12) The use of lead-acid batteries shall not be permitted in major solar
energy systems and facilities except as standby power supplies for
control systems. Cadmium telluride solar panels shall not be
permitted due to the highly carcinogenic nature of cadmium and
the possible detrimental effects on children, wildlife, water
supplies and the environment.
(13) Solar energy generation facilities shall be designed to comply with
either of the following standards for sound emission:
§ 330-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-260
1:897
(a) The sound level shall not exceed 40 dBA when measured at any
point on the property line of the solar facility; or
(b) The sound level shall not exceed the ambient sound levels
measured at locations at the property line of the solar facility
that reasonably represent current or potential off-site sensitive
receptors in accordance with the following requirements:
[1] Ambient sound level measurements shall be made with an
octave band sound level meter during daylight hours for
periods of at least 1/2 hour and on 3 separate occasions, a
minimum of 4 hours apart, representing morning, mid-day
and evening, at least one of which shall be during a nonrush
hour. The meter shall be set for slow response with a
one-second sampling interval; and
[2] The data reported for each occasion shall be the octave
band values (31.5 Hz to 8,000 Hz) from the one second
sample that represents the L90 or Lmin broadband value
("unweighted" or "flat" response, e.g., dBZ).
(14) Any disturbance of wooded or forested areas shall be in compliance
with the Vernon Tree Protection Ordinance (Chapter 330, Article
XX).
(15) All applications for a major solar facility shall be accompanied by a
decommissioning plan to be implemented upon abandonment, or
cessation of activity, or in conjunction with removal of solar energy
systems. The decommissioning plan shall be submitted in
accordance with the requirements of this section. The
decommissioning plan shall also be documented on the site plans in
note form. Prior to removal of solar energy systems a demolition
permit for removal activities shall be obtained from the Vernon
Township Construction Official. Prior to issuance of a demolition
permit, the owner or operator of the facility shall post a
performance bond to ensure removal of the facility or systems in
accordance with the decommissioning plan. Disconnection of solar
energy systems shall be supervised by an electrician licensed in the
State of New Jersey. The Zoning Official shall be responsible for
compliance with the decommissioning plan.
(a) Solar and photovoltaic energy facilities and structures which
have not been in active and continuous service for a period of
18 months shall be removed from the property to a place of
safe and legal disposal in accordance with a decommissioning
plan. In order for the facility to maintain its status as an
operating solar farm, an annual report shall be submitted to
the Township Zoning Official stating the amount of electricity
generated by the facility in the previous year and the number
of days the facility was operational.
§ 330-260 VERNON CODE § 330-260
1:898
(b) If the applicant ceases operation of the project for 18 months;
or begins, but does not complete, construction of the project
within 18 months of start of construction, the applicant shall
restore the site according to a decommissioning plan prepared
by the applicant and approved by the Board. The applicant
shall submit a decommissioning plan that ensures that the site
will be restored to a useful, nonhazardous condition without
significant delay, including but not limited to the following:
[1] Removal of aboveground and underground equipment,
structures and foundations. The plan shall describe the
means by which all equipment and components of the
system(s) shall be disposed of in an environmentally
responsible manner and in accordance with prevailing
Federal, State and local regulations.
[2] Restoration of the surface grade and soil after removal of
aboveground structures and equipment.
[3] Revegetation of restored soil areas with native seed mixes,
plant species suitable to the area, which shall not include
any invasive species. In farmland areas, the revegetation
component of the decommissioning plan may include
provisions to resume agricultural use of the site.
[4] The plan must provide for the protection of public health
and safety and for protection of the environment and
natural resources during site restoration. The
decommissioning of all solar energy generation facilities
shall be done in accordance with a conservation plan
designed to address the impacts of the decommissioning
process.
[5] The plan must include a timeline for completion of site
restoration work.
(c) A cost estimate shall be provided for the cost of fully
implementing the decommissioning plan prior to the issuance
of a demolition permit. The cost estimate shall be subject to
review and approval by the Township Engineer.
(d) Before beginning any decommissioning activities, the
applicant must submit a performance bond in a form and
amount satisfactory to the Township Attorney, which shall be
based upon an estimate approved by the Township Engineer,
assuring the availability of adequate funds to remove the solar
infrastructure and restore the site to a useful, nonhazardous
condition in accordance with the decommissioning plan.
(e) Upon cessation of activity for a cumulative period of 18 months
of construction or installation activities of an approved major
solar or photovoltaic energy system, the Township may notify
§ 330-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-260
1:899
§ 330-261. (Reserved) [Deleted 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 13-12]
the owner and/or the operator of the facility to complete
construction and installation of the facility. If the owner and/
or operator fail to complete construction and installation
activities within 180 additional days, the Township may order
the owner and/or operator of the facility to implement the
decommissioning plan. Within 180 days of notice being served,
the owner and/or or operator shall substantially complete all
activities in the decommissioning plan.
(f) Upon cessation of activity of a fully constructed major solar or
photovoltaic energy system for a cumulative period of one year,
the Township may notify the owner and/or the operator of the
facility to implement the decommissioning plan. The Township
Zoning Official shall be responsible for enforcement. Within
180 days of notice being served, the owner and/or operator
shall either resume energy generation to at least 80 percent
capacity of the facility at cessation of activity, or fully
implement the decommissioning plan. If, within 180 days of
receipt of notice, the owner and/or operator of the facility or
system fail to resume energy generation to at least 80 percent
of capacity of the facility or system as established at the time of
approval, the Township may order the owner and/or operator
of the facility to implement the decommissioning plan.
(g) If the operator fails to fully implement the decommissioning
plan subject to the procedures and timelines set forth is
paragraphs (e) and (f) above, or is otherwise unable to restore
the site as required within 180 days of the Township's service
of notice in accordance with this section, the Township may, at
its own expense, provide for the restoration of the site in
accordance with the decommissioning plan and may in
accordance with the law recover all expenses incurred for such
activities from the defaulted operator and/or the property
owner. The costs incurred by the municipality shall be assessed
against the property, shall become a lien and tax upon the said
property, shall be added to and be a part of the taxes to be
levied and assessed thereon, and enforced and collected with
interest by the same officers and in the same manner as other
taxes.
§ 330-260 VERNON CODE § 330-261
1:900
ARTICLE XXII
Redevelopment Plans
§ 330-262. Mountain Creek Redevelopment Plan.
The Mountain Creek Redevelopment Plan is included as an attachment to
this chapter.112
112. Editor's Note: Additional redevelopment plans may be found in Appendix A,
Redevelopment Plans; Redevelopment Ordinances and Special Zoning Districts, which is
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 330-262 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-262
1:901

ARTICLE XXIII
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-262
1:903

ARTICLE XXIV
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-262
1:905

ARTICLE XXV
(Reserved)
§ 330-263. through § 330-274. (Reserved)
§ 330-263 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-263
1:907

ARTICLE XXVI
Redevelopment Project Tax Exemptions and Abatements113
§ 330-275. Redevelopment Exemptions and Abatements; Eligibility.
§ 330-275.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The definitions contained in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-3 are incorporated herein by
reference as if set forth at length. As used in this Ordinance, words shall
have the meanings as so defined unless a different meaning is expressed.
§ 330-275.2. Tax Exemptions and Abatements Authorized. [Ord. No.
2016-07]
The Township hereby authorizes the utilization of exemptions and
abatements in accordance with Article VIII, Section I, Paragraph 6, of
the New Jersey Constitution and establishes the eligibility of commercial
and industrial structures for up to twenty (20) year tax exemptions and
abatements in areas in need of redevelopment as authorized by N.J.S.A.
40A:20-1, et seq.
§ 330-275.3. Improvements to Commercial and Industrial
Structures. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
Improvements to commercial and industrial structures are eligible for a
tax exemption and/or abatement for a period of up to twenty (20) years
commencing with the completion of the improvement. Any such exemption
and/or abatement shall be subject to the owner and Township entering into
a financial agreement pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-4 and N.J.S.A. 40A:20-9.
The Tax Assessor's full and true value of the improvement shall be regarded
as not increasing the value of the property notwithstanding that the value of
the property to which the improvement is made is increased thereby. During
the exemption and/or abatement period, the assessment on the property
shall not be less than the assessment existing thereon immediately prior to
the improvements, unless there is damage to the structure through action
of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
§ 330-275.4. Construction of New Commercial and Industrial
Structures. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
Construction of new commercial and industrial structures shall be eligible
for tax exemption and/or abatement for a period of up to twenty (20) years
commencing with completion of the project. Any such exemption and/or
abatement shall be subject to the owner and Township entering into a
financial agreement pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-4 and N.J.S.A. 40A:20-9.
A. The applicant shall furnish to the municipality all the information
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:20-8. In addition, every applicant shall file the
application form prescribed by the Director of the New Jersey Division
113. Editor's Note: Adopted by Ord. No. 2014-16; repealed and replaced by Ord. No. 2016-07
§ 330-275 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-275.4
1:909
§ 330-275.5. Eligibility for Additional Construction or Improvement.
[Ord. No. 2016-07]
An additional improvement or construction, completed on a property
granted a previous exemption and/or abatement during the period in which
such previous exemption and/or abatement is in effect, shall be qualified for
an exemption and/or abatement, just as if such property had not received
a previous exemption and/or abatement. In such case, the additional
improvement or construction shall be considered as separate for the
purposes of calculating exemptions and/or abatements, except that the
assessed value of any previous improvement or construction shall be added
to the assessed valuation as it was prior to that improvement or
construction for the purpose of determining the assessed valuation of the
property from which any additional abatement is to be subtracted.
§ 330-275.6. Applicability of Statutory Regulatory Provisions. [Ord.
No. 2016-07]
Every application for exemption and/or abatement and every exemption
and/or abatement granted shall be subject to all the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:20-1, et seq., and all rules and regulations issued thereunder.
§ 330-275.7. Applicability of Federal, State and Local Laws. [Ord.
No. 2016-07]
All tax abatement and/or exemption agreements shall provide that the
applicant is subject to all federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
of Taxation in the Department of Treasury, with the Tax Assessor, as
a condition to approval, within thirty (30) days, including Saturdays
and Sundays, following the completion of the improvement or project.
Every application for exemption and/or abatement so filed shall be
approved and allowed by the Tax Assessor to the degree that the
application is consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and
the financial agreement, provided that the improvements or project
for which the application is made, qualifies as such, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1, et seq. and the financial agreement. The
granting of an exemption and/or abatement and financial agreement,
if appropriate, shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the
official tax records of the taxing district, which record shall contain a
notice of termination date thereof.
B. No tax exemption and/or abatement shall be granted unless approved
by resolution of the Township Council on an individual basis after
review, evaluation, and approval of each application for compliance
with the terms of this Ordinance and the underlying statute, rules and
regulations.
C. The financial agreement shall conform to the requirements set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:20-8.
§ 330-275.4 VERNON CODE § 330-275.8
1:910
§ 330-275.8. Cessation or Disposition of Property. [Ord. No.
2016-07]
If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax exemption and/
or abatement agreement, the applicant ceases to operate or disposes of
the property or otherwise fails to meet the conditions of eligibility, the
tax otherwise due if there had been no exemption and/or abatement shall
become due and payable by the property owner. The Tax Assessor shall
notify the property owner and the Tax Collector forthwith and the Tax
Collector shall within fifteen (15) days thereof notify the owner of the
property of the amount of taxes due. However, with respect to sale or
other disposal of the property which it is determined that the new owner
of the property will continue to use the property pursuant to the conditions
which were set forth in the tax exemption and/or abatement agreement, the
exemption and/or abatement shall continue.
§ 330-275.9. Default in Tax Payments. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
In the event of default by the applicant, including but not limited to the
failure to make timely payments of applicable administrative fees and
service charges to the Township, the Township shall notify the applicant,
in writing, of said default. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days to
cure any default. Following the thirty day cure period, the Township shall
have the right to proceed against the property pursuant to the In Rem Tax
Foreclosure Act, N.J.S.A. 54:4-1, et seq., and/or may cancel the financial
agreement upon thirty (30) days notice to the applicant.
§ 330-275.10. Taxes Upon Termination. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
At the termination of a tax exemption and/or abatement agreement, a
project shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes as provided by
state law and local ordinance.
§ 330-275.11. Payment of Application Fees. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
No application for tax exemption and/or abatement shall be accepted by
the municipality unless accompanied by full payment of the required
application fee. Such fees shall be based on total project cost as set forth in
a schedule on file with the Office of the Municipal Clerk. These fees shall be
received as compensation for the legal review and related work required by
the municipality's departments and agencies.
§ 330-275.12. Ordinance Sent to Department of Community Affairs.
[Ord. No. 2016-07]
The Municipal Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to forward a certified
copy of this Ordinance to the State of New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
§ 330-275.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-275.13
1:911
§ 330-275.13. Ineligibility. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
No exemption and/or abatement shall be granted, or tax agreement entered
into with respect to any property for which property taxes or any other
municipal charges are delinquent or remain unpaid or for which penalties
for nonpayment are due for a period of at least one year, or for any property
not being used in conformance with local, state or federal ordinance,
regulation or statute.
§ 330-275.14. Appeal. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
Appeal of any determination made by the municipality under the terms of
this Ordinance shall be made to the Sussex County Board of Taxation.
§ 330-275.15. Construction of Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
Where consistent with the context in which used in this ordinance, words
importing the singular shall include the plural; words importing the plural
shall include the singular; and, words importing one gender shall include all
other genders.
§ 330-275.16. Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed. [Ord. No.
2016-07]
Should any provision of this Ordinance be inconsistent with the provisions
of any prior ordinances, the inconsistent provisions of such prior ordinances
are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of the inconsistencies. This
Ordinance specifically replaces and supersedes Ordinance 16-2014.
§ 330-275.17. Severability. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
In the event that any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance is declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such declaration of invalidity shall not affect any other
provision or application of this ordinance which may be given effect, and,
to realize this intent, the provisions and applications of this ordinance are
declared to be severable.
§ 330-275.18. Captions. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
Captions contained in this Ordinance have been inserted only for the
purpose of facilitating reference to the various sections, and are not
intended and shall not be utilized to construe the intent and meaning of the
text of any section.
§ 330-275.19. Application Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The application fee is to be paid at the time that an application is submitted
for tax exemption and/or exemption and abatement.
§ 330-275.13 VERNON CODE § 330-275.19
1:912
The application fee shall be calculated as a percentage of the estimated cost
of the improvements and shall be equal to 0.25% of the estimated cost of the
improvements. The minimum application fee shall be not less than $1,500
or more than $25,000.
§ 330-275.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-275.19
1:913

ARTICLE XXVII
Resort Service Fee
§ 330-276. Preamble. [Added 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-01]
WHEREAS, Mountain Creek Resort, Inc. ("Mountain Creek") owns and
operates a four-season resort located in the Township of Vernon
("Township") that is commonly known as the Mountain Creek Resort
("Resort"); and
WHEREAS, Mountain Creek owns and/or leases multiple parcels of real
property to operate the Resort, all of which are listed on the attached
Appendix A114 and are incorporated herein ("property"); and
WHEREAS, Mountain Creek intends to further develop the Resort, and its
contemplated development requires additional wastewater capacity; and
WHEREAS, Mountain Creek requested the Township to acquire the
additional wastewater capacity from the Sussex County Municipal Utilities
Authority ("SCUMA") and build the infrastructure necessary for the
additional wastewater capacity ("project"), which would facilitate
development of the property; and
WHEREAS, the project was funded by the Township and SCUMA issuing
bonds ("sewer bonds"); and
WHEREAS, the Township and Mountain Creek entered into an agreement
dated October 24, 2005 ("2005 Sewer Agreement"), pursuant to which
Mountain Creek agreed, subject to the terms of the 2005 Sewer Agreement,
to pay the debt service on the sewer bonds, plus the costs associated with
the development, construction, operation, and maintenance of the project
less the revenue obtained by the Township for sewer charges on an annual
basis; and
WHEREAS, the Township and Mountain Creek entered into a sewer funding
agreement dated July 18, 2012 ("Sewer Funding Agreement"), which
modified and superseded the 2005 Sewer Agreement; and
WHEREAS, the Sewer Funding Agreement, among other things, modified
Mountain Creek's obligation to pay the debt service for the sewer bonds and
thereafter required Mountain Creek to pay 63% of any yearly budget deficit
incurred by the Vernon Township Municipal Utilities Authority ("VTMUA")
in relation to the project; and
WHEREAS, subject to the terms of the Sewer Funding Agreement,
Mountain Creek's obligations under the Sewer Funding Agreement
continue annually until the sewer bonds are paid in full; and
WHEREAS, Mountain Creek filed a Chapter 11 petition in the United States
Bankruptcy Court for the District of New Jersey ("Bankruptcy Court") on
114. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 330-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-276
1:915
May 15, 2017, and the Chapter 11 case is pending under Case No. 17-19899
(SLM) and thereafter Mountain Creek did not pay certain obligations (the
"past due obligations") provided for under the Sewer Funding Agreement;
WHEREAS, Mountain Creek has not paid the past due obligations; and
WHEREAS, the Vernon parties (as defined below) and Mountain Creek
are engaged in certain litigation (the "litigation") in the Bankruptcy Court
concerning the Sewer Funding Agreement and claims asserted by the
Vernon parties arising under and related to the Sewer Funding Agreement;
WHEREAS, the Township and the VTMUA (together "Vernon parties") and
Mountain Creek have entered into a settlement agreement (the "Approved
Settlement Agreement") to resolve the litigation and all claims related
to the Sewer Funding Agreement, which settlement agreement has been
approved by the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of New
Jersey; and
WHEREAS, the Approved Settlement Agreement has been approved by the
authorized representatives of the Vernon parties; and
WHEREAS, subject to the terms and conditions of the Approved Settlement
Agreement, Mountain Creek has agreed to pay the following obligations
owed to the Vernon parties pursuant to the Sewer Funding Agreement:
(i) Mountain Creek's 63% share of the yearly budget deficit (the "VTMUA
Budget Deficit Obligations"), if any, incurred by the VTMUA; (ii) payments
on Mountain Creek's accumulated past due debt under Section 6.02 of
the Sewer Funding Agreement for the period January 1, 2012, through
December 31, 2016 ("past due sewer obligations"); (iii) payments on the
debt service attributable to the Vernon bonds as defined in Article 5.02
of the Sewer Funding Agreement ("Vernon bond obligations"); and (iv)
Mountain Creek's obligation ("pump house obligations") to reimburse the
Township for the costs associated with the design, permitting and
construction of the Sand Hill Road Sewage Pump Station ("Pump Station").
The past due sewer obligations and the Vernon bond obligations are
hereinafter referred to as the "Fixed Sewer Agreement obligations."
Together, the Fixed Sewer Agreement obligations, the VTMUA budget
deficit obligations and the pump house obligations are hereinafter
collectively referred to as the "Sewer Agreement obligations." Appendix
B attached hereto lists the Fixed Sewer obligations and the estimated
VTMUA budget deficit obligations. The actual amount of the VTMUA budget
deficit obligations will be calculated annually in accordance with Approved
Settlement Agreement. The pump house obligations are not yet determined
but shall be determined as set forth in the Approved Settlement Agreement.
Once the pump house obligations are determined, Appendix B shall be
updated to include those amounts.115
WHEREAS, pursuant to the terms of the Approved Settlement Agreement, a
recreational service fee (referred to in the Approved Settlement Agreement
115. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 330-276 VERNON CODE § 330-276
1:916
as the "Vernon municipal fee") will be collected from Mountain Creek or
any other operator offering recreational activities (as such term is defined
in the Approved Settlement Agreement) on the property to pay the Sewer
Agreement obligations.
§ 330-277. General provisions. [Added 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-01]
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the by the Township Council of
the Township of Vernon as follows:
A. The aforesaid recitals are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if
repeated in full; and
B. To satisfy the Sewer Agreement obligations, Mountain Creek, and/or
any operator licensed by or in contract with Mountain Creek (including
any successor to Mountain Creek) to operate/manage any recreational
activity, or any person or entity that offers recreational activities
("Resort Operator(s)") on the property shall cause to be charged and
collected from every customer purchasing a ticket for admission
(whether such ticket is an individual ticket or included as part of a
group sale or ticket/admission package, in which case the Recreational
Service Fee will be charged to the recreational activity portion of such
ticket/admission package) for any recreational activity a fee equal to
7% of the gross ticket price related to such recreational activities (the
"recreational service fee(s)"). In the event there is a shortfall in
collections of the recreational service fees (the "shortfall") necessary to
repay the annual Sewer Agreement obligations due in any calendar
year, Mountain Creek and/or any resort operator shall, from the first
day of the calendar year immediately following the shortfall, cause to be
charged and collected from every customer purchasing a ticket for
admission for any recreational activity a fee equal to 8% of the gross
ticket price related to such recreational activities until such time as the
shortfall for the prior year(s) is fully paid. If the shortfall, if any, is paid,
Mountain Creek and/or any resort operator shall reduce the fee to 7%
of the gross ticket price. Recreational activities subject to the
Recreational Service Fee include skiing/snowboarding, snow tubing,
water park admission, admission to the bike park and the Oktober Fest
offered by Mountain Creek, any of its affiliated companies or successors
or assigns or any resort operator at the property. The Recreational
Service Fee shall not include any activities or sales with respect to
which a sales tax is applied as of the effective date of this article. In the
event that a sales or similar type of tax is applied to any recreational
activity after the effective date of this article, the obligation to charge,
collect, and remit the Recreational Service Fee shall continue.
Recreational activities shall not include, and the Recreational Service
Fee shall not apply to, sales for lodging, food, beverages, parking,
apparel and other retail items, equipment, land, banquet-related
services, and other similar good or services; and
C. The Recreational Service Fee shall be collected until the Sewer
Agreement obligations are paid in full; and
§ 330-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-277
1:917
D. Except to the extent set forth in Section 2(vi) of the Approved
Settlement Agreement, until such time as all of the Sewer Agreement
obligations are paid in full, the recreational service fees that are
collected shall constitute the property of the Vernon parties and shall be
held by Mountain Creek, and/or any resort operator that manages or
operates the Resort or offers recreational activities on the property, in a
separate interest-bearing account ("Recreational Service Fee account")
in express trust for the Vernon parties for the specific purpose of paying
the Sewer Agreement obligations in accordance with the terms of the
Approved Settlement Agreement. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
apply to Mountain Creek's regular quarterly sewer usage fees or
property taxes; and
E. Subject to the terms of the Approved Settlement Agreement, on or
before January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1 of each year,
commencing October 1, 2019, Mountain Creek, and/or any resort
operator that manages or operates the Resort or offers recreational
activities on the property, shall disburse the recreational service fees
held in Recreational Service Fee Account as of December 1, March 1,
June 1, and September 1 towards payment of the Sewer Agreement
obligations owed for that calendar year; and
F. Subject to the terms of Section 2(vi) of the Approved Settlement
Agreement, if the recreational service fees in the Recreational Service
Fee account exceed the Sewer Agreement obligations owed for a
calendar year, Mountain Creek, and/or any resort operator that
manages or operates the Resort or offers recreational activities on the
property, shall hold the excess recreational service fees in the
Recreational Service Fee account and paid and applied to the Sewer
Agreement obligations due in the following year(s) in accordance with
the timeline in Section 2(v) of the Approved Settlement Agreement; and
G. If the amount held in the Recreational Service Fee account exceeds the
amount equal to twice the Sewer Agreement Obligation owed for the
preceding year, Mountain Creek, and/or any resort operator that
manages or operates the Resort or offers recreational activities on the
property, shall be entitled to use the amount in excess of twice the
Sewer Agreement obligation owed for the preceding year ("excess
Recreational Fee") in its sole discretion. The excess Recreational Fee
shall not constitute trust funds held for the benefit of the Vernon
parties; and
H. If the funds in the Recreational Service Fee Account are not sufficient to
pay in full the annual Sewer Agreement obligations in any particular
calendar year, the recreational service fees collected in any subsequent
year shall be applied first to satisfy the shortfall and Mountain Creek,
and/or any resort operator that manages or operates the Resort or
offers recreational activities on the property, shall increase the amount
of the Recreational Service Fee to 8% in accordance with Subsection B
above. When the shortfall for the prior year(s) is fully paid, Mountain
Creek, and/or any resort operator that manages or operates the Resort
§ 330-277 VERNON CODE § 330-277
1:918
or offers recreational activities on the property, shall reduce the fee to
7% of the gross ticket price or gross admission price.
I. Subject to the terms of Section 2(v) of the Approved Settlement
Agreement, the Vernon parties shall have the right to audit the
Recreational Service Fee account at any time by an auditor solely of the
Vernon parties choosing during reasonable business hours, on at least
seven business days' advance written notice and at the sole expense of
the Vernon parties; and
J. The obligation to charge, collect, and remit the Recreational Service
Fee consistent with this article shall be a continuing obligation imposed
by the Vernon parties on Mountain Creek and/or any resort operator
that manages or operates the Resort or offers recreational activities on
the property; and
K. The obligation to collect and disburse the recreational service fees
pursuant to this article and in accordance with the terms of the
Approved Settlement Agreement shall be a condition of operating or
conducting any recreational activities on the property until such time as
the Sewer Agreement obligations are paid in full; and
L. Upon payment in full of all Sewer Agreement obligations neither
Mountain Creek nor any resort operator shall have any obligation to
charge, collect, or remit to the Vernon parties the Recreational Service
Fee. To the extent any recreational service fees remain in the
Recreational Service Fee account at the time all Sewer Agreement
obligations are paid in full, Mountain Creek or any resort operator shall
be entitled to retain the funds in the Recreational Service Fee account
for its exclusive use and the Vernon parties shall not have any
entitlement to any portion of the excess funds; and
M. This article shall not prohibit the Township of Vernon from obtaining or
enforcing any lien pursuant to the Approved Settlement Agreement.
N. This article may only be amended by an affirmative vote of 3/4 of the
Township Council.
O. Each section of this article is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for
any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity of constitutionality
of any other sections or parts thereof.
P. Any ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this
article are hereby repealed as to their inconsistencies only.
Q. This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage, approval,
and publication by law.
§ 330-277 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-277
1:919
Chapter 341
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
§ 330-277 VERNON CODE § 330-277
1:920
ARTICLE I
Delinquent Taxes and Assessments
[Adopted 7-25-1988 by Ord. No. 88-12]
§ 341-1. Payment of delinquent taxes and assessments required
prior to issuance or reissuance of license or permit.
Any applicant who requests the issuance, reissuance or renewal of any
license or permit issued by, or requiring the approval of, the Mayor and
Township Council, or of any agency or department of the Township which
issues permits, shall be required to pay any delinquent property taxes or
assessment, if he is the owner of the property where the activity for which
the license or permit is sought to be conducted.
§ 341-2. Revocation of license or permit for nonpayment;
reinstatement.
Any license or permit issued by the Mayor and Township Council, or any
agency, official or department thereof, may be revoked by the Mayor and
Township Council, when any licensee or permittee who is the owner of the
property upon which the licensed or permitted activity is conducted shall
have failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at least three quarters
of the year. Upon proof of payment of all delinquent taxes, any such revoked
license or permit shall be restored by resolution of the Mayor and Township
Council.
§ 341-3. Exemption.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any license or permit issued
pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.116
116. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 341-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-3
1:921
Chapter 363
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 137.
Animals — See Ch. 148.
Public assemblies — See Ch. 153.
Right to farm — See Ch. 240.
§ 363-1. Unnecessary and annoying noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person in any public or private place to make,
or allow to be made, continued unnecessary, loud, or unusual noise which
annoys, disturbs, or injures the quiet, comfort, repose, health, peace, or
safety of others within the limits of the Township of Vernon.
§ 363-2. Cutoff of audible alarm signaling devices.
Every audible alarm signaling device designed for external notification shall
have an automatic time limit cutoff of 15 minutes. Signaling or operation of
an audible alarm signaling device in excess of 15 consecutive minutes shall
be presumed to violate this chapter.
§ 363-3. Unlawful acts.
The following acts are declared to be in violation of this chapter, but such
enumerations shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
A. The operation of any instrument, phonograph, machine, or device
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to
be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure,
or vehicle in which it is located.
B. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of persons.
C. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the
Township, except as a danger warning, the sounding of any such device
for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, the use of any
horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust.
D. Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio
or television receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other
machine or device for the producing or reproduction of sound in such
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, repose, health, safety or comfort
of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time at louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the personal enjoyment of persons
§ 341-3 VERNON CODE § 363-3
1:922
§ 363-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device
is operated and who are voluntarily listeners.
E. The use of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, photograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine device, whether
producing or reproducing sound, upon the public street for the purpose
of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to
any building or structure.
F. The causing of any noise on any street adjacent to a school, institution
of learning, church or public office building while the same are in use,
or adjacent to a hospital, medical office or clinic, which interferes with
the workings of such institutions or which disturbs the occupants in
such buildings.
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency.
B. The emission of sound at any regularly operated outdoor commercial
recreational facility for the conduct of its usual business, as long as
such activity takes place during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
C. Noise from snowmaking operations at any regularly authorized,
approved and operated ski area.
D. Noise from celebrations or events sponsored by the Township of
Vernon, public or parochial schools, or houses of worship.
E. Noise from athletic events, celebrations, concerts or dances held at
Veterans Memorial Park, if approved and/or sanctioned or authorized
by the Mayor and Township Council.
F. Noise from or generated as a result of farming operations or farming
equipment/vehicles incidental to the undertaking of a farming business
or enterprise as long as such activity takes place during the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
G. Community associations. A "community association" shall be defined as
in § 330-5 of Chapter 330, Land Development. Audible disturbances
created by events which are sanctioned by a community association
such as, but not limited to, athletic and/or sporting events, celebrations,
concerts or dances, held on or in common facilities owned by the
community association, shall be subject to the community association's
own regulations and are exempt from this chapter. However, all such
audible disturbances effecting areas outside of the boundaries of the
community association shall be deemed a violation, and nothing in this
section shall prohibit any person from seeking relief from such audible
§ 363-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 363-4
1:923
§ 363-5. Violations and penalties.117
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties.
Each day of continued violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense and be punishable as such.
Chapter 369
NUCLEAR-FREE ZONE
§ 369-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Vernon Township Nuclear-Free Zone
Ordinance."
§ 369-2. Findings.
The Mayor and Township Council of the Township of Vernon find that
contamination by radioactive substances interferes with the farming and
residential character of the Township of Vernon, and contamination by
radioactive substances will have an adverse effect on the residents, visitors,
businesses, water resources and wildlife in the Township of Vernon.
§ 369-3. Prohibition.
The development, production, storage, deployment, usage, landfilling,
fabrication, destruction and transportation of radioactive materials in and
through the Township of Vernon is hereby prohibited except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 369-4. Enforcement.
The Township Attorney is authorized to take appropriate action to enforce
the prohibitions contained herein. Said action may include but is not limited
to a civil action seeking injunctive relief in any court of competent
jurisdiction. In the event the Township Attorney fails or neglects to so
act, any resident (person or corporation) may, by appropriate civil action,
enforce the prohibition contained herein.
§ 369-5. Other actions.
The adoption of this chapter is not intended to preclude other actions, either
administrative or legal in nature, attempting to enforce the prohibition
contained in this chapter. Remedies herein are deemed to be cumulative to
disturbances under the general provisions of this chapter. [Added
5-30-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17]
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 363-4 VERNON CODE § 369-5
1:924
any such rights claimed in common law or under statutory or constitutional
authority.
§ 369-6. Exclusions.
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to naturally
occurring materials containing low, normal or background levels of
radiation. This chapter shall not apply to consumer products in general use
such as smoke detectors and time pieces. Nor shall it apply to commonly
accepted medical uses such as x-rays and pharmaceuticals. This chapter
shall not apply to movement for burial or storage elsewhere of radioactivecontaminated
soil or other materials.
Chapter 374
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned properties and unfit
buildings — See Ch. 130.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 531.
Dumping and littering — See Ch. 227.
Noise — See Ch. 363.
Pesticides — See Ch. 440.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 447.
Right to farm — See Ch. 240.
§ 374-1. Title of code adopted.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)." The Code is adopted by reference without including the full text as
permitted by N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 374-2. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Vernon Township Building
Department will remain on file there for the use and examination of the
public.
§ 374-3. Commercial nuisance defined.
No person shall intentionally or willfully engage in conduct which interferes
with, obstructs or otherwise unlawfully disrupts the lawful activities of any
commercial or retail establishment or place of business.
§ 369-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-4
1:925
§ 374-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who creates or maintains a nuisance or a commercial nuisance
as set forth in the chapter shall be in violation of this Code and be subject
to the penalties set forth in Section 1-19.
Chapter 380
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 380-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to require the clear display of street
numbers from public streets, for all properties that contain principal
buildings within the Township of Vernon, in order to assist the general
public or the authorities in identifying any property in case of an emergency,
as well as for the welfare of the general public in conducting their normal
affairs, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et seq.
§ 380-2. Responsibility of owners.
The owners of all buildings within the Township of Vernon shall cause to be
displayed the street numbers on the tax records of the Township of Vernon
as they appear on file in the office of the Tax Assessor of the Township of
Vernon, in the manner hereinafter set forth.
§ 380-3. Assignment of numbers. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
Street numbers shall be assigned, placed on the tax records and allotted
to the owners of said lands by the Tax Assessor of the Township. When
assignment of a number takes place, said numbers shall be placed on the
tax records of the Township of Vernon and, thereafter, shall be applicable
to the designated premises. The Tax Assessor or such other person as may
be designated shall correct any clerical errors with respect to assignment
of said street numbers, if and when discovered.
§ 380-4. Numbering of subdivision lots.
The Tax Assessor or designee shall be responsible for assigning appropriate
street number sequences to each lot which is created as a result of a
subdivision or resubdivision. Such numbers shall be in appropriate
sequence in relation to the number assigned to other lots facing the same
street and shall be recorded on the tax records of the Township.
§ 380-5. Standards for numbering.
The Tax Assessor or designee shall give due regard to the need for a logical
and uniform sequence of assignment along the street and roads of the
Township. To this end, numbering of a street shall generally begin at its
intersection with a more major street and shall be numbered beginning with
§ 374-4 VERNON CODE § 380-5
1:926
"one" on one side and "two" on the other. Through streets shall be numbered
in the same fashion, generally from south to north or west to east.
§ 380-6. Specifications.
In order to comply with this chapter, street numbers shall be Arabic in
design, shall be a minimum height of three inches and shall be mounted
in a secure fashion to a building's front wall, or to a porch or other fixed
appurtenance in front of the building, in the general vicinity of the main
entryway or main path of travel which leads to the main entrance from
a public street, or otherwise separately mounted upon the face of a wall
or upon a post in the front yard of the premises. They shall be mounted
at a height of between four and 10 feet above the adjacent grade or
exterior landing beneath, but never higher than 15 feet above the adjoining
grade. They shall be sufficiently legible as to contrasting background,
arrangement, spacing, size and uniformity of integers so that the numbers
may be read during daylight hours by a person possessing at least 20/40
vision when viewing the numbers from the center line of the facing street.
The numbers shall be so placed that trees, shrubs and other obstructions do
not substantially block the line of sight of the numbers from the center of
the street.
§ 380-7. Notice to conform; violations and penalties.118
Failure on the part of the property owner to comply with the provisions of
this chapter within a period of 15 days from the date of issuance of a notice
of violation shall be sufficient cause for the enforcement official to cause a
summons to issue. Upon conviction thereof, the person cited shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and
penalties. Each day of continued failure to conform 15 days after notice to
conform shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 396
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public assemblies — See Ch. 153. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 500.
§ 396-1. Authority to control or close streets for parades and other
events.
The Mayor and Township Council shall be authorized and may regulate and
control the use of highways and streets of the municipality for processions,
parades, block dances, coaster derby races, road races and other races
and for sporting, recreational and public events, and for said purpose may
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-1
1:927
provide for the temporary closing of said streets and highways to other
traffic.
Chapter 407
PARKING, HANDICAPPED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 99.
§ 407-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
HANDICAPPED PERSON — Any person who has lost the use of one or
more limbs as a consequence of paralysis, amputation, or other permanent
disability, or who is permanently disabled so as to be unable to walk without
the aid of an assisting device or another person assisting them, or whose
mobility is otherwise limited as certified by a physician and who has
qualified for the issuance of a handicapped person identification card
through the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 39:4-205.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building, structure, facility, or complex used by
the general public, including, but not limited to, theaters, concert halls,
auditoriums, museums, schools, libraries, recreation facilities, public
transportation terminals and stations, factories, office buildings, business
establishments, passenger vehicle service stations, shopping centers,
hotels, motels and public eating places. Private residences of less than four
units, warehouse storage areas, and buildings containing the manufacturing
of hazardous products are specifically excluded from this definition.
§ 407-2. Provision for parking spaces for handicapped persons.
A. The owners of property upon which new public buildings are proposed
to be built shall provide in the plans for the public buildings and the
public parking areas serving the public buildings for the creation of
parking spaces for handicapped persons in accordance with the
provisions and standards set forth in this chapter. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for said premises unless it meets the
standards of and provides for the required parking spaces for
handicapped persons.
B. All owners of public buildings that are served by parking facilities shall
create parking spaces for handicapped persons in accordance with the
standards provided in this section and complete the installation of said
parking spaces no later than one year from the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 396-1 VERNON CODE § 407-3
1:928
§ 407-3. Standards for construction and location of handicapped
parking spaces.
§ 407-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Number of parking spaces required. Parking spaces for handicapped
persons shall be constructed according to the following guidelines:119
Total Parking Spaces in Lot
Required Number of Spaces
for Handicapped Persons
1 to 55 spaces 2
56 and more 1% of total spaces rounded up to
next whole number
B. The location of the parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be in
an area of the parking facility which is most accessible and closest to
the entrance to the public building that the facility serves. The
determination of the location of these spaces shall be made by the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Township of
Vernon when site plan applications for public buildings are made to
these Boards. The Code Enforcement Officer, in conjunction and
consultation with the owner of the premises, shall determine the
location for these spaces for public buildings that have already been
completed. In shopping centers and other multistore facilities, the
handicapped spaces shall be as near to the flagship store as possible
and/or at such other locations as may be agreed upon between the Code
Enforcement Officer and the owner.
C. Each space shall be identified with a clearly visible upright sign which
has been made according to the specifications and requirements of the
Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles, the New Jersey
Administrative Code, and New Jersey statutes.
D. Each parking space for handicapped persons shall be 12 feet wide to
allow additional room for persons in wheelchairs or on braces or
crutches to get in or out of either side of the automobile on a level,
paved surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
E. Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
F. Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped
people access from the parking area to the sidewalk.
A. Any individual or entity that fails to provide parking spaces for
handicapped persons as required in this chapter, or who fails to
properly maintain said parking spaces so that they are properly marked
as parking spaces for handicapped persons, shall be subject to a fine of
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 407-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 407-4
1:929
Chapter 408
PARKING, VETERANS.
§ 408-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VETERAN — An individual who, through the possession of a DD214 form,
or active military identification card, reserve identification card, dependent
identification card, retired identification card, veteran identification card,
honorable discharge certificate, general discharge certificate, satisfies one
or more of the following criteria:
§ 408-2. Courtesy parking spaces for veterans.
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days,
or both, or as is otherwise specified in N.J.S.A. 39:4-203.
B. Any person who parks, stops or permits a motor vehicles to stand in a
parking space designated for handicapped persons, unless the vehicle
in that space has affixed to it an identification certificate or marker
issued by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of
New Jersey as described in N.J.S.A. 39:4-206, is in violation of this
chapter. Fines for parking in a handicapped parking space without legal
authority from the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles shall be as
follows: [Amended 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-38]
(1) For a first offense: $250.
(2) For a second or subsequent offense: $250 and a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days.
A person currently serving in the United States Army, Navy, Air Force,
Marines or Coast Guard, or their reserve components, or the Army
National Guard or the Air National Guard; or
A.
A person having served in the United States Army, Navy, Air Force,
Marines or Coast Guard and having received a general discharge or
higher; or
B.
A person having served in any combination of United States Army, Navy,
Air Force, Marines or Coast Guard, or their reserve components, or the
Army National Guard or the Air National Guard and having received a
general discharge or higher.
C.
A. Two parking spaces shall be designated in the parking lots of the
following facilities for Veterans:
(1) Town Hall;
§ 407-4 VERNON CODE § 408-2
1:930
Chapter 413
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 413-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for the
use of parks and recreation areas within the Township of Vernon.
§ 413-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall be used as herein
defined:
DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT —
Duly appointed personnel of the Township, including the Recreation
Director and his/her designated staff members.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that can
be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor
or aerosol from the product. The term includes any device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar,
e-hookah, e-cigarillo, vape pen, or under any other produce name or
descriptor.[Added 10-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-24]
MOTOR VEHICLE — All on-road and off-road vehicles, including but not
limited to cars, trucks, vans, motorcycles, minibikes, mopeds, go-carts, dune
buggies, and dirt bikes, and any other similar motorized vehicles of the type
normally used on land for recreation, entertainment, or pleasure.
PARK/RECREATION AREA — Any property owned or leased by the
Township of Vernon which is used for open space and recreation purposes
and which is open to the public either without charge or on a fee basis.
The term includes, but is not limited to, playgrounds, parks, ball fields,
athletic fields located at the public schools, swimming areas, beaches,
natural education facilities, and any paths, roadways, sidewalks, and
parking areas therein or adjacent thereto.
§ 413-3. Jurisdiction.
The rules and regulations promulgated herein shall apply to parks and
recreation areas within the Township and, where applicable, by resolution
or ordinance of the Township Council, to other lands owned and/or
controlled by the Township which are devoted to public recreational use or
purpose.
§ 413-4. Rules and regulations.
(2) Veterans Memorial Park; and
(3) Maple Gange Park.
§ 408-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-4
1:931
A. Hours of operation. All parks and recreation areas shall open at sunrise
and shall close 1/2 hour after sunset, unless otherwise posted or
designated by a permit issued by the Department of Recreation and
Community Development.
B. Park closure.
(1) Any section or part of any park or recreation area may be declared
by the Department of Recreation and Community Development,
Department of Public Works Director, Chief of Police or designee or
the Mayor or designee closed to the public at any time and for any
interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated
intervals and either entirely or merely to certain uses or when same
is filled to capacity or when it is in the public interest to do so.
(2) No person shall enter upon or use any park or recreational area
which is closed to the public, unless so authorized to do so by one of
the aforementioned departments and/or individuals.
(3) Permits will become void for the remainder of the season upon
failure to comply with an authorized closure.
C. Fees. All parks and recreation areas shall be opened to the general
public unless specifically restricted by action of the Township Council
upon recommendation of the Director of Recreation and Community
Development in consultation with the Board of Recreation. The
Township Council upon recommendation of the Recreation Director
shall have the power to establish fees for the use of all facilities. The
Township reserves the right to establish higher fees for nonresidents
than for residents. Permits for usage of fields within the Township parks
and recreation areas shall be granted upon approval as set forth herein
and the payment of a damage escrow of $500 to be held in escrow by
the Township. After use of the facilities and inspection by the Township,
the escrow shall be returned less any costs for damages related to the
usage of the facilities. Damages in excess of the escrow shall be billed
to the user.
D. Availability. Parks are available on a first-come-first-served basis unless
reserved in advance.
E. Occupancy limit. All persons shall abide by posted occupancy limits or
permits with occupancy limits as set forth for the event.
F. Use of parks and recreation areas by organized groups.
(1) Parks and recreation areas may not be used by organized groups
without written permission.
(2) At the joint discretion of the Department of Recreation and
Community Development and Police Chief, an organization may be
required to hire police, fire, ambulance or other service during the
event as per a fee schedule set by the Department of Recreation
§ 413-4 VERNON CODE § 413-4
1:932
and Community Development or safety service required, and to be
paid by the organization.
(3) At the discretion of the Department of Recreation and Community
Development, insurance certificates naming the Township as an
additional insured may be required depending upon the intended
use and group size.
(4) No improvements, maintenance, or structural changes shall be
made to any of the parks and/or recreational areas by an
organization/person at any time without prior written approval by
the Recreation Director or the Township (excluding pre-game setups
and lining of fields) in consultation with the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
(5) All requests for improvements, maintenance, or structural changes
must be made in writing and submitted to the Department of
Recreation and Community Development no later than one month
before they are to be performed. Depending upon the extent of the
work requested, such requests shall also be subject to approval by
the Mayor, Township Planning Board and/or Township Council.
(6) No person may disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
(7) The Department of Recreation and Community Development shall
maintain a master schedule for the reserved use of all recreational
areas.
G. Peace and quiet. Persons in a park or recreation area shall adhere to
noise levels reasonable to all persons in attendance, the determination
of which shall be at the discretion of the Department of Recreation and
Community Development or any law enforcement officer of the
Township of Vernon.
H. Abandoned or unattended property. The Township may remove any
article or property found in a park or recreation area after posted hours
at the owner's expense.
I. Animals, wildlife, plant life and waterway activities.
(1) Pets brought into a park or recreation area shall be confined or
under direct control and on a leash.
(2) All pet owners must abide by Township regulations and are
responsible for cleaning up after their pet(s).
(3) Animals trained to assist the disabled are permitted in all areas.
(4) No person shall kill, injure, or disturb any animal or bird, or have in
their possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or the
viable nest or young of any reptile or bird; or damage any grass,
§ 413-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-4
1:933
trees, flowers, shrubs, plants, soil, rocks, sand, buildings, sign,
structure, or equipment upon any premises under the jurisdiction
of the Township.
(5) No person shall fish from Township property whether by the use of
hook and line, net, trap or other device except in waters designated
by the Department of Recreation and Community Development or
the Township Council for that use and under such regulations and
restrictions as have been adopted.
(6) Waterway access points for fishing, boat launch and other
waterway recreational activities shall be limited to those areas as
designated by the Department of Recreation and Community
Development, in consultation with the Chief of Police.
(7) No person shall cause damage to the natural resources of any park
or recreation area.
(8) No person shall track, hunt, trap or otherwise engage in the
capture of any animal, bird, reptile or other creature in any park or
recreational area under the jurisdiction of the Township.
J. Weapons and firearms. No person shall carry or use firearms or
explosives, air rifles, slingshots, or any weapon in any park or
recreation area, except for authorized law enforcement officers.
Fireworks displays may be permitted under supervision as directed and
required by the Department of Recreation and Community
Development.
K. Fires, smoking, firewood or fireworks.
(1) No person shall build or attempt to build a fire except in designated
areas or by permit.
(2) No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches,
burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper, or other flammable
material within any park or on any highway, road, or street abutting
or contiguous thereto. Smoking and the use of all tobacco products
and electronic smoking devices by any person on park and
recreation property of the Township is strictly prohibited.
[Amended 10-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-24]
(3) No person shall leave a picnic area before the fire is completely
extinguished.
L. Signs. No person or organization shall post by any means or erect or
cause to be erected any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription
whatever, in any park or recreation area or highway or road adjacent
thereto, without authorization of the Department of Recreation and
Community Development.
M. Solicitation.
§ 413-4 VERNON CODE § 413-4
1:934
(1) No person or organization shall solicit alms or contributions for any
purpose, or engage in the business of soliciting, distributing,
selling, or peddling any liquids, edibles, goods, wares,
merchandise, services, or circulars in any park or recreation area
unless authorized by the Department of Recreation and Community
Development or Township Council.
(2) No person shall gamble or participate or abet any game of chance
unless in such areas and under such regulations as may be
designated by the Department of Recreation and Community
Development.
N. Motor vehicles and parking.
(1) Motor vehicles are restricted to paved roadways, unless other
permission is granted.
(2) Vehicles must adhere to posted speed limits.
(3) Parking is restricted to designated areas.
(4) No vehicle standing or parked after park closure or before park
opening in designated park areas, or elsewhere in the park, is
permitted, and any vehicle so parked may be towed at the owner's
expense.
(5) The parking area located by the snack bar near Veteran's Memorial
Park is used for medical emergencies. Parking in that area is
strictly for vehicles whose drivers are present in the park.
O. Trail use. Trails may be used in accordance with posted signs. Trail
users are subject to all park rules and regulations.
P. Adherence to park signs. All persons are required to adhere to all park
signs.
Q. Glass containers and garbage.
(1) No person shall deposit any garbage or refuse in any park or
recreation area except in receptacles provided for such purposes.
(2) If garbage receptacles are full, each person must remove their
garbage from the park or recreation area.
(3) No person shall bring, carry or transport any domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste, refuse or garbage into any park or
deposit same into any garbage receptacle.
(4) No person shall scatter litter or any form of waste material, or
break, throw, or place any glass on lawns, walks, roads, benches,
tables, wooded, or other areas on any park property.
(5) No person shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the water of any pond, lake, stream, or body of water in or
§ 413-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-4
1:935
§ 413-5. Permits; appeals.
adjacent to any park or tributary stream, storm drain, or drain
flowing into such water, any substance, matter, or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters.
R. Disruptive behavior.
(1) No person shall foul or pollute any fountain or water area within
the park.
(2) No person in any open space or recreation area shall engage in
boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or
engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to cause a
breach of public peace.
A. Permits for activities to be conducted on municipal parks or
recreational facilities shall be obtained by application in accordance
with the following procedure:
(1) A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Department of Recreation and Community
Development stating:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(c) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(d) The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired.
(e) Any other information which the approving entity shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued hereunder.
(f) Variances required from park rules and regulations.
(g) In the case of a youth program, an affidavit certifying that all
persons in a position supervising children have had a
background check as required by § 413-5H.
(2) Standards for issuance of a use permit shall include the following
findings:
(a) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the park, property or facility.
(b) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health,
welfare, safety and recreation.
§ 413-4 VERNON CODE § 413-5
1:936
(c) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably
anticipated will not include violence, crime or disorderly
conduct.
(d) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the Township.
(e) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use
on the date and hour requested in the application.
(f) That the applicant is in compliance with the background check
affidavit requirement of § 413-5G, if the proposed use is a
youth program.
(3) All applications to use municipal property or facilities within the
jurisdiction of the Board of Recreation and Community
Development shall be designated as recreation permits and shall be
submitted to the Director of Recreation and Community
Development for a decision by the Director of Recreation and
Community Development.
(4) All applications for the use of municipal property or facilities not
within the jurisdiction of the Board of Recreation shall be
designated as special use permits and be submitted to the
Township Clerk to be placed on the Governing Body's agenda for a
decision, whose decision shall be final and non-appealable.
B. Appeal of recreation permits.
(1) Within 45 days after the receipt of an application for a recreation
permit, the Director of Recreation and Community Development
shall apprise an applicant in writing of its determination to grant or
deny a permit. In the event of a denial, the notification shall include
the reason for the denial.
(2) Any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to the
Township Council a decision under this section of the Director by
serving written notice thereof on the Township Clerk within five
working days of said refusal. The Mayor, or his designee, shall
attempt to mediate any permit denial or dispute.
(3) A copy of the appeal notice shall also be served on the Director
within the same time, and the Director shall immediately forward
the application and the reasons for its refusal to the Township
Council who shall consider the application and sustain or overrule
the Director of Recreation and Community Development's decision
within 30 days from the receipt of the appeal by the Township
Clerk. The decision of the Governing Body shall be final.
C. A permittee shall be bound by all rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
§ 413-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-5
1:937
D. The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for
all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason
of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall
have been issued. A permittee may be required to submit evidence of
liability insurance covering injuries to members of the general public
arising out of such permitted activities in such amounts as may be from
time to time determined prior to the commencement of any activity or
issuance of any permit.
E. Revocation. A permit may be revoked by the approving authority upon a
finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown.
F. Alcoholic beverages. No permit shall allow the possession, sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages in a park area or on municipal
property without a resolution of the Governing Body authorizing the
possession, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
G. Background check affidavit.
(1) Effective January 1, 2012, prior to any club or organization, other
than Township-sponsored youth programs, receiving any type of
permit to use Township-owned property or facilities for youth
programs, the club or organization must complete an affidavit on a
form approved by the Mayor certifying that all official coaches,
assistant coaches and adults who are in positions of authority or
control of youth participants under the age of 18 have completed
and passed a background check within the last four years, meaning
that the individual has not been convicted of any of the
disqualifying offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-3. The affidavit
shall also state that the affiant is not aware of any relevant
convictions subsequent to the background check.
(2) In the event that a club or organization can not comply with this
subsection because background checks have been submitted to the
State Police but results have not been received, a conditional
permit may be issued for up to 60 days.
H. Township-sponsored youth programs.
(1) Effective January 1, 2012, all adults, those persons 18 years of age
or older, including but not limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or
similar positions involved in educating, directing or supervising
youth in a Vernon Township sponsored youth program shall submit
required information for the purpose of obtaining a criminal history
background check with the State Bureau of Identification in the
New Jersey State Police.
(2) Upon receipt of a completed background check conducted by the
State Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police and/or
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, the
Recreation Activities Coordinator shall notify the applicant and the
§ 413-5 VERNON CODE § 413-5
1:938
§ 413-6. Enforcement.
§ 413-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties.
The Municipal Court shall have the power to ban a violator from entering
upon or using the parks or recreation areas within the Township until
further order of court, upon petition, and for good cause shown.
Chapter 428
head of the program of affirmative or negative results. The
determination shall be based upon § 413-5H(3) of this chapter.
(3) In the event the criminal background check reveals any prior
convictions for crimes or offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-3,
that individual shall not be allowed to participate in any Townshipsponsored
youth program.
(4) Refusal by individuals required to submit to background checks
will result in a dismissal of the individual from any Townshipsponsored
activities requiring background checks.
(5) Any and all criminal background checks shall be filed and
maintained in a secure and locked cabinet or room and shall not be
available to the public. The records shall be exempt from public
disclosure under the common law or the New Jersey Right to Know
Law. The records shall only be retained for such period as is
necessary to serve their intended and authorized purpose and in
conformance with State of New Jersey Division Retention Schedule.
(6) All Township-sponsored youth programs that have individuals
subject to this chapter shall ensure that background checks are
renewed; no less than every four years a new background check
shall be submitted.
A. The Recreation Director, or other Township official and any Police
Officer shall have the authority to eject from any recreation area any
person acting in violation of this chapter.
B. The Recreation Director, or other Township official and any Police
Officer shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property,
thing, or device in a park or recreation area, if the possession or use of
such property, thing or device is prohibited.
C. It shall be the duty of the Director of Recreation and Community
Development with the assistance of the Chief of Police, to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey
the directive of any person supervising any public park or recreation
area, or to disobey the direction of any sign, or to deface, destroy, or
remove any such sign.
§ 413-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-7
1:939
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charitable organizations — See Ch. 186.
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
Food handler's certification — See Ch. 289.
Payment of delinquent taxes and assessments
prior to issuance of licenses and
permits — See Ch. 341, Art. I.
§ 413-7 VERNON CODE § 413-7
1:940
ARTICLE I
Peddlers and Hawkers
§ 428-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIXED LOCATION — The same place or one within 300 feet of a place
previously used by the same peddler once in a calendar year.
PEDDLER — Includes any person, whether a resident of the Township or
not, travelling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, bicycle or any other type
of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street
to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, food, ice cream, fruit ices, soda water, rolls,
coffee, sandwiches, hot dogs, garden farm products or provisions, offering
and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles
to purchasers. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker,"
"huckster" and "vendor."
§ 428-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler, as
defined in this article, within the corporate limits of the Township of Vernon,
without first obtaining a license as provided by this article. Any exempt
fireman or veteran who comes within the effect of N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq.
shall not be required to obtain a license, provided he has obtained one as
required by the aforesaid statute, but shall be required to comply with all
provisions of this article.
§ 428-3. License fees.120
The license fee for a peddler and an additional fee for each vehicle used in
connection with the license are set forth in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows,
Article II. No portion of this fee shall be prorated for any part of the year.
§ 428-4. Use of streets.
A. No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location, nor shall be
permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might
impede or inconvenience the public or become a safety hazard to
himself or others. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of a
police officer exercised in good faith shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether the area is congested or the public impeded, inconvenienced,
or placed in an unsafe situation.
B. No peddler shall use a fixed location on a public right-of-way unless he
has obtained a written authorization from the public body owning said
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 428-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-4
1:941
§ 428-5. Use of private property.
No peddler shall use a fixed location on private property unless he has
obtained written authorization from the property owner and unless he has
further obtained site plan approval by the Planning or Zoning Board.
§ 428-6. Hours and days of sale.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, hawk, or peddle in the Township any of
the items listed under the definition of "peddler" in § 428-1 or any of the
items that such a person would be expected to have for sale before 10:00
a.m. or after 8:00 p.m., nor on Sundays or holidays, except for ice cream
vendors, who, subject to the time restrictions herein contained, may operate
on Sundays.
§ 428-7. Enforcement; duty to display license.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Township to require any
person seen peddling and who is not known by the officer to be duly
licensed to produce his peddler's license and to enforce the provisions of
this article against any person found to be violating the same. In the event
that a person who is peddling cannot produce his peddler's license, then the
police officer shall require that person to cease any further peddling until
his license is produced.
§ 428-8. Exceptions.
§ 428-9. Inspection of equipment; food peddlers; condition of
vehicles.
right-of-way, and unless he has further obtained site plan approval from
the Planning or Zoning Board of the Township of Vernon.
A. This article shall not be construed to include the delivery of milk, eggs,
bread, newspapers (only newspapers that are to be paid for by the
recipient), or such other necessary and perishable articles of food or
merchandise of the type commonly delivered on a house-to-house basis
at intervals at less than one week and which foodstuffs and newspapers
have been specifically ordered and will be or have been paid for.
B. Federal census-takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to federal,
state, county, or local laws shall not be prohibited by this article.
However, they shall be required to notify the Township Clerk at least 10
days prior to the date their activities begin.
C. Any veteran or exempt volunteer fireman who holds a special license
issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be exempt from application for
a license, but shall be required to comply with all other sections of this
article.
§ 428-4 VERNON CODE § 428-9
1:942
§ 428-10. Application for license. [Amended 8-27-2007 by Ord. No.
07-38]
A. The equipment used or employed by peddlers of ice cream, foods,
beverages, confections and other related commodities and foodstuffs
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and shall be subject
to the inspection of the Department of Health and Human Services or
its authorized agents. Any violation found and not immediately
corrected shall be grounds for revocation of the license.121
B. Peddlers selling foods and/or beverages must obtain food handler's
licenses122 from the Department of Health and Human Services and
comply with all requirements to keep them in good standing, including
renewal of same when they expire.123
C. Any vehicle that fails motor vehicle inspection or is not in compliance
with state statutes for the condition and operability of vehicles may not
be used by peddlers.
A. Applicants for a permit under this article must file with the Township
Clerk a sworn, written application, in duplicate, on forms to be
furnished by said Clerk, which shall give the following information:
(1) Name, age, and description of the applicant.
(2) Permanent home address and telephone number, as well as local
address and telephone number of the applicant.
(3) Social security number.
(4) State and number of driver's license.
(5) Whether the applicant was convicted or has pleaded guilty to any
motor vehicle offenses in the last 10 years.
(6) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
(7) The name, address, and telephone number of the employer,
together with credentials establishing the employer-employee
relationship.
(8) The place where the goods proposed to be sold, or orders taken for
the sale thereof, are manufactured, prepared, or produced; where
such goods or products are located at the time said application is
filed; the proposed method of delivery; in the case of foodstuffs, the
date on which a food handler's certificate was obtained.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 289, Food Handler's Certification.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 428-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-10
1:943
§ 428-11. Badge; identification.
The Township Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery
of his license a badge or a certificate on which shall contain the words
"licensed peddler," the period for which the license is issued, the number
of the license, and the imprint of the seal of the Township of Vernon. The
badge or certificate shall be conspicuously displayed by the solicitor at all
times.
(9) Two photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by three
inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear
and distinguishing manner. Such photographs shall have been
taken sufficiently recently so that they portray the applicant's
present features.
(10) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of the offense, the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor, and any statement the applicant may wish to make with
respect to any such conviction or guilty plea.
(11) The names of the municipalities in the State of New Jersey in which
the applicant has peddled goods within the last two years prior to
the date of the application.
(12) A copy of the certificate of authority to collect sales tax issued by
the State of New Jersey as provided for by P.L. 1993, Chapter 274,
of the laws of the State of New Jersey124 and, additionally, shall
supply sufficient proof to establish that said certificate of
registration has been filed with the State of New Jersey, Director of
Taxation. [Added 3-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2]
B. At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall pay a fee of $20
to the Township Clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts
stated therein.
124. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.3.
§ 428-10 VERNON CODE § 428-11
1:944
ARTICLE II
Solicitors and Canvassers
§ 428-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
SOLICITOR — A person, also known as a "canvasser," whether a resident
of the Township or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor
truck or bicycle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from
house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders
for sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery, or the services to be furnished or performed
in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries, or exposes for sale
a sample of the subject of the sale, with or without accepting an advance
payment for the goods. The term "solicitor" shall also include any person
who may be taking a poll or a survey from house to house or on the streets
or distributing advertisements or handbills.
§ 428-13. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in this article to
engage in the business within the Township without first obtaining a license.
§ 428-14. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any person who has obtained a charitable
solicitor's permit in accordance with Article III, nor shall it apply to any
person distributing literature or handbills on behalf of a candidate for public
office.
§ 428-15. Application for license; fee. [Amended 8-27-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-38]
The application for a solicitor's license shall be the same as is required to be
completed and filed for the peddler's license in § 428-10. Said application
shall request the same information, be filed in the same way, and be
accompanied by a fee of $20. An application may include the names of
multiple solicitors in the event same are employed by the applicant and
their names and information as required by § 428-10 are individually
included with the application.
§ 428-16. License fee. [Amended 8-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-38]
The license fee which shall be charged by the Township Clerk for each
solicitor's and canvasser's license shall be $100. One license fee of $100.
shall apply to all licenses issued under one application in the event all
solicitors included in the application are employed by the same applicant.
§ 428-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-17
1:945
§ 428-17. Badge; identification.
The Township Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery of his
license a badge or a certificate on which shall contain the words "licensed
solicitor," the period for which the license is issued, the number of the
license, and the imprint of the seal of the Township of Vernon. The badge or
certificate shall be conspicuously displayed by the solicitor at all times.
§ 428-18. Hours and days of operation. [Amended 8-27-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-38]
No soliciting or canvassing activities shall be conducted before 10:00 a.m.
or later than 9:00 p.m., nor on Sundays or holidays.
§ 428-18A. No Solicitation List. [Amended 8-27-2007 by Ord. No.
07-38]
A. The Township of Vernon shall institute a list of residents who request
that solicitors not solicit on their property. The "No Solicitation List"
shall be maintained by the Township Clerk.
B. Residents of Vernon may request in writing to the Township Clerk to be
added to the No Solicitation List.
C. Upon receipt of a written request, the Township Clerk shall add the
name and address of the resident to the No Solicitation List.
D. Prior to solicitation or canvassing by any person or organization
receiving a license under § 428, the Township Clerk shall provide a copy
of the No Solicitation List to the license applicant with the license and
the licensee and their employees shall thereafter refrain from any
solicitation on the properties or to the names set forth on the No
Solicitation List.
§ 428-17 VERNON CODE § 428-18A
1:946
ARTICLE III
Charitable Solicitations
§ 428-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — In accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20,
shall mean: (1) any person determined by the federal Internal Revenue
Service to be a tax exempt organization pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3); or (2) any person who
is, or holds himself out to be, established for any benevolent, philanthropic,
humane, social welfare, public health, or other eleemosynary purpose, or
for the benefit of law enforcement personnel, firefighters or other persons
who protect the public safety, or any person who in any manner employs
a charitable appeal as the basis of any solicitation, or an appeal which
has a tendency to suggest there is a charitable purpose to any such
solicitation.125[Added 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
CONTRIBUTION — Includes the words "alms," "food," "clothes," "money,"
"subscription" and "property" of any nature or kind.
PERSON or ORGANIZATION — Any individual, firm, copartnership,
corporation, company, association, church, religious denomination, society,
class or league.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request, directly or indirectly, for
money, credit, property, financial assistance, and other things of value
on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial
assistance or other things of value will be used for a charitable and
philanthropic purpose, as defined in this article. "Solicitation" shall be
deemed to be complete when made, whether or not the person making the
solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 428-20. Permit required; exemption. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-09]
No charitable organization shall solicit charitable and philanthropic
contributions within the Township without first having obtained a permit
authorizing public solicitations; provided, however, that the provisions of
this section shall not apply to any established charitable organization
authorized and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person if the
solicitations by such charitable organization are conducted among the
members thereof or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or
contributions at the regular assembly or meetings of such charitable
organization.
125. Editor's Note: The former definition of "charitable and philanthropic," which preceded
this definition, was repealed 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09.
§ 428-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-21
1:947
§ 428-21. Application for permit. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No.
18-09]
A. Application for a permit to make a public solicitation of funds by
charitable organizations shall be made to the Township Clerk on forms
provided by the Township.
B. The application herein required shall contain the following information:
(1) The purpose for which the solicitation is to be made and the
estimated amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby.
(2) A specific statement showing the need for the solicitation.
(3) The name, telephone number, and address of the person or persons
who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation.
(4) The names and addresses of all persons making the proposed
solicitation.
(5) A brief outline of the method to be used in conducting the
solicitation.
(6) The specific location or locations of proposed charitable
solicitation. If the application is for roadside solicitation a traffic
control plan, site layout plan or sketch of the roadways involved
including a diagram of the proposed set up or method of solicitation
must be included in accordance with § 428-25.2.
(7) The time and dates when the solicitation shall be made, giving the
beginning and ending dates of the solicitation.
(8) The amount of any wages, fees, commission, or expenses to be paid
to any person or organization for conducting the solicitation and
the names and addresses of all such persons.
(9) If applicable, identify the manner in which motorist solicitations
will be conducted and the procedures to be used to ensure the
safety of members of the public who will be traveling the roadways
situated in the Township.
(10) A full statement to the effect that, if the permit is approved, it will
not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement of the
proposed solicitation by the Township or by any of its officers or
departments.
(11) A copy of the ruling from the Internal Revenue Service in which it
determined the organization to be a charitable organization under
the rules of the Internal Revenue Code so that donations made to
such organizations are tax deductible. If such determination has
not been applied for, the applicant shall indicate whether it intends
to seek such recognition.
§ 428-21 VERNON CODE § 428-22
1:948
§ 428-22. No permit fee required.
There shall be no fee payable to the Township for any charitable and
philanthropic permit.
§ 428-23. Time limit of permit.
No permit may grant the right to solicit for charitable and philanthropic
contributions for a period longer than 90 consecutive days.
§ 428-24. Written receipts for contributions.
Any person or organization receiving money or any other thing of a value of
$1 or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to this
article shall give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor
showing the date and the amount received. This section shall not apply
to any contribution collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used
in solicitation or where it is impractical to determine the amount of each
contribution.
§ 428-25. Hours and days of solicitation. [Amended 3-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-09]
All solicitations conducted under the authority of this article shall take place
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and no solicitations shall
be conducted on Sundays with the exception of roadside solicitations. Any
charitable organization desiring to solicit at hours other than those stated
herein shall make special requests therefor on its application, and this
special request shall be approved or disapproved by the Township Council.
If approval is given by the Township Council for solicitation to be conducted
at a time other than the hours stated in this section, the approval shall be
plainly stamped on the permit issued by the Township Clerk.
§ 428-25.1. Authorization for charitable solicitations on Township
roadways. [Added 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, charitable organizations are authorized to
submit applications for permits for solicitation of charitable contributions
on Township roadways. Such solicitations shall not occur on county
roadways unless authorized by the Sussex County Department of
Engineering. Such solicitations shall further not occur on state highways
unless authorized by the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of
New Jersey. In the event a charitable organization soliciting adversely
affects the flow of traffic or conducts solicitation in an unsafe manner,
it shall be at the discretion of the Vernon Township Police Department
to make modifications or corrections to ensure the safety of the persons/
organizations making solicitations and the motoring public.
§ 428-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-25.2
1:949
§ 428-25.2. Regulations for charitable solicitations on Township
roadways. [Added 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
Charitable organizations authorized to engage in charitable solicitations on
the Township's roadways shall abide by the following conditions:
§ 428-25.3. Background check exemption. [Added 3-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-09]
When applying for a permit to make charitable solicitations, members of
the volunteer fire departments and emergency medical services that service
Vernon Township shall be exempt from the background check requirements
outlined at § 428-26A.
A. At no time will anyone under the age of 18 participate in any solicitation
on the roadways within the Township of Vernon.
B. At all times, any participating members of the applicant organization
must be wearing the most current DOT-approved reflective vests for
high visibility.
C. At no time will any participating member of the applicant organization
stand in the roadway while traffic is moving or to obstruct the flow of
traffic.
D. Participating members of the applicant organization may enter the
roadway once traffic has stopped and must return to the shoulder of the
roadway when the flow of traffic resumes.
E. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may request that the Township
Council deny a roadside solicitation permit if the number of requests for
roadside solicitation exceeds more than one within two miles.
F. In accordance with § 428-25.3, upon receipt of an application for
roadside solicitation from a Township Ambulance or Township Fire
Department, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall have five
business days from the receipt of an application to review and make any
recommendation in accordance with §§ 428-25.1 or 428-25.2 of this
chapter.
G. The applicant organization may only occupy one section of any roadway
within the Township of Vernon.
H. The applicant organization must provide a site layout plan to include a
map of the proposed location and where members will be located along
the roadway.
I. Each application shall be submitted no less than 30 days prior to the
project event date.
§ 428-25.2 VERNON CODE § 428-25.3
1:950
ARTICLE IV
Provisions Applicable to All Peddlers, Solicitors and Charitable
Solicitations
§ 428-26. Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of license or
permit; permanent records to be kept.
§ 428-27. Appeal of disapproval.
If the application has been disapproved and the applicant desires to appeal
the decisions to the Mayor and Township Council, he may do so by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Township Clerk within 10 days of the date
of the notice of disapproval. An appeal will only be heard where there is new
information provided by the applicant that was not previously submitted, or
where the applicant can provide information that shows the reason for the
disapproval by the Mayor and Township Council were not valid. The Mayor
A. Upon receipt of an application, the Township Police Chief shall cause an
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be
made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. In
addition, he shall obtain a copy of the applicant's motor vehicle
operating record for at least the past 10 years and check on all types of
criminal convictions since the applicant was 18. Such investigation
shall be completed within 10 days after the application is filed, and that,
together with the application, shall be forwarded to the Mayor and
Township Council for their review and decision on said application.
They shall provide a decision within 25 days of the date the application
was submitted.
B. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Mayor and
Township Council shall endorse on such application its disapproval and
the specific reasons for its disapproval, and then notify the applicant
that his application was disapproved and that no license or permit shall
be issued.
C. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Mayor
and Township Council shall endorse on the application its approval, and
the Township Clerk shall deliver to the applicant his license or permit.
Such license or permit shall contain the signature and seal of the
issuing officer and shall show the name, address, and photograph of
said licensee or permittee, the class of license or permit issued, and the
kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance and the length
of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license or permit
number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such
peddling, soliciting, or charitable solicitations.
D. The Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses and permits
issued.
§ 428-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-27
1:951
and Township Council shall hold its hearing on appeal within 15 days after
the submission of same, and its decision then shall be final.
§ 428-28. Expiration of licenses and permits.
Every permit or license issued hereunder, except those under § 428-23,
shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which it was issued. All
permits must thereafter be renewed if the licensees or permittees desire to
continue their operations.
§ 428-29. Renewal of license or permit; fee.
§ 428-30. Record of licenses, permits and violations.
The Township Clerk shall maintain a record for each license and permit
issued and record the reports of violations received.
§ 428-31. Revocation of permit; hearing.
A. Any licensee or permittee having a permit or license valid until
December 31 of the previous year may apply for a renewal of that
license or permit and submit a renewal application fee of $25, and that
license or permit shall automatically be renewed by the Township Clerk,
provided the Township Clerk did not receive complaints regarding the
licensee's or permittee's business and further provided the applicant
for renewal states under oath that there has been no change in the
information originally supplied to the Township on his first application.
B. If the licensee or permittee's prior permit was revoked or information
previously submitted has changed, or complaints were received about
the licensee's or permittee's operation, then he shall be required to file
a new application, together with the application fee, and then proceed
as if he had never been licensed before.
A. Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Mayor and Township Council after notice and hearing before the
Mayor and Township Council for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for permit.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as peddler, solicitor, or charitable
solicitation.
(3) Any violation of this Chapter 428 of the Vernon Township Code.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling, soliciting, or seeking
charitable solicitations in an unlawful manner, or in such manner as
§ 428-27 VERNON CODE § 428-31
1:952
§ 428-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. The continuation
of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
to constitute a breach of peace or as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(6) In regard to peddlers and solicitors, a conviction or plea of guilty to
a charge of drunk driving, reckless driving, careless driving,
speeding, or other similar motor vehicle conviction or guilty plea
that indicates the peddler or solicitor may represent a hazard to
Township residents.
B. Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint
and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid by both regular mail and certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the permittee at his last known address, as well as to all of
the addresses given in his application or served upon him personally at
least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 428-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-32
1:953
Chapter 434
PERFORMANCE GUARANTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250. Land development — See Ch. 330.
§ 434-1. Standards.
Whenever, by virtue of any law, ordinance, or regulation, any person, firm or
corporation is required to post a performance guaranty with the Township
of Vernon or any of its boards or agencies, such performance guaranty shall
comply with the following standards:
§ 434-2. Filing of performance guaranty required prior to approval.
No municipal approvals requiring a performance guaranty shall be given
unless and until the person's guaranty has been filed in the manner set forth
in § 434-1 above.
A. The applicant shall submit a form of bond signed by the party to be
bound, setting forth specifically both the improvements to be installed
and the time limitations within which the improvements shall be
physically in place and approved by the Township Engineer (for the
failure of installation of such improvements within the time limits
thereof, the bond shall be in default as to both principal and surety
without notice), and accompanied by a certified check for the amount of
the bond payable to the Township of Vernon to be deposited by the
Township of Vernon at interest in a depository bank, and to be used to
satisfy any default in the terms of the bond.
B. In lieu of a certified check, the person, firm or corporation to be bound
by the bond may submit a letter of credit issued by a bank doing
business in the State of New Jersey, or surety bond executed by a surety
company authorized by the State of New Jersey to guarantee the
performance bonds for projects undertaken by the State of New Jersey.
The qualification of such surety company to guarantee projects of the
State of New Jersey shall be submitted with the surety bond. In any
event, 10% of such performance guaranty shall be in cash in the form of
a certified check.
C. Each bond, whether secured by cash or a surety as above set forth, shall
bear thereon the following legend: "I hereby approve the form of the
within bond" and a line thereunder for the signature of the Township
Attorney. No bond shall be adequate and no approvals shall be based
thereon unless the form thereof has been so approved and the manual
signature of the Township Attorney is affixed to the bond.
§ 428-32 VERNON CODE § 434-3
1:954
§ 434-3. Renewals and extensions.
The standards of this chapter shall also apply to the renewal or extension of
any performance guaranty.
Chapter 440
PESTICIDES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Right to farm — See Ch. 240.
§ 440-1. Authority.
An ordinance regulating pesticide use and application and fixing penalties
for violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1F-13.
§ 440-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Pesticide
Ordinance of the Township of Vernon."
§ 440-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and application of
pesticides, as herein defined, so as to limit human exposure, prevent
contamination of surface and ground water supplies, prevent loss of soil
fertility and prevent the destruction or endangerment of those species of
wildlife and their habitat not defined as pests under the definition of this
chapter.
§ 440-4. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
ACT — The Pesticide Control Act of 1971, as amended, N.J.S.A. 13:1F-1 et
seq.
ACTIVE INGREDIENT — Any ingredient which will prevent, destroy, repel,
control, or mitigate pests, or which will act as a plant regulator, defoliant,
or desiccant.
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY — Any plant or part thereof, or animal,
or animal product, produced by a person (including farmers, ranchers,
vineyardists, plant propagators, Christmas tree growers, aquaculturists,
floriculturists, orchardists, foresters, or other comparable persons)
primarily for sale, consumption, propagation, or other use by man or animal.
§ 434-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-4
1:955
BRAND or BRAND NAME or TRADE NAME — The characteristic
designation by words, symbols, name, number or trademark of a specific,
particular pesticide or formulation thereof under which the pesticide is
distributed, sold, offered for sale, handled, stored, used, or transported in
the State of New Jersey.
COMMERCIAL PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any person (whether or not he
is a private applicator with respect to some uses) who uses or supervises
the use of any pesticide for any purpose or on any property other than as
provided by the definition of "private pesticide applicator."
COMMERCIAL PESTICIDE OPERATOR — Any person who applies
pesticides by equipment other than aerial under the direct supervision of a
certified and registered responsible pesticide applicator.
COMMUNITY OR AREA WIDE — Any pesticide application performed on
aggregate areas greater than three acres of land which is part of a pest
control program administered by a governmental agency or which is
contracted for or performed by one person who has control over the use of
the land to which the pesticide is applied.
CONTRACTOR — Any person who hires a commercial pesticide applicator
business to perform an ornamental pest control application utilizing
hydraulic spraying equipment operating at a rate greater than 300 psi
and 10 gpm, airblast sprayers, or aerial application equipment on property
owned or controlled by him. For the purposes of this definition, the term
"contractor" shall include any person who makes such application on
property owned or controlled by him.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
ORNAMENTAL — Trees, shrubs, and other planting in and around
habitations generally, but not necessarily located in urban and suburban
areas, including residences, parks, streets, retail outlets, industrial and
institutional buildings.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships, and joint-stock companies as well as individuals, and shall
also include all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
PEST —
PESTICIDE — Includes any substance or mixture of substances labeled,
designed or intended for use in preventing, destroying, repelling or
mitigating any pest, or any substance or mixture of substances labeled,
designed or intended for use as a defoliant, desiccant, or plant regulator;
A. Any insect, rodent, nematode, fungus, weed; or
Any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus,
bacteria, or other micro-organism (except viruses, bacteria or other
micro-organisms on or in living man or other animals) which is injurious
to health or the environment.
B.
§ 440-4 VERNON CODE § 440-4
1:956
provided that the term "pesticide" shall not include any substance or
mixture of substances which the EPA does not consider to be a pesticide.
PESTICIDE APPLICATOR BUSINESS — Any person who either wholly or in
part holds himself out for hire to apply pesticides in the State of New Jersey.
PRIVATE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any person who uses or supervises
the use of any pesticide for purposes of producing any agricultural
commodity on property owned or rented by him or his employer or, if
applied without compensation, other than trading of personal services
between producers of agricultural commodities, on the property of another
person.
PROPER ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — An official designated by the
municipality, subject to approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, whose duties are to enforce the rules and
regulations promulgated under this chapter.
RESPONSIBLE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any individual who is
accountable for the use of a pesticide by himself or any person under his
direct supervision.
RESTRICTED USE PESTICIDE — Any pesticide or pesticide use so classified
under the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:30-2 or so classified by the Administrator
of the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
STATE REGULATIONS — Pesticide rules and regulations promulgated
under the Act and codified in N.J.A.C. 7:30.
TARGET SITE — A specific location, including but not limited to any crop,
commodity, object, delineated field or area, or structure or part thereof, that
is intended to be treated by a pesticide so that any pests therein or thereon
are controlled. This term does not include any similar site which was not a
part of the original agreement between the contracting parties even if such
site is included on the label or labeling of the pesticide.
USE — Any act of handling or release of a pesticide, or exposure of man,
property, or the environment to a pesticide through acts which include but
are not limited to:
§ 440-5. Commercial pesticide operator.
Applying a pesticide, including mixing and loading, and any required
supervisory action in or near the area of application;
A.
B. Handling, transporting, or storing a pesticide or pesticide container;
Disposal actions for a pesticide and/or containers or equipment
associated with the pesticide.
C.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a commercial pesticide
operator without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and having obtained a valid pesticide operator registration issued by
that Department.
§ 440-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-5
1:957
§ 440-6. Commercial pesticide applicator.
§ 440-7. Pesticide applicator business.
§ 440-8. Private pesticide applicator.
B. Each commercial pesticide operator shall at all times have in his/her
possession the valid registration card and shall produce it upon request
by proper enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a commercial pesticide
applicator without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and having obtained a valid commercial pesticide applicator
registration issued by that Department.
B. Each commercial pesticide applicator shall at all times have in his/her
possession the valid registration card and shall produce it immediately
upon request by proper enforcement personnel.
C. Each commercial pesticide applicator must keep records of each
application of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state
regulations. Such records shall be made available to all proper
enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a pesticide applicator
business without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and having obtained a valid pesticide applicator business registration
issued by that Department. The business registration shall be made
immediately available upon request of proper enforcement personnel.
B. The pesticide applicator business must keep records of each application
of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state regulations. Such
records shall be made available to all proper enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a private pesticide applicator
without having satisfied the applicable requirements established by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and having
obtained a valid private pesticide applicator registration issued by that
Department.
B. The valid registration card shall be made available within 24 hours of
the request of proper enforcement personnel.
C. All private pesticide applicators must keep records of each application
of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state regulations. Such
records shall be made available to all proper enforcement personnel.
§ 440-5 VERNON CODE § 440-9
1:958
§ 440-9. Storage of pesticides.
No person shall store restricted use pesticides without first meeting the
applicable provisions of state regulations.
§ 440-10. Pesticide equipment.
No person shall add water to any pesticide handling, storage, or application
equipment via a hose, pump, or other equipment unless such hose, pump,
or other equipment is fitted with an effective valve or device to prevent
backflow of pesticides or liquids containing pesticides into water supply
systems, streams, lakes, other sources of water or other areas; except that
such backflow devices or valves are not required when the hose, pump,
or other equipment is not allowed to contact or fall below the level of the
liquid in the handling, storage, or application equipment to which water is
being added and no other possible means of establishing a back-siphon or
backflow exists.
§ 440-11. Safety equipment.
All persons having employees who use, apply, transport or otherwise handle
any pesticide shall make available to such employees any necessary and
appropriate safety equipment in good working order and shall train such
employees in the proper operation of such safety equipment.
§ 440-12. Notification of community or area wide applications.
A. No person shall apply any pesticide on a community or area wide basis
unless prior notification of the proposed application has been given to
persons residing in the vicinity of the proposed target site.
(1) The notification shall be made through advertisement in at least
two newspapers having the greatest likelihood of informing the
public within the area of application.
(2) The newspaper notification must be given a maximum of 60 days
and a minimum of seven days prior to the proposed application
date.
(3) The notification must contain at least:
(a) The proposed application date;
(b) The location of the application;
(c) The name, address, and registration number of the applicator
business or the responsible pesticide applicator associated
with the application;
(d) The brand name and active ingredients of the pesticide(s) to be
used;
(e) Application equipment to be used; and
§ 440-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-12
1:959
§ 440-13. Notification of ornamental applications.
(f) The name, address, and phone number of a person who may be
contacted and is responsible for supplying updated information
on the advertised pesticide applications to those persons
requesting it.
(4) Upon the request by a person residing in the vicinity of the
proposed target site, to a person designated pursuant to
Subsection A(3)(f) above, such designated person shall provide, at
a minimum, the following information at least 12 hours prior to the
application, except that, if a reasonable attempt to provide notice is
unsuccessful, an attempt to notify such person, by telephone, shall
be made immediately prior to the application.
(a) The actual time and date of application;
(b) The actual pesticide to be applied, including the EPA
registration number; and
(c) Any precautionary statement(s) on the product's federal
registered label.
(5) The person designated pursuant to Subsection A(3)(f) above shall
maintain a record of all telephone calls, attempted and completed
with persons requesting information referred to in Subsection A(4)
above, and a file of related correspondence. Such record and file
shall be made available to the proper enforcement personnel upon
request. The minimum information required to be kept on the call
record shall include:
(a) Name and phone number of the person contacted; and
(b) The time and date of the call.
(6) The person making the application subject to the notification
requirements shall keep a record of the newspapers in which the
advertisement was placed and the dates published. This
information shall be made available to the proper enforcement
personnel upon request.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for the purpose of producing an agricultural
commodity, mosquito larviciding applications, or the application of
granular formulations in nonresidential areas.
A. No person shall cause or allow an outdoor ornamental pest control
application utilizing hydraulic spraying equipment operating at a rate
greater than 300 psi and 10 gpm, airblast sprayers, or aerial application
equipment on property owned or controlled by him unless the following
procedures have been followed:
§ 440-12 VERNON CODE § 440-13
1:960
(1) General public requesting notification. Any person desiring
notification of outdoor ornamental pesticide applications may
register with the Township Clerk or other designated municipal
agent by April 1 of the calendar year in which the applications
subject to notification will occur, unless the municipality chooses
not to maintain this registry.
(2) The contractor shall obtain the names and addresses of persons
requesting notification from the Township Clerk, Department of
Health and Human Services, or other designated municipal agent
or through other available resources such as personal contact with
residents and owners of property adjacent and contiguous to the
contractor's property and shall provide notice to such registered
persons and residents and owners of property adjacent and
contiguous, at least 48 hours prior to the proposed application, by
mail or by personal delivery, such notice to contain the following
information:126
(a) A general statement of the purpose of the notification and
procedures to follow to obtain additional updated information;
(b) The proposed application date(s);
(c) The location of the application;
(d) The name, address, and registration number of the applicator
business or the responsible pesticide applicator associated
with the application;
(e) The brand name and active ingredients of the pesticide(s) to be
used; and
(f) The name, address, and phone number of the applicator who
may be contacted and is responsible for supplying updated
information on the proposed pesticide applications to those
persons requesting it.
(3) Upon the request of any resident of property adjacent and
contiguous to the contractor's property, to the applicator
designated pursuant to Subsection A(2)(f), such designated
applicator shall provide, at a minimum, the following information at
least 12 hours prior to the application, except that if a reasonable
attempt to provide notice is unsuccessful, an attempt to notify such
person, by telephone, shall be made immediately prior to the
application:
(a) The actual time and date of application; and
(b) Any precautionary statement(s) on the product's federal
registered label.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-13
1:961
(4) The applicator designated pursuant to Subsection A(2)(f) above
shall maintain a record of all telephone calls, attempted and
completed with persons requesting information referred to in
Subsection A(3)above, and a file of related correspondence. Such
record and file shall be made available to the proper enforcement
personnel upon request. The minimum information required to be
kept on the call record shall include:
(a) Name and phone number of the person contacted; and
(b) The time and date of the call.
(5) The contractor shall keep a record or file of the notice he provided,
which may include a copy of the receipt for the certified letter(s), if
certified mail is utilized.
(6) The provisions of this section shall not apply to an additional
application made on the same day and in the same locality as an
application governed by this section, if the following requirements
are satisfied:
(a) The contractor demonstrates to the satisfaction of the local
governing authority that he had not hired the applicator more
than 48 hours prior to the start of the application governed by
this section;
(b) If the municipality maintains a registry referred to in
Subsection A(1) above, the contractor has personally contacted
residents listed on the registry and whose property is adjacent
and contiguous to property on which the additional application
is proposed and no objections were raised; and
(c) If a municipality does not maintain a registry referred to in
Subsection A(1) above, the contractor has personally contacted
residents of property adjacent and contiguous to property on
which the application is proposed and no objections were
raised.
(7) A waiver of the minimum amount of prior notice required in
Subsection A(2) may be granted at the discretion of the local
governing authority.
B. Prior to performing an outdoor ornamental pest control application
subject to the notification provisions, the commercial pesticide
applicator shall provide the contractor with a written statement
outlining the contractor's notification responsibilities and the specifics
of the proposed application referred to in Subsection A(2) or (3) above.
C. The contractor may delegate, in writing, his notification responsibilities
to the commercial pesticide applicator, provided the commercial
pesticide applicator agrees, in writing, to assume the notification
responsibilities as delineated in this chapter.
§ 440-13 VERNON CODE § 440-13
1:962
§ 440-14. Notification of apiarists.
D. The commercial pesticide applicator is not responsible for any actions
resulting from the failure of the contractor to fulfill his notification
obligations unless the contractor has delegated and the commercial
pesticide applicator has assumed the notification responsibilities as
stated in Subsection C above.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for the purpose of producing an agricultural
commodity or to any person required to supply advance notification
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:30-10.9.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply where the target site is
greater than 100 feet from the contractor's property line.
A. No person shall make an outdoor application of a pesticide product
which has information on its label or labeling noting that the product is
toxic to bees unless such person first notifies, at least 36 hours prior to
the application, each apiarist who:
(1) Desires notification;
(2) Maintains an apiary which is located within 1/2 mile of the target
site;
(3) Has been registered with either the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or the New Jersey Beekeepers
Association by April 1 of the calendar year in which the applications
subject to the notification requirements of this section will occur.
B. Notification pursuant to Subsection A above may be given to the
apiarist directly or, in the case of any apiarist registered with the New
Jersey Beekeepers Association, through the local designated agent of
that association; provided that the agent has agreed to make the
required notification and has himself been given notification at least 72
hours prior to the intended application.
C. The notification must include the following information:
(1) The intended date of the application;
(2) The approximate time of the application;
(3) The brand name and active ingredient of the pesticide to be
applied;
(4) The location of the land on which the application is to be made; and
(5) The name and certified pesticide applicator registration number of
the responsible pesticide applicator.
D. If the application date is changed so that the application will not occur
on the intended date specified in the original notification of application
§ 440-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-14
1:963
§ 440-15. Permit required for commercial pesticide applicator; fee.
but will be conducted during the next consecutive day, notification must
be given to the individual apiarist as soon as reasonably possible but
not later than 10:00 p.m. the night prior to the new application date.
E. If the owner or operator of an apiary does not choose to move, cover, or
otherwise protect the apiary, the application may be made without
delay; provided that such application complies with the pesticide
labeling and any provisions of the Act or any rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person using a
pesticide on an aggregate area less than three acres; provided that the
application is not made with hydraulic spraying equipment operating at
a rate greater than 300 psi and 10 gpm, airblast sprayers, or aerial
equipment.
G. Any person required to notify apiarists pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall not be responsible for notifying any apiarist who cannot be
notified because:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the
New Jersey Beekeepers Association have failed to provide
information deemed necessary by the Department for such
notification; or
(2) The New Jersey Beekeepers Association has failed to or been
unable to notify any apiarist(s) after agreeing to do so.
H. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for agricultural purposes, except to the crops
within the dates and/or stage as stated below:
(1) Apples: April 15 to May 15.
(2) Pears: April 15 to May 15.
(3) Strawberries: April 15 to May 15.
(4) Blueberries: April 15 to May 31.
(5) Cranberries: June 15 to August 15.
(6) Holly: June 1 to June 30.
(7) Vine crops (Cucurbits): June 1 to August 31.
(8) Sweet corn: flowering stage.
A. No pesticide applicator business shall engage in the activity or business
of pesticide application within the territorial limits of Vernon Township
without having obtained a permit from the Department of Health and
Human Services. This permit shall be obtained prior to the first
§ 440-14 VERNON CODE § 440-15
1:964
§ 440-16. Permit required for contractor; fee.
§ 440-17. Permit required for community or area wide applications;
fee; exception.
§ 440-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating, or failing to comply with, any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $5 nor more than $500 in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuance of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
pesticide application and shall be valid for the calendar year in which it
is issued.127
B. For the issuance of a permit to engage in the business or activity of
pesticide application, a fee of $35 is hereby established.
A. No contractor as herein defined shall cause any pesticide application to
be performed without having obtained a permit from the Department of
Health and Human Services. This permit shall be obtained at least three
days prior to each proposed pesticide application.128
B. For the issuance of a permit to a contractor, a fee of $2 for each
application is hereby established.
A. No person except as exempted under § 440-12B (to wit: applications for
the purpose of producing an agricultural commodity, mosquito
larviciding applications, or the application of granular formulations in
nonresidential areas) shall apply or cause to be applied any pesticide on
a community or area wide basis as defined in this chapter without
obtaining a permit from the Department of Health and Human Services
at least three days prior to each proposed pesticide application.129
B. For the issuance of a permit to apply or cause to be applied any
pesticide on a community or area wide basis, a fee of $10 for each
application is hereby established.
C. No permit shall be required for applications by any government agency
pursuant to the proper authority vested in that agency.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-18
1:965
Chapter 447
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned property and unfit
buildings — See Ch. 130.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 531.
Dumping and littering — See Ch. 227.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 263.
Pesticides — See Ch. 440.
Recycling — See Ch. 452.
Right to farm — See Ch. 240.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 205.
§ 440-18 VERNON CODE § 440-18
1:966
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 447-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance and condition of residential and nonresidential premises. It
fixes certain responsibilities upon owners, operators, occupants and other
persons. It authorizes and establishes procedures for the inspection of
residential and nonresidential premises. It fixes penalties for the violation
of this code and provides procedures for correcting violations in those cases
requiring Township action. This chapter is hereby declared to be protective,
preventive and essential for the public interest.
§ 447-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, whenever used in this chapter, shall have
the respective meanings herein assigned to them and shall be construed to
include the plurals of these words:
BUILDING CODE — The Building Code of the Township of Vernon which is
the Uniform Construction Code of New Jersey (UCC).
DETERIORATION — A condition characterized by holes, rot, crumbling,
cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect,
vandalism, lack of maintenance, excessive use and/or the uncorrected
consequences of natural catastrophe.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — See § 447-12.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises, or any part thereof, which
may be viewed lawfully by the public or any member thereof.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
MAINTENANCE — To keep in good repair and preserve the premises.
OCCUPANT — Any person living or sleeping in a building; or having
possession of a space within a building.
OPERATOR — Any person who has chore, charge or control of a structure
or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. This term shall not include
licensed real estate agents.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
§ 447-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-2
1:967
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes any of the following:
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected, the use of
which requires location on or in the ground or attachment to something
having its location on or in the ground, and includes fences, tanks,
swimming pools, shelters, towers, advertising devices, bins, tents, lunch
wagons and trailer, dining cars or similar structures on wheels or other
supports used for commercial or residential purposes; wires and their
supporting poles, towers and frames of electrical or telephone utilities or
service utilities entirely below the ground are also deemed to be structures.
TENANT — A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOWN CENTER ZONE — Any property located in the Town Center (TC)
Zone of the Township as delineated in the Vernon Township Zoning Map.
VACANT LOT — A premise that is designated by a single block and lot and
does not contain any structure upon it. This would not include woodland
lots. Woodland lots consist of several deciduous and coniferous trees of
more than 10 feet in height that create closed canopies.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure.
The physical condition or occupancy of any premises recorded as a
public nuisance at common law;
A.
Any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including
but not limited to basements, excavations and unsafe fences or
structures;
B.
C. Any premises that has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
D. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation;
Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard or is
manifestly unsafe or unsecure so as to endanger life, limb or property;
E.
Any premises that is unsanitary, or that is littered with rubbish or
garbage, or that has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
F.
Any structure that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged
by fire to the extent so as not to provide shelter; in danger of collapse
or failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
G.
§ 447-2 VERNON CODE § 447-3
1:968
§ 447-3. Applicability.
Every residential and nonresidential building and structure and the
premises on which it is situated in the Township of Vernon used or intended
to be used for residential, commercial, business or industrial occupancy
shall comply with the provision of this Code, whether or not the buildings
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the
enactment of this Code and irrespective of any permits or licenses which
shall have been issued for the use or occupancy or repair of equipment
or facilities prior to the enactment of this Code. This Code establishes
minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all
buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established
for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, equipment or
facilities contained therein, except as provided in § 447-4.
§ 447-4. Prevalence of higher standards.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinance of the Township or under the laws of
the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail,
but if the provisions of this chapter impose a lower standard than any other
ordinance of the Township or of the laws of the State of New Jersey, then
the higher standard contained in any other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 447-5. Compliance with additional standards required.
Compliance with this Code shall not constitute a defense against any
violation of any other ordinance of the Township applicable to any owner,
operator or occupant from complying with any other provision nor any
official of the Township from enforcing any other provision.
§ 447-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-5
1:969

ARTICLE II
Responsibilities of Owners, Operators, Occupants, and Creditor
§ 447-6. Responsibilities of owner and operator.
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
described in Article III of this chapter and the regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any such
duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge or
violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also responsible
therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 447-7. Responsibilities of occupants.
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
Article III of this chapter and all the regulations promulgated thereto, and
the occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility and
be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of
the fact that the owner is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 447-8. Contract not to alter responsibilities.
Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, the respective
obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one hand and
the occupant on the other shall not be altered or affected by any agreement
or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between them and other
parties.
§ 447-9. Creditors.
A. Creditors responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep
of the exterior of the vacant and abandoned residential property,
pursuant to code § 130-2, shall be responsible for complying with this
chapter.
§ 447-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-9
1:971

ARTICLE III
Structural Soundness; General Maintenance
§ 447-10. Exterior of buildings and premises:
A. Sidewalks. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street,
catch basin or other public place any accumulation of litter or snow
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:65-12, the owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or
tenants of premises abutting or bordering any streets in the Town
Center Zone shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks
of such streets or, in the case of ice, which may be so frozen as to make
removal impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand, salt or cinders within 24 hours after the same shall fall or be
formed thereon.
B. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, that this
term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. This section shall
not apply to vacant lots except those located within the Town Center
Zone.
C. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be structurally sound.
D. General exterior structure. The exterior of a structure shall be
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare based upon applicable building codes.
E. Structural members. All structural members shall be capable of safely
supporting the imposed dead and live loads based on applicable
building codes.
F. Roofs and drainage. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be
maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall
not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
G. Overhang extensions. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings,
fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions
shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be
kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal
or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust
by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
H. Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck,
porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage
and capable of supporting the imposed loads subject to applicable
building codes.
§ 447-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-10
1:973
§ 447-11. Signs.
All signs permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful
nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair, and printed matter,
pictures or illustrations contained thereon shall be completely maintained
or, when no longer in use, completely removed. All nonoperative or broken
electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting members,
be removed forthwith.
I. Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition as defined by applicable building codes.
J. Window and door frames. Every window, door and frame shall be kept
in sound condition and good repair as defined by applicable building
codes.
§ 447-10 VERNON CODE § 447-11
1:974
ARTICLE IV
Administration and Enforcement
§ 447-12. Enforcement officer.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any officer or employee
whose regular duties include enforcement of building, plumbing, electrical,
zoning, health, housing, safety or fire code regulations or statutes, and
reference hereinafter to the enforcement officer shall be deemed to mean
any such officer or employee who is acting in such capacity with respect to
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 447-13. Enforcement procedure.
§ 447-14. Emergency conditions.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds that an emergency condition
in violation of this chapter exists, which condition requires immediate
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there is or has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter, then notice of the
violation shall be given.
B. Written notice of violation shall be served either by hand delivery to the
property owner or operator, or by leaving a copy at his/her usual place
of abode with a person not less than 16 years of age, or by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the last
known address as shown on the most recent tax duplicate of the
Township, or upon the operator at the property address. Should service
by hand delivery or post be unsuccessful, then service shall be made by
posting a copy of the notice of violation at a conspicuous place on the
subject premises and by sending a copy by regular mail to the owner at
the last known address as shown on the most recent tax duplicate of the
Township.
C. Written notice of violation shall state that unless the alleged violation is
abated, removed or cured within 10 days of the date of service
(exclusive of the date of service), then a summons shall be issued. The
Code Enforcement Officer may, in his/her discretion, extend the time
period for compliance if, in his/her judgment, it is believed that the
alleged violation cannot reasonably be completely corrected within 10
days. In such case the notice of violation shall set forth the length of the
time period to cure.
D. In the event that the alleged violation is not fully remedied within the
time period stated in the notice of violation, or such additional time as
the Code Enforcement Officer may afford, then a summons shall be
issued against the person, persons or entities so notified. Should the
same alleged violation continue unabated, the Code Enforcement
Officer may issue additional summons or summonses without the need
to serve a notice of violation anew.
§ 447-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-14
1:975
attention in order to protect the public health or safety, he shall issue an
order by service of notice as set forth in § 447-13, reciting the existence
of such an emergency condition and requiring that such action be taken
by the violator as soon as reasonably necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but upon objection in writing to the
Township Administrator, any such person shall be afforded a hearing before
the Township Administrator as soon as is reasonably possible. After such
a hearing and decision by the Township Administrator to the existence or
nonexistence of the emergency condition, the Township Administrator may
continue such order in effect, or modify or withdraw it; subject to issuance
of a summons for violation hereof, such order is continued. A decision by
the Township Administrator may be appealed to the Sussex County Board of
Appeals, if that body has jurisdiction.
§ 447-15. Further action.
Nothing contained herein shall limit the power of the Code Enforcement
Officer to take such further action under the criminal and civil laws of this
state through any court of competent jurisdiction as may be necessary to
remove or abate any nuisance.
§ 447-16. Compliance inspections.
Upon issuance of notice required by §§ 447-13 and 447-14, property owners
shall correct the condition and notify the Code Enforcement Officer that
said condition has been corrected. An inspection shall then be made for
which no fee shall be charged. Should full compliance not be achieved at
the time of the inspection, the Township shall be reimbursed for cost of
all reinspections by the property owner. Failure to reimburse the Township
shall result in a lien for said cost being placed against the property.
§ 447-17. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise outlined in this chapter, any person or entity who
shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any order promulgated
hereunder shall, after summons is issued under the terms hereof, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000. Each violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter and each day that each such violation shall
continue may be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 447-18. Assessment of Township costs to premises.
Where abatement of any nuisance as defined herein was accomplished
and premises brought into compliance with this chapter through the
expenditures of Township funds, such costs shall be assessed against the
premises cited as a lien in the same manner as real estate taxes if ordered
by the court.
§ 447-14 VERNON CODE § 447-19
1:976
§ 447-19. Exemption.
Any farm assessed property that is registered with the Township and the
State of New Jersey Department of Agriculture shall be exempt from this
chapter.
§ 447-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-19
1:977
Chapter 452
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping and littering — See Ch. 227.
§ 452-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
ALUMINUM — Products made of aluminum, including aluminum cans,
screen frames, lawn chair frames and similar items.
BIMETAL (TIN) CANS — Cans of the type commonly used for packaging
of food products excluding any cans used for paints, pesticides or similar
products.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Box-type products made from paper
commonly used in packaging and shipping.
GLASS — Products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the
product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging or
bottling, and other material commonly known as glass, excluding blue and
flat glass and glass commonly known as window glass.
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — Uncontaminated paper of the type commonly used
in offices, such as white bond, white stationery, white notepad paper,
computer printout paper and white paper forms, excluding carbon or
carbonized paper.
PLASTIC — All plastic PET bottles (soda bottles) and HDPE jugs commonly
used for packaging of milk, water, and juice.
SALVAGE PAPER PRODUCTS — Uncontaminated paper material, including
such as material as used newspaper, magazines, paperback books, the
colored or glossy/inserts and advertisement materials.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves and small tree branches.
§ 452-2. Applicability; private contracts; reports.
All persons, firms and corporations, public and private, shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter. Firms and corporations may make
arrangements for disposal of their recyclables through private contracts,
provided that monthly reports (log sheets) shall be submitted, indicating
items recycled and the specific weights for the month. Such reports shall be
filed no later than the 10th day of the following month. An annual report on
total tonnage recycled for the year shall also be filed no later than January
10. Such reports shall be filed with:
§ 447-19 VERNON CODE § 452-2
1:978
The Township of Vernon
Municipal Center
Office of Recycling
Church Street
Vernon, New Jersey 07462
§ 452-3. Items to be recycled; regulations.
The occupant or owner of any building within the Township of Vernon shall
deliver for disposal the following named items and shall do so in conformity
with the following regulations:
§ 452-4. Disposal of recyclables.
All recyclables shall be disposed of at designated recycling centers or, when
available, to an authorized contractor picking up recyclables at curbside.
§ 452-5. Unlawful removal of recyclables; violations and penalties.
From the time of placement at the recycling center (or at the curb should
there be a contract for curbside pickup of recyclables), all recyclables
described herein shall be and become the property of the Township of
Vernon or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
A. Salvage paper products may be deposited loose, bundled or in paper
bags not to exceed 50 pounds and shall not be permitted in plastic bags.
B. Glass shall be rinsed, lids, metal rings and plastic covers removed.
Containers must also be separated by color, clear, brown (amber) and
green.
C. Aluminum. Aluminum cans shall be rinsed, aluminum scrap shall be
neatly bundled and bundles not to exceed 50 pounds.
D. Bimetal (tin) cans. Cans shall be rinsed and lids and labels removed.
E. Plastic containers shall be rinsed and caps, metal rings, and labels
(whenever possible) removed.
F. Yard waste shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter from
September 1 through December 31, and shall be placed in nonopaque
biodegradable bags, and branches must be no longer than four feet nor
larger than four inches in diameter and bundled not to exceed 50
pounds. Alternatively it may be composted.
G. High-grade paper shall be separated and kept dry, flat in a paper or
cardboard box and free of contaminants. No carbon or carbonized
paper shall be included.
H. Corrugated cardboard shall be crushed flat and bundled. Each bundle
shall not exceed 50 pounds.
§ 452-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-5
1:979
person unauthorized by the Township of Vernon to cause to be removed any
of these items from the recycling center (or curb). Violators of this section,
upon conviction, will be subject to a fine of no less than $500 for each
offense.
§ 452-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, business or institution which violates any provision of this
chapter or any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and not to
exceed $1,000.
Chapter 454
RIGHTS-OF-WAY, TOWNSHIP-OWNED
§ 452-5 VERNON CODE § 452-6
1:980
ARTICLE I
Purpose of Chapter
§ 454-1. Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to require that all mailboxes placed upon
Township-owned rights-of-way be placed in such a manner that allows for
efficient snow and/or ice removal from and maintenance of the rights-ofway.
It is the further intent of this chapter to require that all basketball
equipment, including, but not limited to, posts, backboards and rims, are
located a safe distance from Township-owned roads and rights-of-way so as
to allow for the efficient snow and/or ice removal from and maintenance of
the rights-of-way.
§ 454-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-1
1:981

ARTICLE II
Mailboxes
§ 454-2. Installation.
Any mailbox placed upon a Township-owned right-of-way shall be installed
at a height of 41 to 45 inches from the road suface to inside floor of the
mailbox or point of mail entry (locked designs) and shall be set back at least
8 inches from the front face of curb or road edge to the mailbox door.
§ 454-3. Repairs—Township liability.
For any mailbox located in a Township-owned right-of-way, the Township of
Vernon will make repairs to or replace a mailboxes and/or post damaged
due to snow and/or ice removal and/or maintenance operations only under
the following circumstances:
§ 454-4. Township not liable.
The Township shall not be liable and shall not repair or replace mailboxes
or posts located in Township rights-of-way where the Township determines
that:
§ 454-5. Replacement of mailbox.
In the event that actual physical contact with Township-owned equipment
damages a mailbox installed in accordance with chapter, the Township
will install a new, green-treated post and/or standard black mailbox. If
the property owner desires a non-standard mailbox, the Township will
reimburse the property owner up to $50 towards replacement costs. If any
damage exceeds $50, the property owner shall be responsible for any costs
A. Physical damage is caused by actual contact with Township-owned and
operated equipment, which damage and contact can be proven and
documented by the owner;
B. The mailbox and/or post is of standard design and placed in
conformance with this chapter, and
C. The existing installation, mailbox, and mailbox post were in good
condition and repair prior to the alleged event causing damage.
Nothing in this section or in this chapter shall be construed in any way
to waive any or all defenses available to the Township under Title 59 of
the New Jersey Statutes.
A. The mailbox was not of standard design and/or not placed in
conformance with this chapter; or
B. The mailbox, post, and installation were not in good conditon and
repair; or
C. The mailbox and/or post was damaged due to plowed snow and/or ice.
§ 454-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-5
1:983
above the $50 approved reimbursement by the Township for materials only;
no reimbursement for labor shall be given.
§ 454-6. Responsibility for access to mailbox.
The Township shall have no obligation to ensure that during snow and/or
ice removal operations, snow and/or ice is plowed in such a manner as to
permit access to any mailbox. It shall be the obligation of the owner of such
mailbox to remove any necessary snow and/or ice to permit postal service
access to the mailbox.
§ 454-7. Damage caused by thrown snow or ice.
In no event shall the Township of Vernon be responsible for damage to a
mailbox when such damage is caused by snow or ice thrown during snow
and/or ice removal operations.
§ 454-5 VERNON CODE § 454-7
1:984
ARTICLE III
Basketball Equipment
§ 454-8. Location.
All basketball equipment, including, but not limited to, posts, backboards
and rims, shall be located at least 10 feet from the edge of a Townshipowned
roadway. In no event shall any basketball equipment be located in
a Township-owned right-of-way. A property owner shall be responsible for
any damage incurred to Township equipment due to the failure to locate any
basketball equipment in accordance with this chapter.
§ 454-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-8
1:985
Chapter 462
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 330.
Potable water supply — See Ch. 555.
Public noncommunity and nonpublic water
systems — See Ch. 560.
§ 462-1. Adoption of standards.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection has promulgated
certain regulations known as "Chapter 9A, Standards for Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems," New Jersey Administrative Code
7:9A-1.4 through 7:9A-12.8, together with Appendix A through D, which
establish standards for the location, construction and maintenance of
sewage disposal systems is hereby adopted in its entirety and shall be
controlling unless higher standards are prescribed herein by the Vernon
Township Department of Health and Human Services.
§ 462-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITIONAL BEDROOM — An increase in the number of bedrooms from
that which existed prior to the addition. A interior partition which divides
a room into two separate rooms which meet the definition of "bedroom" is
considered an additional bedroom.
BEDROOM — Any room, excluding the general living area as defined in this
section, which contains a door and a window, and which is greater than
80 square feet. At least 1/2 of the floor area of the bedroom shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the
floor area in comparing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of
determining the square footage of living space available for occupancy as a
bedroom.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed to practice engineering in
the State of New Jersey.
ENGINEER CERTIFICATION OF INSTALLATION — A certified statement
by the engineers that the individual sewage disposal system was installed
according to the designs and plans submitted to, and approved by, the
Vernon Township Department of Health and Human Services and without
deviations therefrom in any manner, shape or form.
FENCING — A rigid or semirigid barrier constructed of aluminum, steel,
wire, plastic or other durable, weather-resistant mesh which shall be four
feet in height from the ground and the said fencing shall be anchored to the
§ 454-8 VERNON CODE § 462-2
1:986
ground by post, pole or other such supporting device at least every eight
feet. The bottom of the fencing shall not be more than four inches from the
underlying ground.
GENERAL LIVING AREA — The kitchen, dining room, living room, and
family room. These rooms shall not be located so as to be used as a primary
sleeping area. For example, a second floor of a home which has bedrooms
located on it would be considered to be all bedrooms even if one room was
called a family room.
PERSON — Any person, persons, firm, engineer, applicant, surveyor,
corporation or other entity.
SOIL LOG — Having the following information as a minimum: number of
soil profile pits, type of soils, depth of soil horizons, presence and depth of
mottling, percolation or permeability of soil, estimated seasonal high-water
table, depth of bedrock and whether massive or fractured.
STABILIZATION — The containment of all soil within the area of ground
disturbance and the prevention of soil erosion through wind or rainfall by
the application of mulch and the installation of silt fences or hay bales on
the perimeter of the soil disturbance.
§ 462-3. Permit required.
A. No person, persons, firms, corporations or other entities shall
construct, alter or repair any individual sewage disposal system until a
permit for the construction, alteration, or repair of said sewage disposal
system has been issued by the Vernon Township Health Officer. The
Vernon Township Health Officer shall not issue a permit to construct a
new sewage disposal system until such time as a zoning permit for the
construction has been issued by the Zoning Officer or an approval for
necessary variances from Chapter 330, Land Development, has been
granted by the appropriate municipal board pursuant to the provisions
of the Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey.130
[Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-11; amended 11-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-21]
B. Said permit shall be valid for a period of one year only from the date of
original approval and must be renewed thereafter if the proposed
system has not received a satisfactory final grade inspection.
C. The design shall have met all current applicable state regulations and
local ordinances in effect on the date the permit was issued; the soils,
water table, permeability, and location of adjacent wells and septic
systems are recertified to by the design engineer; and the permit was
originally issued subsequent to October 1986 in order for the
application to be renewed, unless the conditions in Subsection D below
are met.
130. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 462-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-3
1:987
§ 462-4. Design required.
D. A permit may be renewed by the Vernon Township Health Officer if it
met all applicable codes at the time it was issued and the installation of
the individual sewage disposal system was commenced prior to the
expiration of the permit. Proof that the system was started prior to the
expiration date shall be required. Proof shall consist of an inspection
being requested by applicant and approved by the Vernon Township
Health Officer pursuant to § 462-12 prior to the expiration of said
permit and that, once started, the installation process shall not be
interrupted for a period greater than five days. [Amended 11-13-2008
by Ord. No. 08-21]
A. In addition to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq., the
following shall be provided:
(1) The name of the person witnessing the soil profile for the Vernon
Township Health Officer shall be included on the plot plan and the
date of same. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(2) The plot plan shall show the complete section of the septic system
with all details of the disposal area construction.
(3) The plot plan shall show a profile of the property with existing and
proposed grading. The septic system shall be located on said
profile.
(4) The plot plan shall show the location of all existing individual
subsurface sewage disposal systems within 150 feet of the
proposed disposal system. It shall also show the type, and size, of
installation of each disposal system located within 150 feet of the
proposed disposal system. The plot plan shall further show how the
location of any systems within 150 feet was determined. In the
event the location of any system within 150 feet of the proposed
system is estimated, the application shall specifically indicate why
said locations were only estimated and why the actual locations
could not be confirmed. In the event the locations within 150 feet of
the proposed system are only estimated, the application shall
indicate what attempts were made to obtain records of these
systems from the Vernon Township Health Officer and adjoining
property owners. The Vernon Township Health Officer shall have
the right to refuse to issue a permit if it determines that a diligent
effort was not made by the applicant to accurately locate all
systems within 150 feet of the proposed system. If a permit is
denied on this basis, the applicant shall be required to make more
diligent efforts and to resubmit the application. [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(5) The plot plan shall show the location of the proposed well or
potable water supply system and shall provide the distance from all
elements of any sewage disposal system within 150 feet of said
§ 462-3 VERNON CODE § 462-4
1:988
§ 462-5. Soil evaluation.
well. The well shall be required to be located at least 100 feet
from any disposal area unless it is located as far from any existing
or proposed septic system as possible, but in no event less than
50 feet, and is provided with a casing to a depth of 50 feet or
more, as required by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, and where said casing extends to, and is sealed into, a
confining layer separating the aquifer from the stratum of soil used
for sewage disposal.
(6) The plot plan shall show the location of all existing wells that are
within 150 feet from any element of the sewage disposal system.
No existing wells shall be located within 100 feet of the proposed
disposal area unless those wells were installed after July 13, 1979,
and are provided with a casing to a depth of 50 feet or more, as
required by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, and where said casing extends to, and is sealed into, a
confining layer separating the aquifer from the stratum of soil used
for sewage disposal.
B. Within 15 working days, the Vernon Township Health Officer will review
all available information and either allow or deny the reduction from
100 feet based on the information provided. Under no circumstances
can the Vernon Township Health Officer reduce the distance below 50
feet. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
A. Prior to performing any soil evaluation tests, all property lines shall be
located and the location and method of determining same shall be
provided to the inspector from the Vernon Township Health Officer.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
B. If evidence of bedrock is present at a depth of less than 10 feet below
existing grade within 50 feet of the proposed disposal area, a minimum
of four soil profile pits shall be required near the corners of the disposal
area. The inspector for the Vernon Township Health Officer shall have
the right to request additional soil profile pits as he/she deems
necessary. No design for an individual sewage disposal system shall be
approved unless the required number of soil profile pits are performed
as indicated by N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq., this chapter or the inspector
for the Vernon Township Health Officer and in compliance with all state
statutes and regulations and local ordinances, rules and regulations.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
C. If the zone of disposal appears to be less permeable than the horizon
being tested for permeability, additional permeability tests shall be
performed in these more restrictive horizons.
D. Multiple site inspections scheduled for one day by one engineer or
applicant shall be limited to that number which can reasonably be
§ 462-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-5
1:989
§ 462-6. Trenches.
Trenches are the preferred system and must be installed when possible. If a
disposal bed is proposed instead, the engineer must state why trenches are
not desirable for the lot.
§ 462-7. Commencement of construction. [Amended 11-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-21]
The engineer or surveyor must stake the corner of the disposal area with
10 feet off set stakes prior to the commencement of any construction on
the site. The lot must be staked by a licensed professional surveyor prior to
the commencement of construction. Any deviation from the proposed design
must be reported immediately to the Vernon Township Health Officer. No
further work shall continue until approved by said Health Officer.
§ 462-8. Lots under 25,000 square feet; lots with bedrock present.
performed during the regular business hours of the Vernon Township
Health Officer. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
E. All proposed subdivisions shall have at least one soil profile pit and
permeability test on each proposed lot in an area suitable for an
individual sewage disposal system. The tests performed shall indicate
the suitability of the soil for sewage disposal prior to subdivision
approval.
F. Any soil profile pit, percolation test hole or similar hole shall be
backfilled within 24 hours following the digging of same. Fencing shall
be erected around the open hole prior to sunset on the day the hole is
dug and shall remain until the hole is backfilled. If the hole is backfilled
prior to sunset of the day it is dug, fencing shall not be necessary.
G. Any lot which has soil disturbed in order to perform soil testing shall be
restored by rough grading and stabilization before the excavating
equipment leaves the disturbed site, but in any event not more than 24
hours after the testing.
A. Any lot under 25,000 square feet or where the presence of bedrock is
indicated must have the disposal area excavated prior to the issuance of
the septic permit.
B. No excavation shall occur without a written order granting permission
to proceed by the Vernon Township Department of Health and Human
Services.
C. All applicants for the installation of new sewage disposal systems on
lots under 25,000 square feet shall notify all property owners within a
radius of 200 feet by certified mail, return receipt requested. The
property owners within 200 feet shall notify the Vernon Township
Health Officer in writing of any objections to the application of file
within 10 days of receipt of this notice. After 10 days and within 30
§ 462-5 VERNON CODE § 462-8
1:990
§ 462-9. Excavation requirements on all lots.
§ 462-10. Engineer's wall certification.
Certification of installation by the design engineer shall be required when
retaining walls of greater than 48 inches in height are designed to contain a
raised system. Approval by the design engineer is required for any retaining
wall installations over 48 inches in height.
§ 462-11. Special conditions requiring inspection from design
engineer.
§ 462-12. Inspection required.
days, the Vernon Township Health Officer will review all available
information and either allow or deny the application in writing.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
A. In the event rain causes the excavation to silt in or collapse, the
excavation will have to be reinspected within 24 hours before
proceeding.
B. In any excavation requiring select fill, that fill shall be installed within
96 hours after inspection of the excavation.
C. Any excavation, whether select fill is required or not, shall be backfilled
within 96 hours following the excavation inspection. Fencing shall be
erected around the open excavation prior to sunset on the day the
system is excavated and shall remain until the excavation is backfilled
which shall occur within the time period as set forth above.
D. Stabilization must be installed after the start of construction to prevent
runoff from the lot during construction. Any lot which has soil disturbed
in order to install a septic system shall be restored by rough grading
and stabilization before the excavating equipment leaves the disturbed
site, but in any event not more than 24 hours after receiving approval
for the final component installation pursuant to § 462-12A(4).
A. In lots where any component of the subsurface sewage disposal system
will be located within 100 feet of a lake, river, stream or other similar
watercourse, or a wetland, all installations of individual subsurface
sewage disposal systems must be witnessed by a licensed professional
engineer. He shall submit an engineer's certification of installation to
the Vernon Health Officer along with a statement that the installation is
in accordance with the approved design and with all federal, state,
county and local statutes, ordinances and regulations. [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
B. Engineer's certification of installation may be required on any design,
and the engineer and owner shall be so notified.
§ 462-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-12
1:991
§ 462-13. Individual sewage disposal system licensed installer
required.
A. The following inspections are required to be performed and approved
by the Vernon Township Health Officer for each disposal system:
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(1) Excavation.
(2) Bankrun.
(3) Berm construction (if applicable).
(4) Final component installation.
(5) Final grade inspection.
B. Twenty-four hours' (one business day) notice shall be provided by the
excavator or owner for each inspection requested. Weekends and
holidays shall not be included in the above time.
C. All sewage disposal system installations, once started, must be
continued and not interrupted for greater than five working days. If a
system may have silted in by rainfall runoff, the Vernon Township
Health Officer shall not approve any subsequent inspections until the
excavator has demonstrated that no damage to the soil horizons has
occurred. This may require removal of stone or select fill in order to
examine the entire area which was exposed to the rainfall runoff.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
A. No person, persons, firms, corporations or other entity shall engage in
the installation, either in whole or part, of an individual subsurface
sewage disposal system without first obtaining a license to install
systems in Vernon Township from the Vernon Township Health Officer.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
B. The installer shall be eligible for a license if he meets the following
criteria:
(1) A minimum of two years' experience installing systems in Vernon
Township, prior to the enactment of this chapter; or
(2) A minimum of two years' experience in septic system installation
and obtain a satisfactory (passing) grade on a licensing exam
currently being used by the Vernon Township Health Officer; or
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(3) A homeowner, wishing to alter or install his system at his primary
residence, who will assume complete responsibility for work
performed and only for work outlined in the permit.
C. If the homeowner is acting as the installer and is eligible as specified in
Subsection B(3) above, only he and his immediate family shall engage in
§ 462-12 VERNON CODE § 462-13
1:992
§ 462-14. Department requirements for construction permit
approval; exemptions; additions or alterations to property;
conversion from public seasonal water systems.
the installation process. The work cannot be given to an unlicensed
subcontractor, whether in whole, or in part, or whether for payment
or not, except to the extent that he can hire someone to haul the
material to his home. He must sign a certification that the dwelling
will be his primary residence, that he understands and is responsible
for knowing the inspections required under § 462-12 of this chapter.
The homeowner shall not install more than one septic system once
every five years. This five-year limitation does not apply to altering or
repairing the septic system at the homeowner's primary residence.
D. The license shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewed.
The homeowner's license shall be valid only for the specified block and
lot indicated on the license.
A. No Health Officer approval shall be required of the sewage disposal
system for the following: [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(1) Repairing fire damage. The building is to be restored to the same
number of bedrooms or less as formerly existed prior to the fire and
shall stay within the same building perimeter and number of floors
as previously existed.
(2) Electrical permits.
(3) Plumbing permits which do not add fixtures or replace existing
fixtures with those which have greater wastewater flows.
(4) Shed less than 100 square feet without footing or cement slab.
(5) Deck and aboveground pool. Although no review by the Vernon
Township Health Officer is necessary, the deck or any aboveground
pool shall not be constructed in such a manner which will interfere
with the maintenance and cleaning of any component of the septic
system, or with a future alteration of the septic system.
B. Prior to the Health Officer approval of the following, the applicant shall
submit the location of the existing septic system, and should no
adequate soil test information be available, then the applicant shall
submit soil log information demonstrating that the existing septic
system can be expanded to meet current alteration standards:
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(1) Garages.
(2) Sheds with footings or cement slab.
(3) In-ground pool.
§ 462-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-14
1:993
§ 462-15. Certificate of compliance.
New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor shall
new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be occupied, which must
rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until the Vernon Township Health
Officer shall have issued a certificate indicating that the disposal system has
been located and constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit
(4) General living area additions (i.e., dining room, den, living room)
which will cover additional square footage of lot.
Note: Items in Subsection B(1) through (4) all encroach on
available open land on the lot, and this open land may be required
for expansion of the septic system.
(5) If a site inspection demonstrates that the proposed garage, deck or
other habitable or nonhabitable living area expansion will not
encroach on needed or usable area for a future septic system
repair, then the Vernon Township Health Officer shall eliminate the
need for soil log information.
C. The following requires expansion of an existing septic system to
conform to new construction standards prior to approval or proof that
the existing septic system meets existing state and local requirements:
(1) Construction of additional bedrooms.
(2) Any change of use which results in an increase in wastewater flow
as defined by N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4. [Amended 12-8-1992 by Ord. No.
92-2]
D. Prior to conversion from a public seasonal water system, the following
must be satisfied: [Added 12-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-2]
(1) A map prepared by a professional engineer or licensed surveyor
which shall include the following:
(a) Scale of no more than 60 feet to the inch.
(b) Dimensions and setbacks of the subject property.
(c) Location of all existing or proposed buildings on the site and all
wells and septic systems within 150 feet of the well or septic
proposed to be installed.
(d) Dimensions of right-of-way of any contiguous roads.
(e) General notation of any topography greater than 15% slope on
the property shown in increments of 5%.
(2) The existing septic system must comply with the standards
promulgated by the Health Officer. [Amended 11-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-21]
§ 462-14 VERNON CODE § 462-15
1:994
issued and the requirements of the aforementioned standards. Issuance of
such certificate shall not be required for repairs to an existing individual
sewage disposal system, as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1.
§ 462-16. Requirements for certificate of compliance. [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
After all required inspections, except the final grade, are made and
approved by the Vernon Township Health Officer, the builder of the home
as well as the installer of the subsurface sewage disposal system shall be
required to prepare at least two copies of an as-built plan showing the
actual locations and dimensions of all components of the subsurface sewage
disposal system and the well. Before a certificate of compliance is issued
for the premises, one copy of the as-built plan shall be placed in a plastic
wrapper on or adjacent to the electrical box for the building, and one copy
given to the Vernon Township Health Officer for filing.
§ 462-17. Water-saving devices.
§ 462-18. Fees.131
Fees associated with this chapter are included in Chapter 250, Fees and
Escrows, Article II.
§ 462-19. Provisional approval.
A. Automatic flushing devices of the siphonic design are prohibited.
B. Water closets, either flush tank or flushometer operated, shall be
designed by, manufactured, and installed to the operable and
adequately flushed average of 3.5 gallons of water but no more than
four gallons per flushing cycle when tested in any one-test pressure.
Less than three-and-one-half-gallon flush toilets are highly
recommended and may be required by either the engineer or the
Vernon Township Health Officer. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
C. Urinals shall be designed, manufactured, and installed to be operable
and adequately flushed with no more than 1.5 gallons of water per
flush.
D. Lavatory faucets shall be designed, manufactured, and installed so that
they shall not exceed a water flow rate of 2.75 gallons per minute with
varying supply line pressure. Every lavatory faucet will be equipped
with an improved aerator. Self-closing or self-metering faucets shall be
installed on all public lavatories.
E. Garbage grinders or disposal units shall be prohibited.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 462-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-19
1:995
§ 462-20. Denial of permit. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
§ 462-21. Order to stop work. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
The Vernon Township Health Officer may order all further work in and about
any individual sewage disposal system, which is being erected or installed
in violation of the standards, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as
shall be necessary to remedy such violation. Thereafter, the work shall be
A. Any provisional approval which is granted pending any additional
information, notification of adjacent property owners, excavating the
disposal system, etc., shall expire eight months from the date
provisional approval was granted in the event the required information,
notification, excavation, etc., is not provided and a permit to construct,
alter or repair is not issued by the Vernon Township Health Officer.
Once the permit is issued, it shall be valid for one year from the date of
issue and can only be renewed if all current state regulations and local
ordinances are complied with at the time of renewal or the application
meets the provisions as set forth under § 462-3C and D. . [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
B. If the provisional approval expires as set forth above and no permit was
issued, the entire application shall become null and void and be
returned, except one copy for the file, to the applicant at the address
provided on the application. Any subsequent application shall be
considered as an initial application and not a revision to an existing
application.
A. In case any permit or certification required by this chapter is denied by
the Vernon Township Health Officer, a public hearing shall be held
before the Mayor and Township Council within 15 days after written
request is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing the Mayor and
Township Council shall affirm, alter or rescind the previous
determination of the Vernon Township Health Officer and shall, by
written resolution, notify the applicant accordingly within 15 days after
the date of such hearing.132
B. If an application to construct, alter, or repair a subsurface disposal
system is denied, and no further revisions, information, etc., is received
within six months of issuance of a written notice from the Vernon
Township Health Officer indicating that the application cannot be
approved by the Vernon Township Health Officer, the entire application
shall become null and void and be returned, except for one copy for the
file, to the applicant at the address provided on the application. Any
subsequent application shall be considered as an initial application and
not a revision to an existing application.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 462-19 VERNON CODE § 462-21
1:996
continued without any violation of any of the provisions of the code. After
issuance of any such stop-work order and the service of a copy thereof
upon any person connected with or working in and about the erection or
installation of any such disposal system, or any part thereof, no further work
shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 462-22. Violations and penalties.
§ 462-23. Copies of adopted standards on file. [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
Three copies of the adopted code referred to as the "Standards for
Construction, Installation, and Maintenance of Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems in the Township of Vernon" have been placed on
file in the office of the Vernon Township Health Officer and will remain on
file in said office for the use and examination of the public.
Chapter 465
(RESERVED)
[Former Chapter 465, Sex Offender Restrictions, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 08-07, was repealed in its entirety
2-26-2009 by Ordinance No. 09-06.]
Chapter 478
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 275.
Land development — See Ch. 330.
Soil removal — See Ch. 483.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation or other entity violating any
of the provisions of or any order under this chapter or contained within
Chapter 9A, Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems, promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, New Jersey Administrative Code 7:9A-1.1 through
7:9A-12.8, or any section or subsection of this chapter or any local
health regulation, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and
penalties.133
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 462-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-23
1:997

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 478-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Ordinance of the Township of Vernon."
§ 478-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control soil erosion and sediment damages
and related environmental damage by requiring adequate provisions for
surface water retention and drainage and for the protection of exposed
soil surfaces in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience and
general welfare of the community.
§ 478-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-2
1:999

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 478-3. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain rules of word usage apply to the
text as follows:
§ 478-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A person, partnership, corporation or public agency
requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity or seeking site
plan or subdivision approval from the Planning Board.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — A proposed subdivision of land,
site plan, special exception, zoning variance, planned unit development or
building permit.[Added 5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9]
CERTIFICATION — A signed written statement by the designated official
that specific constructions, inspections or tests, where required, have been
performed and that such comply with the applicable requirements of the
ordinance or regulations adopted.
COMMITTEE — The State Soil Conservation Committee in the Department
of Agriculture established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-3.[Added 5-15-1978
by Ord. No. 78-9]
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing highly erodible or severely
eroded area.
DISTRICT — The Sussex County Soil Conservation District.[Added
5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9134]
DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, excavating, storing,
grading, filling or transporting of soil or any other activity which causes soil
to be exposed to the danger of erosion.[Added 5-15-1978 by Ord. No.
78-9]
DIVERSION — A channel with or without a supporting ridge on the lower
side constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
B. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word
"may" is permissive.
C. The word or term not interpreted or defined by this article shall be used
with a meaning of common or standard utilization.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 478-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-4
1:1001
EMBANKMENT or FILL — A man-made deposit of soil, rock or other
materials.
EROSION — Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice and gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully indicates
necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of the timing
for their installation, which will effectively minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation. Such measures shall be in accordance with standards as
adopted by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan which provides for use of land,
within its capabilities and treatment, within practical limits, according to a
chosen use to prevent further deterioration of soil and water resources.
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water within the
municipality.
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — Any and all earth-work not included as part
of the site plan or subdivision plan.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, filling and any other activity which causes land to be exposed
to the danger of erosion.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in
establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — A certificate issued to perform work under this chapter.
PLAN — A scheme which indicates land treatment measures, including a
schedule of the timing for their installation, to minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation.[Added 5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9]
PROJECT — The disturbance of more than 5,000 square feet of the surface
area of land for the accommodation of construction for which the Standard
Building Code of the State of New Jersey would require a building permit,
except that the construction of a single-family dwelling unit shall not be
deemed a "project" under this act unless such unit is part of a proposed
subdivision, site plan, special exception, zoning variance, planned unit
development or building permit application involving two or more such
single-family dwelling units.[Added 5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9]
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built at suitable locations to retain
rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material.
SITE — Any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
§ 478-4 VERNON CODE § 478-4
1:1002
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A governmental subdivision of this
state, which encompasses this Township, organized in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
STANDARDS — Standards for soil erosion and sediment control in New
Jersey as promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee.[Added
5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9]
STATE SOIL CONSERVATION COMMITTEE — An agency of the state
established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, of the
New Jersey Revised Statutes.
STRIPPING — Any activity which significantly disturbs vegetated or
otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and grubbing
operations.
VEGETATION PROTECTION — Stabilization of erosive or sedimentproducing
areas by covering the soil with:
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river,
creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine
or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course either
continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and
banks, and shall include any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of overflow or floodwater.
A. Permanent seeding, producing long-term vegetative cover.
B. Short-term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover.
Sodding, producing areas covered with a turf of perennial sod-forming
grass.
C.
§ 478-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-4
1:1003

ARTICLE III
Restrictions
§ 478-5. Plans required prior to commencement of certain
activities. [Amended 5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9]
A. Except for land disturbances associated with existing single-family
dwellings not considered a "project," or an area of 5,000 square feet or
less, land used for gardening, primarily for home consumption, and
agricultural use of land when operated in accordance with a
conservation plan approved by the Soil Conservation District or when it
is determined by the local Soil Conservation District that such
agricultural pursuits will not cause excessive erosion and
sedimentation and site plans for development where the land in
question will not be disturbed, then no site plans shall be approved, no
new streets shall be constructed, no changes shall be made in the
contour of the land, no grading and excavating or removal or
destruction of topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall
be commenced by any developer until such time as a plan for erosion
and sediment control has been processed with and approved by the
Planning Board.
B. No subdivision, site plan or land development plan shall be approved
unless it includes a soil erosion and sediment control plan. Erosion and
sedimentation control measures used to control erosion and reduce
sedimentation shall, as a minimum, meet the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, as promulgated by the State Soil
Conservation Committee, and amendments and supplements thereto
hereinafter adopted by said bodies. The Municipal Engineer shall
ensure compliance with the appropriate specifications, three copies of
which are on file at the municipal building and are available from the
district.
C. Review and approval or denial shall be made within a period of 30 days
of submission of a complete application unless, by mutual agreement in
writing between the municipality and the applicant, this period is
extended for an additional 30 days. Failure of the municipality to make
a decision within such period or such extension thereof shall constitute
certification.
D. The applicant shall be provided with written notice of such decision by
the Township Engineer (or other authorized municipal agent). A copy of
such decision, including name of applicant, site location by street
address and block and lot number, and proposed land use shall be sent
to the Sussex County Soil Conservation District. The municipality shall
also make available such other information as may be required by the
District.
§ 478-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-5
1:1005

ARTICLE IV
Procedure
§ 478-6. Land development requiring site plans.
On all site plans, preliminary subdivision plats and large lot subdivision
applications involving land, grading, excavation or removal or destruction
of topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of land, there shall be submitted
to the Planning Board a separate soil erosion and sediment control plan at a
scale of either one inch equals 50 feet or one inch equals 100 feet for each
site. Such plans shall contain:
A. Location and description of existing natural and man-made features on
and surrounding the site, including general topography and soil
characteristics and a copy of the soil conservation district soil survey,
where available.
B. Location and description of proposed changes to the site.
C. Measures for soil erosion and sediment control which must meet or
exceed Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control adopted by the Sussex County Soil Conservation District. The
said Standards and Specifications shall be on file at the offices of the
local Soil Conservation District and the Municipal Clerk.
D. A schedule of the sequence of installation of planned erosion and
sediment control measures as related to the progress of the project,
including starting and completion dates.
E. All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted for approval.
F. Space for signatures attesting to Soil Conservation District approval.
G. Space for Planning Board approval.
§ 478-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-6
1:1007

ARTICLE V
Control Measures
§ 478-7. Filing of performance guaranty.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the developer shall have filed with
the municipality a performance guaranty sufficient in amount to cover the
cost of all such soil erosion and sediment control measures or uncompleted
portions thereof as required by the soil erosion and sediment control plan
and as estimated by the Municipal Engineer, to assure the installation
of such uncompleted soil erosion and sediment control measures on or
before an agreed date. Such performance guaranty may be in the form
of a performance bond, which shall be issued by a bonding or surety
company approved by the Planning Board, a certified check, returnable to
the developer after full compliance or any other type of surety approved by
the Municipal Attorney. The performance guaranty shall be approved by the
Municipal Attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance
guaranty shall run for a period to be fixed by the Planning Board but, in no
case, for a term of more than two years.
§ 478-8. Completion and inspection.
When all of the necessary and appropriate soil erosion and sediment control
measures have been completed, the developer shall notify the Planning
Board in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid soil erosion and sediment control measures and shall send a
copy thereof to the Construction Code Official or Municipal Engineer. The
Planning Board shall direct and authorize the Construction Code Official or
Municipal Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid soil erosion and sediment
control measures. The Construction Code Official or Municipal Engineer
shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Planning Board. Said
report shall be detailed and shall indicate either approval, partial approval
or rejection. If said soil erosion and sediment control measures, or any
portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Construction Code Official or Municipal Engineer, said report shall contain
a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection. Where said report
indicates partial approval of said soil erosion and sediment control
measures, it shall indicate the cost of the soil erosion and sediment control
measures for which approval is rejected or withheld. Where partial approval
is granted, the developer may be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure the soil erosion and sediment control measures not yet approved. No
approval for occupancy of any building will be granted unless all needed soil
erosion control measures have been completed or substantially provided
for in accordance with this chapter. The developer shall bear the final
responsibility for the installation and construction of all required soil
erosion and sediment control measures according to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 478-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-9
1:1009
§ 478-9. Maintenance guaranty.
The Township may also require a maintenance guaranty for a period not
to exceed two years after final approval of the soil erosion and sediment
control measures, in an amount not to exceed 10% of the cost of the
improvement or of the permanent installation.
§ 478-9 VERNON CODE § 478-9
1:1010
ARTICLE VI
Inspection and Approval
§ 478-10. Requirements.
A. Prior to and during construction, all the soil erosion and sediment
control measures shall be subject to inspection and approval by the
Municipal Engineer, who shall be notified by the developer at least 24
hours prior to the start of construction. No underground installation
shall be covered until inspected and approved.
B. When all of the necessary and appropriate soil erosion and sediment
control measures have been completed, the developer shall notify the
Mayor and Township Council in writing, by certified or registered mail,
of the completion of the aforesaid soil erosion and sediment control
measures and shall send a copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer. The
Municipal Engineer shall inspect all of the aforesaid soil erosion and
sediment control measures. The Municipal Engineer shall thereupon
file a report, in writing, with the Mayor and Township Council. Said
report shall be detailed and shall indicate either approval, partial
approval or rejection. If said soil erosion and sediment control
measures, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Municipal Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection. Where said
report indicates partial approval of said soil erosion and sediment
control measures, it shall indicate the cost of the soil erosion and
sediment control measures for which approval is rejected or withheld.
Where partial approval is granted, the developer may be released from
all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty bond, except for that
portion adequately sufficient to secure the soil erosion and sediment
control measures not yet approved. No approval for occupancy of any
building will be granted unless all needed soil erosion control measures
have been completed or substantially provided for in accordance with
this chapter. The developer shall bear the final responsibility for the
installation and construction of all required soil erosion and sediment
control measures according to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The municipality may issue a stop construction order if a project is not
being executed in accordance with a certified plan. [Added 5-15-1978
by Ord. No. 78-9]
D. A certificate of occupancy shall be withheld unless there has been
compliance with the provisions of a certified plan for permanent
measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation. [Added 5-15-1978
by Ord. No. 78-9]
E. A formal report of compliance must be filed with the municipal agent
authorized to issue certificates of occupancy. A copy of this report shall
be sent to the Sussex County Soil Conservation District. [Added
5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9]
§ 478-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-10
1:1011

ARTICLE VII
Principles and Standards
§ 478-11. General design principles.
§ 478-12. Performance standards.
A. Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed site
development involving any and all types of land disturbance and shall
be in operation during all stages of the disturbance activity.
B. The following principles shall apply to the soil erosion and sediment
control plan:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbances shall be
done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
(2) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and
protected.
(3) The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure
shall be kept within practical limits.
(4) Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization
measure shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
construction or other land disturbance.
(5) Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff, resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions, during and after
development or disturbance.
(6) Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site wherever
possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
(7) Sediment shall be retained on site to the maximum extent feasible.
[Amended 5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9]
(8) Diversions, sediment basins and similar required structures shall
be installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
A. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading
or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the developer
causing such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces,
drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any damage at his
expense as quickly as possible.
B. Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within the
development is the responsibility of the developer until the final
facilities are accepted by the Township.
C. It is the responsibility of the developer doing any act on or across a
communal stream, watercourse or swale, or upon the floodplain or
right-of-way thereof, to maintain as nearly as possible in its present
§ 478-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-12
1:1013
state the stream, watercourse, swale, floodplain or right-of-way during
the pendency of the activity and to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
D. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses, including public
drainageways originating and completely on private property, is the
responsibility of the landowner to their point of open discharge at the
property line or at a communal watercourse within the property.
§ 478-12 VERNON CODE § 478-12
1:1014
ARTICLE VIII
Fees
§ 478-13. Fees; payment of costs.
A. If submitted as part of an application for subdivision or site plan
approval, no additional fees shall be charged under this chapter. In all
other cases, a fee of $250 shall be paid with the application to cover the
costs of the initial review for the purpose of determining whether a soil
erosion and sediment control plan is necessary.135
B. All expenses for legal, engineering or planning work required by the
Township in connection with the enforcement of this chapter shall be
paid for by the applicant who shall deposit a sum equal to 5% of the
estimated cost of all soil erosion and sediment control measures
required pursuant to this chapter, but in no case less than $250.
C. Should the actual costs to the Township be less than the amount of said
deposit, any surplus shall be returned to the applicant, and the
applicant shall be responsible for payment of any such costs which
exceed the amount of said deposit.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 478-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-13
1:1015

ARTICLE IX
Review of Plans by Sussex County Soil Conservation District
[Added 8-3-1981 by Ord. No. 81-18]
§ 478-14. Referral to Sussex County Soil Conservation District; fees.
A. All soil erosion and sediment control plans and applications submitted
pursuant to this chapter to any municipal board in connection with an
application for development shall be referred by said board to the
Sussex County Soil Conservation District for its review,
recommendation, and certification in accordance with the Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control pursuant to Chapter 251 of the
Public Laws of 1975.136
B. All fees charged by the Sussex County Soil Conservation District for its
services in connection with the review and certification of any plans
shall be paid by the applicant directly to the Sussex County Soil
Conservation District.
136. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 478-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-14
1:1017

ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 478-15. Inspections.
The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the Construction
Code Official or Municipal Engineer who shall inspect or require adequate
inspection of the work. If the Municipal Engineer finds any existing
conditions not as stated in any application, he may refuse to approve further
work.
§ 478-16. Violations and penalties; injunction; enforcement.
[Amended 5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9137]
If any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter, any standard
promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply
with the provisions of a certified plan, the municipality or the district may
institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive relief to prohibit
and prevent such violation or violations, and said court may proceed in a
summary manner. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, any standard promulgated pursuant to this chapter or fails to
comply with the provisions of a certified plan shall be liable to a penalty
of not less than $25 nor more than $3,000 to be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999 (N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq.). The Superior Court, County Court, County District Court
and Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce said Penalty
Enforcement Law of 1999. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each
day during which it continues shall constitute an additional separate and
distinct offense.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 478-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-16
1:1019
Chapter 483
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 275.
Land development — See Ch. 330.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
478.
§ 478-16 VERNON CODE § 478-16
1:1020
ARTICLE I
Findings; Definitions; Permit Requirements
§ 483-1. Findings; title.
§ 483-2. Definitions.
The words defined in this section shall mean and include the following when
used in this chapter:
ACCESSORY USE — Such use which is clearly incidental to the principal
use, such as, but not limited to, storage sheds, power lines, use of trucks
and loaders, but not including the operation of asphalt and concrete plants,
separation plants, crushers and the like.[Added 11-17-1975 by Ord. No.
75-24; amended 11-7-1977 by Ord. No. 77-20; 9-17-1979 by Ord. No.
79-14]
APPROVED PLAN — A plan for soil removal approved either by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment as a special use and by the Mayor and Township
Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or (in the case of
nonconforming uses) by the Planning Board and Mayor and Township
Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
ARABLE SOIL — Soil that, when dry, contains not less than 4% by weight of
organic matter and the balance of which is a mineral matter.
MAYOR AND TOWNSHIP COUNCIL — The Mayor and Township Council of
the Township of Vernon.
PERMIT — A soil removal permit.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, a corporation or any other
legal entity.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township of Vernon.
SOIL — Includes dirt, stone, gravel, sand, humus, clay, loam and mixtures
of any of these, but this shall not include rock or refer to the quarrying of
rock.
TOPSOIL — The arable soil within eight inches of the surface.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Vernon.
A. The Mayor and Township Council of the Township of Vernon find and
determine that the unregulated and uncontrolled relocation, filling,
excavation and removal of soil on a large scale or for sale or for use
other than on the premises has or may result in conditions detrimental
to the public safety, health, and general welfare, substantially
hampering and deterring the efforts of the Township of Vernon to
effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning.
B. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Vernon Township
Soil Removal Ordinance."
§ 483-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-2
1:1021
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Zoning Board of Adjustment of
the Township of Vernon.
§ 483-3. Permit required.
No person shall excavate for the removal of soil or otherwise remove soil
in contravention of this chapter or for sale or for use other than on the
premises from which the soil shall be taken, except in connection with
excavation or grading incident to construction or alteration of a building
on such premises for which a building permit has been issued, except
in accordance with an approved plan for which a permit has been first
obtained.
§ 483-4. Special use permit. [Amended 11-17-1975 by Ord. No.
75-24]
§ 483-5. Nonconforming uses. [Amended 11-17-1975 by Ord. No.
75-24]
A. No application for a permit shall be made pursuant to this chapter until
a special use permit pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance138 has been obtained, except as otherwise provided in
§ 483-5 of this article. In case a sand and gravel operation anticipates a
removal of less than 500 cubic yards per year, the Planning Board,
Board of Adjustment, and Mayor and Township Council may waive or
modify the requirement of §§ 483-6, 483-15 as to final map, §§ 483-19,
483-23, 483-24, 483-26, 483-27, 483-29 and 483-30 of this chapter,
provided that the resulting operation does not violate the intent and
purpose of this chapter. No permit fees shall be required.
B. In the event such operation exceeds the maximum limit of 500 cubic
yards per year, all of the terms of this chapter shall become operable
and the operator shall immediately comply with all of the requirements
of this chapter.
A. In the case of soil removal operations presently in existence as
nonconforming uses, the owner or operator shall within 90 days of the
effective date of this chapter file an application for a permit under this
chapter with the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall consider
such application and make its recommendations to the Mayor and
Township Council within 65 days from the date of filing of the
application.
B. Sand and gravel operations which are operating at the time of the
adoption of this chapter pursuant to the terms of a variance
recommended by the Board of Adjustment and granted by the Mayor
and Township Council shall be controlled by the terms and conditions of
such variance by said Board of Adjustment and Mayor and Township
Council, and be exempt from the terms of this chapter, except that the
138. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
§ 483-2 VERNON CODE § 483-5
1:1022
§ 483-6. Information required to accompany application. [Amended
11-17-1975 by Ord. No. 75-24]
§ 483-7. Factors to be considered in approving permits. [Amended
11-17-1975 by Ord. No. 75-24]
In considering and reviewing the application and arriving at its decision, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment and Mayor and Township
Council shall be guided by and take into consideration the public health,
safety and general welfare and the general purposes of municipal planning,
and particular consideration shall be given to the following factors:
following sections shall be complied with: §§ 483-8, 483-9, 483-10,
483-11, 483-12, 483-13, 483-14, 483-15, 483-16, 483-17, 483-18,
483-19, 483-20, 483-23, 483-26B, 483-27, 483-28, 483-30, 483-31,
483-32 and 483-33.
A. An application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for a special use
permit or to the Planning Board pursuant to § 483-5 of this article shall
be accompanied by a map or maps showing existing contour lines at
five-foot intervals, a current aerial photograph of the site having a
minimum scale of one inch to 200 feet, proposed contour lines at fivefoot
intervals after removal of the soil, all existing structures, all
existing roads and drainage within 200 feet of the property, location of
topsoil storage areas, method of controlling silting of down stream
properties, and the elevations of the water table if it is within eight feet
of the proposed final contour. The determination of the water table is to
be by an approved method and shall be certified by a professional
engineer, which certification shall also show the date such tests were
made. All maps shall be sectionalized into five-acre sections and shall
include a key map. The data submitted shall also include cross section
of elevation at fifty-foot intervals of the premises applied for.
B. The application shall also indicate the total number of cubic yards to be
removed and the length of time within which the proposed operation
shall be completed, which shall normally not be for longer than five
years. Where a total project is not capable of being completed within
five years, it shall be broken down into two sections, one of which shall
be completed within five years and the other within such further period
not exceeding five years as the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
may recommend, or specify, and the Mayor and Township Council
approve. Additional time may be granted by the Mayor and Township
Council for good cause shown by the operator.
A. Soil erosion by water and sand.
B. Surface water drainage.
C. Soil fertility.
D. Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
§ 483-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-7
1:1023
§ 483-8. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued after the approval of the application by the Mayor
and Township Council. It shall show the total number of yards of soil
authorized to be removed as calculated by the Township Engineer based
upon the contour maps submitted, and also the duration or term of said
permit based upon the applicant's estimate of the time necessary to
complete the proposed operation as provided for in § 483-6 of this article.
E. Public health and safety.
F. Land values and uses.
G. Contours, both existing and proposed.
H. Existing contours and topographic character of the land prior to the
removal of any soil and the proposed contours which will result
subsequent to the removal of soil in accordance with the soil removal
application.
I. Whether the proposed removal of soil is necessary and incidental to the
development of the property for its intended use or whether the
proposed removal constitutes primarily a commercial activity.
§ 483-7 VERNON CODE § 483-8
1:1024
ARTICLE II
Operating Requirements
§ 483-9. Method of operation.
If a permit is issued for the removal of earth and soil as provided herein, the
owner or person in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall
be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions, and in such manner that the
area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris, and graded to conform
with the contour lines and grades as required and shown on the approved
plan.
§ 483-10. Regulation of operation.
No soil shall be removed nor shall any operation be conducted so as to
violate any of the regulations contained in this article after a permit is
granted.
§ 483-11. Arable soil regulations.
Sufficient arable soil to provide for a coverage of four inches of arable soil
on the surface shall not be removed from the licensed owner's premises and
shall be stored on the premises. Promptly upon completion of operations,
or as otherwise directed by the Mayor and Township Council, the arable
soil so retained shall be respread on the surface as uniformly as possible at
a thickness of at least four inches and be seeded with winter rye or other
suitable planting. If the arable soil stored on the premises is insufficient to
provide a uniform coverage of four inches of arable soil, sufficient arable
soil must be obtained to provide for the four-inch coverage when the
operation is completed in each such area. Provisions must be made for
adequate drainage after the topsoil is replaced. No topsoil shall be removed
from the Township.
§ 483-12. Deposit of soil on adjoining property or public roads.
Soil removed shall not be deposited or in any way thrown or placed upon
adjoining property or public roads. Any soil or material resulting from any
such operation accumulating on any adjoining property or public road shall
be removed therefrom immediately upon notice to the permittee of such
accumulation.
§ 483-13. Compliance with other standards and terms of permit.
All operations shall be conducted in strict accordance with any state law,
other ordinances of the Township, and the terms and conditions of any
permit granted for such operations.
§ 483-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-14
1:1025
§ 483-14. Nuisances and unsafe conditions.
The operation shall be so conducted as not to constitute a nuisance, and in
no event shall said operation create any hazardous or unsafe condition with
regard to any person or persons.
§ 483-15. Restoration of area; final map.
Upon completion of any operation or of excavation from an area delineated
on the approved plan, said area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of
debris, and graded to conform to the contours and grades as approved by
the Mayor and Township Council. A final map shall be submitted containing
and complying with all requirements as set forth in this chapter.
§ 483-16. Grade; excavations below level of road. [Amended
11-17-1975 by Ord. No. 75-24]
While working an area, the working face of the excavation shall not exceed
60° from the horizontal nor shall the 60° angle have a vertical height
exceeding 30 feet. Any face not currently being worked on shall not exceed
30° from the horizontal. Where an excavated area adjoins a public road or
a road which has been dedicated to the public, no excavation shall be made
below the level of the road, except where the area to be excavated lies
between two or more roads, in which case the final grade may slope from
the higher road elevation to the lower road elevations; subject, however,
to the grade provisions below. Where an excavated area adjoins abutting
property or a public road, the finished slope shall not exceed 5° for a
distance of 50 feet back from the property line or public road. In any event,
no finished grade shall exceed 10%. Care shall be taken so that there shall
be no diversion of surface water either during the operation or after the
project is complete. The prohibition against excavation below the level of
a road as referred to above shall not apply to a sand and gravel operation
which preexisted the adoption of this chapter, and which conducted below
road level excavations at the time of the adoption of this chapter; provided,
however, that the operation shall comply with this chapter in all other
respects.
§ 483-17. Water table.
No soil shall be removed which is within eight feet from the water table.
§ 483-18. Storage of debris; safety hazards.
No trash, junk or debris may be stored in any licensed area, and no safety
hazards will be permitted, either during or after the completion of
operations.
§ 483-19. Progress reports; violations and penalties; inspection.
[Amended 11-17-1975 by Ord. No. 75-24; 4-19-1976 by Ord. No.
76-11]
§ 483-14 VERNON CODE § 483-19
1:1026
§ 483-20. Hours of operation. [Amended 11-17-1975 by Ord. No.
75-24]
Hours of operation shall be limited to the following: 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Mondays through Saturdays. There shall be no operation of any kind or
character outside of the hours specified above as well as on Sundays or
legal holidays, except in emergencies or for good cause, when authorized
by the Mayor and Township Council.
§ 483-21. Operating and storage area limitations. [Amended
11-17-1975 by Ord. No. 75-24]
In order to minimize the possibility of mud slides, drainage of silt, or dust
problems, the area of operation and storage shall not exceed a total of
five acres at any one time without a replacement of topsoil and reseeding
A. Each permittee shall annually furnish a progress report to the Township
Engineer, the first of which shall be submitted nine months after
issuance of the permit. Such progress report shall be prepared and
certified by a licensed professional engineer or by the licensee.
B. Subsequent progress reports should be submitted to the Township
Engineer on November 1 of each year.
C. Failure to comply with progress report filing date will result in a penalty
of $50 per day of late filing, which fine must be paid prior to the
issuance of the renewal license.139
D. The annual progress report submitted should contain an estimate as to
the number of cubic yards removed during the previous year. Present
and future estimated soil removal areas should be indicated for the
upcoming year. Also, any major change from the originally approved
site plan concerning grades, contours, or drainage should be indicated
on the soil removal map.
E. Following the receipt of the annual progress report, the Township
Engineer or his representative shall make a spot check of the site to
ascertain that the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
If, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, a more thorough field
analysis is required, he shall request authorization from the Mayor and
Township Council to proceed with same. In his request for said
authorization, the Township Engineer shall cite the reasons why such a
detailed study is necessary and the anticipated cost thereof.
F. The applicant will be required to comply with the requirements of the
Engineer and shall be responsible for the cost incurred by the Township
of Vernon as a result of such field study required under Subsection E.
G. No license shall be renewed until all the requirements of this chapter
have been complied with and all fees have been paid.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 483-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-21
1:1027
of the premises unless otherwise permitted by the Mayor and Township
Council for good cause shown. Whenever the permittee completes one fiveacre
section, he shall so notify the Mayor and Township Council before the
operation is moved to another section.
§ 483-22. Storage limitations. [Amended 11-17-1975 by Ord. No.
75-24]
The material stored shall not exceed a height of 30 feet, and the maximum
storage slope shall be 45°.
§ 483-23. Bench mark.
The applicant shall install on the licensed premises a concrete bench mark,
the location of which shall be indicated on the maps submitted for approval.
§ 483-24. Access road.
§ 483-25. Separation plants and crushers. [Added 11-7-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-20]
Separation plants and crushers and the like shall not be located within
500 feet of any street nor within 1,000 feet of any adjoining residence. All
such installations shall be screened so as not to be visible to the public.
All performance criteria enumerated in the Commercial Recreation and
Commercial Industrial Zone Districts, whichever is stricter, shall be
applicable.
A. The access road to the licensed premises shall be shown on the maps
submitted.
B. The first 75 feet of the access road shall be paved with bituminous
concrete a minimum thickness of two inches applied to a base approved
by the Township Engineer.
§ 483-21 VERNON CODE § 483-25
1:1028
ARTICLE III
Fees, Bonds, Penalties and Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 483-26. Application fees; escrow. [Amended 3-16-1981 by Ord. No.
81-6; 6-25-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12140]
Upon application for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
the applicant shall pay a fee to cover the costs of the initial review of the
proposed soil removal operation, as well a review fee escrow, as set forth in
Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II.
§ 483-27. Annual permit fees. [Amended 3-16-1981 by Ord. No.
81-6141]
Upon the issuance of a soil removal permit, and on each anniversary date
thereafter, the permittee of a soil removal permit shall pay an annual
permit fee to be computed at the rate established in Chapter 250, Fees and
Escrows, Article II, multiplied by the number of cubic yards to be removed
during a twelve-month period. The calculation of the number of cubic yards
to be removed shall be determined as follows:
A. Initial fee, first year. For the initial year of operation, the calculation of
the number of cubic yards of soil to be removed in the initial year shall
be based upon the map filed with the application; and said map shall
contain a certification by a licensed engineer of the cubic yards to be
removed during the first year.
B. Permit fee, subsequent years. Each permittee shall file a semiannual
progress report with the Township Engineer. These reports will be in
addition to any reports required to be filed pursuant to § 483-19. These
reports shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer and shall
include a certification of the actual volume of soil removed during the
preceding six months. The annual permit fee for any permittee, for each
year after the first year, shall be calculated at the rate established in
Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II, multiplied by the number of
cubic yards actually removed by the permittee in the 12 preceding
months based on the semiannual reports certified to by the permittee's
licensed professional engineer. This fee shall be paid annually on the
anniversary date of the permit during the continuance of the term
thereof.
C. Existing permittees. The permit fee for existing soil removal operators
shall be computed at the rate established in Chapter 250, Fees and
Escrows, Article II, multiplied by the number of cubic yards actually
removed by the permittee as reported in the permittee's last annual
progress report submitted pursuant to § 483-19D. The permit fee shall
be adjusted in accordance with the number of months remaining the
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 483-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-27
1:1029
§ 483-28. Reimbursement for extraordinary costs or expenses.
In addition to the fees authorized in §§ 483-26 and 483-27, a permittee
shall reimburse the Township for the cost of all extraordinary costs or
expenses necessitated as the result of unforeseen difficulties or exigencies
or as necessitated by or resulting from any violation of any provision of this
chapter.
§ 483-29. Security required. [Amended 11-17-1975 by Ord. No.
75-24]
Before any work is done for which a permit is required, and during the
period covered by the permit, the applicant shall file and maintain a security
in form and with surety approved by the Township Attorney in such amount
as in the opinion of the Township Engineer shall be sufficient to insure
the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the
conditions of the permit and the terms thereof. The security shall be in an
amount of not less than $3,000 per acre of land which is actually being
excavated and/or has not been restored pursuant to § 483-21 in accordance
with the approved plan. The security shall consist of a minimum cash
deposit equal to 1/3 of the total security required, such cash security
deposit shall be deposited by the Mayor and Township Council in an
interest-bearing trust account, the interest to accumulate for the benefit of
the principal and to be payable to the principal annually upon request, with
the balance of the security being in the form of a surety bond. Said security
shall cover the respreading of topsoil for drainage of the site, and grading
to final contour.
§ 483-30. Release from security.
expiration of the operator's permit. Thereafter, the permit fee shall be
determined in accordance with Subsection B above.
D. No initial permit shall be granted and no renewal permit will be issued
until all the fees provided for herein have first been paid. Permit fees
payable by existing permittees shall be payable no later than the 60th
day following the final adoption of this chapter.
E. The violation of the reporting provisions of this chapter shall be cause
for the revocation or suspension of any permit granted pursuant to this
chapter.
F. The failure to pay any permit fee provided for in this chapter shall
automatically revoke any permit granted pursuant to this chapter.
A. When all required performance has been completed, the obligor shall
notify the Mayor and Township Council in writing by certified or
registered mail of the completion thereof and shall send a copy thereof
to the Municipal Engineer. The Mayor and Township Council shall
authorize the Municipal Engineer to inspect the site to determine that
all requirements of the approved plan have been complied with. The
§ 483-27 VERNON CODE § 483-30
1:1030
§ 483-31. Inspection fees.
The obligor shall be responsible for all of the inspection fees of the
Municipal Engineer incurred in making the inspections referred to in
§ 483-30.
§ 483-32. Issuance of a stop-work order; suspension or revocation
of permit. [Amended 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-13]
§ 483-33. Violations and penalties.142
In addition to an action on the security or guaranty, or the revocation of
license provided for herein, any person who violates this chapter or any
director or officer who permits or participates in a violation of this chapter
or the conditions of the permit shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine not exceeding $300, or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both,
in the discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction is had. Each
Municipal Engineer shall thereupon file a report in writing with the
Mayor and Township Council which shall be detailed and shall indicate
either approval, partial approval or rejection.
B. If the work covered by this security or any portion thereof shall not be
approved, or shall be rejected by the Municipal Engineer, said report
shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
Where said rejection indicates partial approval of said improvements or
works, it shall indicate the costs of the work for which approval is
rejected. The Mayor and Township Council shall accept or reject the
work, grant partial approval, or withhold approval, on the basis of such
report and shall notify the obligor in writing by certified or registered
mail of the content of said report and the action of said Mayor and
Township Council with relation thereto not later than 90 days after
receipt of notice from the obligor of the completion of the work. Where
partial approval is granted the obligor shall be released from all liability
pursuant to this performance guaranty except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure the work not yet approved; except,
however, that the surety bond or portions thereof shall be released first,
before any cash surety is released.
A. The municipality may issue a stop-work order if a project is not being
conducted in accordance with all applicable municipal, state and county
approvals and requirements.
B. After reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before the
Mayor and Township Council, the permit of any person may be revoked
or suspended for such period as the Mayor and Township Council may
determined for any violation of the terms hereof or the terms and
conditions of any approved plan and permit granted hereunder.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 483-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-33
1:1031
day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation hereof.
§ 483-34. Minimum requirements; variances. [Added 11-17-1975 by
Ord. No. 75-24]
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of the Township of Vernon, County of Sussex, State of
New Jersey. Any action taken by applicant under the terms of this chapter
shall give primary consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to
the welfare of the entire community. However, if any agency can clearly
demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the
literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable or
will exact undue hardship, the governing body may permit such variance or
variances as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent
of the rules, regulations, and standards established by this chapter.
§ 483-35. Transfer or assignment of permit. [Added 6-1-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-13]
No soil permit shall be transferred or assigned except upon application to
the Mayor and Township Council. A transfer or assignment of any permit
shall be approved by the Mayor and Township Council if the Mayor and
Township Council finds:
§ 483-36. Approved site plans. [Added 12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
00-30]
The provisions of this chapter, requiring an application for a soil removal
permit, shall not apply in such cases where the applicant has received a
preliminary or final site plan approval from either the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and the proposed soil removal being requested
was considered as part of the site plan application before the appropriate
Board.
A. That all fee and penalties, if applicable, which are owed to the Township
of Vernon under this chapter are paid in full prior to the transfer or
assignment.
B. That there are no existing violations pending against the permittee for
violations of this chapter or any term or condition of any permit
previously granted.
C. That the transferee or assignee complies with all the requirements set
forth in this chapter for the grant of an original permit.
§ 483-33 VERNON CODE § 483-36
1:1032
Chapter 484
SOIL FILL PLACEMENT
§ 483-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-36
1:1033

ARTICLE I
Title; Findings; Definitions; Permit Requirements
§ 484-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Soil Fill Ordinance of the Township of
Vernon"
§ 484-2. Purpose and findings.
The Township Council finds that the unregulated and uncontrolled
placement and movement of soil and other mineral deposits can result
in conditions detrimental to the public safety, health and general welfare.
Such conditions substantially hamper and deter the efforts of the Township
to effectuate the general purposes of municipal planning. Soil movement
operations and filling operations should relate to the overall physical
development of the area within which the operation is located. It is essential
that all soil movement operations and filling operations be reviewed and
approved by the Township Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer. All
soil movement operations and filling operations must be conceived and
operated in such a way that there will be no appreciable harmful effects to
the environment. In order to best ensure that all soil movement operations
and filling operations are an asset to the Township of Vernon, rather than a
liability, all such operations shall adhere to the conditions, restrictions and
provisions outlined in this chapter.
§ 484-3. Definitions.
The words defined in this section shall mean and include the following when
used in this chapter:
APPROVED PLAN — A plan for the placement of soil fill approved by
the Zoning Official and/or Township Engineer (minor permit) or by the
Township Lane Use Board (major permit) pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
LAND USE BOARD — The Land Use Board of the Township of Vernon.
MAJOR SOIL FILL PERMIT — A permit for the fill of 500 cubic yards or
more of soil.[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-23]
MINOR SOIL FILL PERMIT — A permit for the fill of more than 100 cubic
yards but less than 500 cubic yards or more of soil.
PERMIT — A soil fill permit.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, a corporation or any other
legal entity.
SOIL — Includes dirt, stone, gravel, sand, humus, clay, loam and mixtures
of any of these, but this shall not include quarry process or rock products
utilized in the construction of roads, driveways or similar types of
construction.
§ 484-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-3
1:1035
TOPSOIL — The arable soil within eight inches of the surface.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Vernon.
§ 484-4. Permit required.
No person shall fill or cause the placement of any soil on any premises
in the Township of Vernon whether such fill be for sale, gift or otherwise,
unless a permit therefore is first secured from the Township Zoning Officer
and/or Township Engineer or the Township Land Use Board as hereinafter
provided. A permit shall not be required for the moving or placement of fill
of less than 100 cubic yards of soil.
§ 484-5. Exceptions and exemptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to excavations or fill for
building foundations, septic tanks or sanitary installations, provided
that no excavation or construction of any kind shall take place until a
site plan or permit has been approved by the Construction Official and/
or Department of Health as required by law.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect or apply to any
person engaged in the moving of soil in and upon lands enrolled in the
Soil Conservation Program of the Sussex County Soil Conservation
District, Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service and for
which lands an approved farm plan has been established by said
agency, provided that all soil moving operations and fill operations in
and upon such lands are performed in accordance with said approved
farm plan and provided further that a copy of said approved farm plan is
placed on file with the Township prior to any soil moving operations or
fill operations.
C. A separate soil permit under this chapter shall not be required for
subdivisions, site plans and/or lot development permits approved
pursuant to Chapter 330, Land Development Subcode of the Township
of Vernon; however, any soil fill material used as part of subdivisions,
site plans and/or lot development permits must be in conformance with
the requirements of Chapter 484, § 484-6C(6). [Amended 12-9-2019
by Ord. No. 19-28]
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect or apply to any
person engaged in a state-mandated cleanup plan; provided that all soil
moving, removal operations and fill operations are performed in
accordance with said cleanup plan and provided further that notice of
the state-mandated cleanup plan is placed on file with the Township
Engineer prior to any soil moving, removal operations or fill operations.
E. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the storage of sand,
soil, stone, topsoil, mulch or other similar materials on lawfully existing
landscaping and contractor yards, provided that the outdoor storage of
materials on said property has previously been established and does not
§ 484-3 VERNON CODE § 484-5
1:1036
§ 484-6. Application for permit.
require site plan approval pursuant to Chapter 330, Land Development
Subcode of the Township of Vernon.
F. This chapter does not regulate the movement and placement of soil fill
directly related to agricultural uses on farm properties within the
Township of Vernon and does not supersede any rights granted under
the Right to Farm Act.143
A. Application for a minor soil fill permit shall be filed with the Township
Zoning officer who shall issue the permit based upon substantial
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that
the Township Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer shall have the
authority to deny a permit if he/she determines that the placement of fill
would be detrimental to the health, welfare or safety of the general
public. The denial shall be in writing setting forth reasons for same. In
the event that the applicant is applying or has applied for more than one
minor soil permit in a one-year period, for the same premises, the
permit shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer to determine if within
that one-year period prior to the new application being made that the
total soil fill will be in the aggregate 500 cubic yards or more. In the
event that the soil fill will be 500 cubic yards or more in the aggregate,
the applicant shall be required to apply for a major soil permit in
accordance with Chapter 484 of the Township Code. Action on an
application for minor soil fill permit shall be taken within 20 business
days of receipt of all required items. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-23; 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-28]
B. Application for a major soil fill permit shall be filed with the Township
Land Use Board and shall be accompanied by a fee prescribed in Ch.
250, Fees and Escrows. Twenty-three copies of the application shall be
submitted on forms prescribed by the Township Land Use Board and
supplied by the Secretary to the Board.
C. The application for minor and major soil fill permits shall set forth the
following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant.
(3) The description and location of the land in question, including the
tax map block and lot numbers.
(4) The purpose or reason for placement of soil.
(5) The nature and quantity, in cubic yards, of soil to be filled.
143. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
§ 484-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-6
1:1037
§ 484-7. Supporting documentation for a major soil fill application.
The application for a major soil fill permit shall be accompanied by a
topographic map or maps prepared and certified by a professional engineer
or land surveyor. The scale of said map shall not be more than 100 feet to
the inch and shall include the following:
(6) Proof that the soil fill materials to be used have been tested and
found to be in conformance with the Soil Ranking Criteria found in
N.J.A.C. 7:26D, Appendix 1, Table 1A. [Amended 12-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-28]
(a) Proof under this section shall include a letter from a laboratory
certified by the State to perform soil analysis, stating that
results meet or exceed the standards set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:26D, Appendix 1, Table 1A, and such other state, county or
municipal standards in effect at the time of testing, along with
the actual test results.
(b) A minimum of two samples are to be extracted from the source
for laboratory analysis for each 1,000-cubic-yard lot, or
fraction thereof. Samples are to be extracted, tested, and
evaluated by a state-certified laboratory. Samples must be
based to the location of the highest suspected contaminated
concentrations, as determined by the laboratory professional
or his duly assigned representative.
(c) Natural material obtained from a quarry shall be exempt from
the testing criteria; however, a receipt from the quarry with the
material amount is required.
(d) Proof shall include copies of trucking records stating the
location of where the soil fill material was picked up and the
location of where the soil fill material was delivered.
(e) The source from where the soil is coming shall be provided
with the permit application and shown on the plans, including
tax lot and block; owner's name; and municipality.
(7) The location to which the soil is to be placed.
(8) The proposed date of completion of the soil fill.
(9) Supporting documentation as required to adequately address and
comply with the purpose and the provisions of this chapter.
(10) An approved soil erosion and sediment control permit (if
applicable).
A. Key map.
B. Existing contour lines at five-foot intervals.
§ 484-6 VERNON CODE § 484-7
1:1038
§ 484-8. Referral.
Upon receipt of an application for a major soil fill permit, the Land Use
Board Secretary shall forthwith send a copy of same to the Zoning Officer,
Construction Official, Township Engineer, and the Environmental
Commission who shall review the application, and they shall submit their
reports and recommendations, and their reasons, to the Township Land Use
Board within 30 days of receipt of the application. Failure to file such a
report within the required time period shall be deemed an approval of the
application by such department, officials and commissions.
§ 484-9. Action by Land Use Board; notice of hearing on major soil
fill applications.
C. Proposed contour lines at five-foot intervals after fill of the soil.
D. All existing structures, all existing roads and drainage within 200 feet
of the property.
E. Location of all property lines.
F. Location of any wetlands, streams, or other environmentally sensitive
areas on the property.
G. Location of any topsoil storage areas.
H. Soil erosion and sediment control measures.
I. Cross sections of the fill areas at fifty-foot intervals.
A. The Township Land Use Board shall grant or deny the application
within 45 days after receipt of the reports and recommendations of the
Zoning Officer, Construction Official, Township Engineer, and
Environmental Commission. On an application for a major soil fill
permit, the Land Use Board shall schedule a public hearing and shall
notify the applicant of the date of such hearing. The applicant shall
notify in writing all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme
limits of the property, as their names appear on the Township tax
records, at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing in the
application. The notice shall be given in person or by registered mail
and shall state the reason for the hearing; the time and place of the
hearing as fixed by the Township Land Use Board; a brief description of
the property; and that a copy of the application and map has been filed
with the Township Clerk for public inspection. The applicant shall also
cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official newspaper of
the Township, at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Five days prior to the hearing, the applicant shall present to the
Township Land Use Board Secretary the following:
§ 484-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-9
1:1039
§ 484-10. Factors to be considered in approving permits.
In considering and reviewing the application and arriving at a decision, the
Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer (minor permit) and the Township
Land Use Board (major permit) be guided by and take into consideration
the public health, safety and general welfare and the general purposes
of municipal planning, and particular consideration shall be given to the
following factors:
§ 484-11. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued after the approval of the application by the Zoning
Official and/or Township Engineer (minor permit) or by the Township Lane
Use Board (major permit). The approval shall specifically list the total
number of cubic yards of soil authorized to be filled as calculated by the
Township Engineer based upon the contour maps submitted and approved.
(1) Certification, in the form of an affidavit, signed and sworn by the
applicant, affirming that he has notified all property owners, as
required in Subsection A of this section.
(2) Proof of publication of the newspaper notice required in Subsection
A of this section.
A. Soil erosion by water and sand.
B. Surface water drainage.
C. Soil fertility.
D. Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
E. Public health and safety.
F. Land values and uses.
G. Contours, both existing and proposed.
H. Existing contours and topographic character of the land prior to the
placement of any soil and proposed contours which will result
subsequent to the placement of soil in accordance with the soil fill
application.
I. Whether the proposed placement of soil is necessary and incidental to
the development of the property for its intended use or whether the
proposed placement of fill constitutes primarily a commercial activity.
§ 484-9 VERNON CODE § 484-11
1:1040
ARTICLE II
Operating Requirements
§ 484-12. Method of operation.
If a permit is issued for the placement of soil as provided herein, the owner
or person in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no
sharp declivities, pits or depressions, and in such manner that the area shall
be properly leveled off, cleared of debris, and graded to conform with the
contour lines and grades as required and shown on the approved plan.
§ 484-13. Regulation of operation.
No soil shall be placed nor shall any operation be conducted so as to violate
any of the regulations contained in this article after a permit is granted.
§ 484-14. Deposit of soil on adjoining property or public roads.
Soil fill shall not be deposited or in any way thrown or placed upon adjoining
property or public roads. Any soil or material resulting from any such
operation accumulating on any adjoining property or public road shall be
removed there from immediately upon notice to the permittee of such
accumulation.
§ 484-15. Compliance with other standards and terms of permit.
All operations shall be conducted in strict accordance with any state law,
other ordinances of the Township, and the terms and conditions of any
permit granted for such operations.
§ 484-16. Nuisances and unsafe conditions.
The operation shall be conducted so as not to constitute a nuisance, and in
no event shall said operation create any hazardous or unsafe condition with
regard to any person or persons. Natural screening is to be preserved by
the applicant.
§ 484-17. Restoration of area.
A. Upon completion of any operation delineated on the approved plan, said
area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris, and graded to
conform to the contours and grades as approved by the Zoning Officer
and/or Township Engineer. A final map for all major soil fill permits shall
be submitted containing and complying with all requirements as set
forth in this chapter.
B. No trash, junk or debris may be stored in any area, and no safety
hazards will be permitted, either during or after the completion of
operations.
§ 484-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-18
1:1041
§ 484-18. Storage limitations.
The material stored shall not exceed a height of 20 feet, and the maximum
storage slope shall be 45°.
§ 484-19. Enforcing officer; inspections.
The Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer are hereby designated as the
officer whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He/
she shall, from time to time, upon his/her own initiative, and whenever
directed by the Township, inspect the premises for which permits have been
granted to ensure compliance with the terms of the permit and of this
chapter. The Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer shall have the right
to enter upon any lands for the purpose of examination and inspection of
the operation without advance notice.
§ 484-20. Use of streets for soil transportation.
In the placement of soil or fill operation, the applicant shall cause such
streets to be kept free from dirt and debris resulting from such soil or fill
operation.
§ 484-18 VERNON CODE § 484-20
1:1042
ARTICLE III
Fees; Bonds; Penalties and Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 484-21. Permit fees; inspection fees.
§ 484-22. Revocation of permit; violations and penalties.
After notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Township Zoning
Officer, the permit of any person may be revoked or suspended for such
period as the Township Zoning Officer may determine for any violation
of the terms hereof or the terms and conditions of any permit granted
hereunder. In addition to the revocation provided for herein, any person
who violates this chapter or any director or officer of a corporation who
participates in a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a maximum fine of $2,000, or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that such violation continues
or exists shall be considered a separate and specific violation of these
provisions and not as a continuing offense.
§ 484-23. Other permits.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to affect the owner's
application for soil erosion and sediment control permits or any other state
or federal regulations or permits as required.
A. The fees for a minor or major soil placement permits are set forth in
Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows.
B. The obligor shall be responsible for all of the inspection fees of the
Township Engineer incurred in making the inspections.
§ 484-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-23
1:1043
Chapter 500
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250.
Land development — See Ch. 330.
Payment of delinquent taxes and
assessments — See Ch. 341, Art. I.
§ 484-23 VERNON CODE § 484-23
1:1044
ARTICLE I
Driveway and Road Opening
[Adopted 12-30-1970 (Ch. 87, Art. III of the 1974 Code)]
§ 500-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Driveway and Road
Opening Ordinance of Vernon Township."
§ 500-2. Permit requirements. [Amended 11-4-1974; 10-3-1977 by
Ord. No. 77-15; 9-21-1981 by Ord. No. 81-21]
§ 500-3. Fees. [Amended 9-21-1981 by Ord. No. 81-21144]
The permit fees for new driveway openings and for reconstruction of
driveways are included in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II.
§ 500-4. Contents of application.
The application for the permit shall specify the location of said driveway
or road and shall include a detailed plan indicating the proposed grading,
paving and drainage construction and such other specifications and details
as the Township Engineer may require.
A. Construction of new driveways or roads. No driveway or road
connecting with a street or road which has been accepted as a
Township road or is being maintained by the Township or which lies
within a subdivision which has received preliminary or final approval
from the Township Planning Board shall hereafter be constructed
unless a permit shall first be secured from the Township Clerk, or be
used unless an approval permit relating to such construction shall be
issued by the Township Engineer, certifying that such construction has
been satisfactorily completed.
B. Alteration and repair of driveways or roads. No driveway or road
connecting with a street or road which has been accepted as a
Township road or is being maintained by the Township or which lies
within a subdivision which has received preliminary or final approval
from the Township Planning Board shall hereafter be altered or
repaired unless a permit shall have first been secured from the
Township Clerk, where such repairs or alterations are to be made to
such portions of the driveway or road which lie within and/or 25 feet
adjacent to the right-of-way of such Township road or street, or be used
unless an approval permit relating to such construction shall be issued
by the Township Engineer, certifying that such construction has been
satisfactorily completed.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-5
1:1045
§ 500-5. Prevention of drainage into driveways or roads;
construction materials; completion of driveway prior to issuance of
certificate of occupancy. [Amended 11-4-1974]
§ 500-6. Safeguards required; liability.
It shall be the duty of the permittee to properly guard the construction by
erecting suitable barriers, warning signs and lanterns, and such permittee
shall be liable for any neglect to safeguard the traveling public.
§ 500-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-1974145]
Any person violating, or failing to comply with, any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties. The continuation of
such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
A. Any such driveway or road shall be so constructed at its connection
with such Township streets or roads that it does not interfere with the
flow of water in such street or road, or in any drainage ditches along
roads, or in any draining piping or facilities along the road, and shall be
constructed to prevent water from draining into the driveway or across
such Township street or road.
B. That portion of the driveway which lies within the road right-of-way and
the next following 25 feet of the driveway adjacent to the road right-ofway
shall be constructed of a foundation course of either eight-inch
bank-run gravel or four-inch crushed stone, and have a pavement of two
inches FABC.
C. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the driveway is
completed or a cash performance guaranty in an amount as determined
by the Township Engineer has been posted with the Township. Upon the
completion of the driveway, such cash performance guaranty shall be
released. In the event such driveways are not completed within six
months after issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the performance
guaranty shall be utilized to complete such driveways by the Township.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-5 VERNON CODE § 500-7
1:1046
ARTICLE II
Street Excavations
[Adopted 5-20-1974 (Ch. 87, Art. IV of 1974 Code); amended in its
entirety 9-21-1981 by Ord. No. 81-21]
§ 500-8. Definitions.146
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works of the
Township of Vernon.
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer of the Township of Vernon.
STREET — Any road, highway, public way, public alley, easement or other
right-of-way accepted or maintained by the Township as a public street, as
well as any state or county road or highway over which the Township has
acquired jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 500-9. Permit required.
§ 500-10. Denial of permit; appeal process.
The Engineer is authorized to refuse the issuance of any permit if such
refusal is in the interest of public safety, public convenience or public
health. In the event that any permit is refused by the Engineer, any
aggrieved may appeal initially to the Director of Public Works. Any party
aggrieved by the decision of the Director of Public Works may appeal to
the Mayor and Township Council. The Mayor and Township Council, after
hearing all the concerned parties and other evidence as may be produced,
may either direct the issuance of such permit or sustain the refusal of the
Engineer.
A. No person shall make an excavation in, tunnel under, or disturb the
surface of any street in the Township of Vernon without first obtaining a
permit from the Township Engineer as hereinafter provided.
B. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit where an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to start work
immediately, provided that the application for a permit is made
simultaneously with the commencement of the work or as soon
thereafter as it is practical. When issued, the permit shall be retroactive
to the date on which work has begun.
C. The Engineer may issue permits to other public bodies without fee.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-11
1:1047
§ 500-11. Application for permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on the form prescribed by the
Township to the Engineer and shall contain the following information:
§ 500-12. Issuance of permit.
Permits shall be issued under the authority of the Engineer and in
accordance with the provisions of this article and the regulations which the
Engineer may establish. The Engineer shall determine the initial time limit
during which the permit shall be valid.
§ 500-13. Contents of permit; filing.
Each permit shall state the identity and address of the applicant, the name
of the street, the location where the excavation or tunnel is to be made, the
dimensions of the opening, and the period during which the permit shall
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street
number, if any, of the abutting property.
C. The Township tax map block and lot number of the property for the
benefit of which the opening is to be made, if applicable.
D. Nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made.
E. Character and purpose of the work proposed.
F. Time when the work is to be commenced and completed. All work must
be commenced and completed between April 1 and November 15
except in case of emergency.
G. Plans.
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by a set of plans in
quadruplicate showing the exact location and dimensions of all
openings.
(2) When the opening is for the purpose of installing water, sewer, gas
or other pipes, engineering drawings showing locations of pipes,
valves and service line interconnections shall be furnished, as well
as a statement of the specifications pertaining to all pipes, valves
and fittings.
H. The name and address of the workman or contractor who is to perform
the work.
I. A statement that the applicant agrees to replace, at his own cost and
expense, the street, curb, gutter and sidewalk to the same state and
condition as they were at the time of the commencement of the work,
within 48 hours of the commencement of same.
§ 500-11 VERNON CODE § 500-13
1:1048
be valid. The original of each permit shall remain on file with the Township
Clerk.
§ 500-14. Fees.147
The permit fees are included in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows, Article II.
§ 500-15. Bond; restoration guaranty; waiver for public utilities.148
A. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished surety in
cash or a surety bond and restoration guaranty in an amount
determined to be sufficient by the Engineer, but in no case less than a
bond of $1,000 and a restoration guaranty of $2.50 per square feet, but
not less than $300. Surety in the amount of $1,000 or less shall be in
cash; surety for amounts in excess of $1,000 may be made by cash or
bond; but in the case a bond is given, the first $1,000 shall be in cash
with any balance by way of surety bond.
B. The restoration guaranty shall be in the form of a certified check
payable to the Township of Vernon.
C. The Mayor and Township Council may waive the restoration guaranty in
the case of public utilities upon the presentation of satisfactory proof
that it is capable of meeting any claims against it up to the amount of
the guaranty, which would otherwise be required. The bond shall be
executed by the applicant as principal with a surety company licensed
to do business in the State of New Jersey as surety, and shall be
conditioned as follows:
(1) To indemnify and hold harmless the Township, its officers, agents,
servants and employees from all loss, damage, claim or expense,
including expenses incurred in the defense of any litigation arising
out of injury to any person or property resulting from any work
done by the applicant under the permit.
(2) To indemnify the Township for any expense incurred in enforcing
any of the provisions of this section.
(3) To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or
damage to his property as a result of any act or omission of the
applicant, his agents, employees or subcontractors done in the
course of any work under the permit.
(4) The bond shall also be conditioned upon the applicant's restoring
the surface and foundation of the street for which the permit is
granted in a manner acceptable to the Engineer.
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
148. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 250, Fees and Escrows, Art. II, for restoration bond
requirements.
§ 500-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-15
1:1049
§ 500-16. Insurance.
§ 500-17. Rules and regulations.
All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations:
(5) One bond may be accepted to cover a number of excavations by the
same applicant. Bonds shall remain in force for a period to be
determined by the Engineer.
A. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished the Engineer
with satisfactory proof of insurance against injury to persons, and
damage to property caused by or omission of the applicant, his agents,
employees or subcontractors done in the course of the work to be
performed under the permit. The insurance shall cover all hazards
likely to arise in connection with the work, including, but not limited to,
collapse and explosion, and shall not be subject to cancellation except
after 30 days' notice given by the insurer to the Township Clerk. The
limits of the policy of insurance shall be $100,000 for injuries to more
than one person in the same accident, and an aggregate of $1,000,000
for property damage for a single incident.
B. The Mayor and Township Council or Director of Public Works, with the
recommendations of the Township Engineer and Township Attorney,
may waive the requirements of this action.
A. All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times, and
during the hours of darkness shall be provided with proper warning
lights. This regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any
other precaution reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or
property. The permittee shall comply with the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Part VI, to provide adequate warning
of an excavation or when required by the Engineer or police to provide
signs, barricades, pavement markings or warning lights.
B. All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed
to traffic unless the closing is approved by the Chief of Police. The
Police Department shall be informed of all street closings at least 24
hours in advance, except where the work is of an emergency nature,
when notice shall be given to the Police Department when work
commences.
C. Upon application by the permittee, the Engineer may extend the time
limit during which the permit shall be valid.
D. All refuse and material shall be removed from the work site within 48
hours.
E. All excavations shall be completely backfilled by the permittee and shall
be compacted by tamping or other suitable means in a manner
§ 500-15 VERNON CODE § 500-17
1:1050
§ 500-18. Restoration of surface.
In all cases the permittee shall restore the surface of the street in
accordance with the following rules, regulations and requirements:
prescribed by the Engineer. Where the Engineer determines that the
excavated material is unsuitable for backfill, the permittee shall backfill
the excavation with New Jersey Specification Zone No. 2, four inches
minus porous fill which shall be placed in layers not exceeding 12
inches in depth and thoroughly compacted by tamping with a
mechanical vibrator or other suitable means prescribed by the
Engineer. The applicant must replace all shoulder stone to a depth of six
inches and thoroughly compact it with a mechanical compaction device.
Upon completion of the work, the permittee shall remove any excess
material and leave the premises in a clean condition. If the Engineer
determines that any backfilled excavation has settled or caved in, he
shall so notify the permittee, who shall promptly continue backfilling
until the Engineer determines that settlement is complete.
F. If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with
rammed concrete composed of one part cement to 10 parts sand.
G. If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall
be done in strict compliance with all applicable state laws and
regulations.
H. If the work is not completed within the time specified in the permit or
any extension granted by the Engineer or is not performed in
accordance with the regulations set forth in this section and any other
regulations that may be established by the Engineer, the Engineer may
have the work completed and the surface of the street restored. The
cost completing the work and restoring the street shall be charged to
the permittee and may be deducted from his deposit or recovered by an
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
I. Blasting and use of jackhammers in connection with any work for which
a permit has been issued hereunder shall be prohibited between 4:30
p.m. and the following 8:00 a.m. prevailing time.
J. Construction equipment shall be stored, left or positioned on any street
after the completion of each day's work.
K. Prior to commencing work, the permittee shall execute the contractor
agreement form as provided by the Traffic Safety Bureau of the Vernon
Township Police Department.
A. No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street, foundation
or surface until the Engineer has determined that the backfill has been
properly compacted and the area properly prepared for restoration.
§ 500-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-18
1:1051
§ 500-19. Permit conditions and regulations; revocation; appeal.
B. The existing pavement after backfill has been completed shall be cut to
a straight edge by suitable means at least six inches back from the
excavation before the pavement is patched.
C. The street surface shall be restored to the section designated by the
Engineer in the permit but in no case shall be less than the structural
equivalent of the following: six inches of 1 1/2 broken stone or four
inches of lime fly ash.
A. Transferability. Every permit shall apply to the person to whom it is
issued and shall not be transferable.
B. Commencement of work. Work under a permit shall commence within
15 days from the date of issuance of the permit. If work is not
commenced within that time, the permit shall automatically terminate
and permit fees forfeited, unless extended in writing by the Engineer.
C. Possession of permit. A copy of the permit together with a copy of the
plan endorsed with the approval of the Engineer shall be kept in
possession of the person actually performing the work and shall be
exhibited on demand to the Engineer or to any police officer of the
Township.
D. Revocation of permit. The Engineer may revoke a permit for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
rules, regulations, laws or ordinances.
(2) Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
(3) Carrying on work under the permit in a manner which endangers
life or property, or which creates any condition which is unhealthy,
unsanitary or declared by any provision of the Vernon Township
Code to constitute a nuisance.
E. Any person aggrieved by the revocation of a permit may appeal to the
Director of Public Works, who shall hold a hearing thereon and shall
affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the Engineer. The Director of
Public Works may provide in his decision that the revocation shall be
vacated if the permittee corrects the violation within a specified period
of time. Any person aggrieved by the determination of the Director of
Public Works may appeal the decision of the Director of Public Works to
the Mayor and Township Council.
F. Modification of permit conditions. In a special case the Mayor and
Township Council may by resolution impose special conditions to which
the issuance of the permit may be subject.
§ 500-18 VERNON CODE § 500-19
1:1052
§ 500-20. Power to make additional rules and regulations.
The Director of Public Works may make any rules and regulations which
he considers necessary for the administration and enforcement of this
article, but regulation shall not be inconsistent with, alter or amend any
provision of this article, or impose any requirement which is in addition to
those expressly or by implication imposed by this article. No regulations
shall be effective unless they are approved by resolution of the Mayor and
Township Council. Copies of all current regulations shall be available to
each permittee for inspection at the time of the issuance of the permit at
the office of the Township Engineer.
§ 500-20.1. Notices of street paving and repairs; deadline. [Added
12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-25]
Whenever the Township Council enacts an ordinance or resolution
providing for the paving or repaving of any street or sidewalk, the Municipal
Clerk shall promptly mail a written notice thereof to each person owning
sewers, mains, conduits, or other utilities, in or under said street or
sidewalk. Such notice shall notify such persons that any application for an
excavation permit for openings, cuts or excavations for work to be done
in or under said street or sidewalk prior to such paving or repaving shall
be submitted promptly in order that the work covered by such excavation
permit may be completed not later than 45 days from the date of enactment
of such ordinance or resolution. The Municipal Clerk shall also promptly
mail copies of such notice to any governmental agencies or departments or
other persons who may desire to perform excavation work in said street or
sidewalk.
§ 500-20.2. Performing repairs. [Added 12-9-2019 by Ord. No.
19-25]
Within said 45 days, every owner, person, agency or utility receiving notice
as prescribed herein shall perform such excavation work subject to the
provisions of this article and other relevant sections of Chapter 500, as may
be necessary to install or repair sewers, mains, conduits, utility installations
or other work in said street or sidewalk. In the event any owner, person,
agency or utility shall fail within said forty-five-day period to perform such
excavation work, any and all rights of such owner, person, agency or utility
or their successors in interest to make openings, cuts or excavations in
said street or sidewalk shall be prohibited and forfeited for a period of five
years from the date of enactment of said ordinance or resolution. During
said five-year period, no excavation permit shall be issued to open, cut or
excavate in said street or sidewalk unless, in the judgment of the Business
Administrator, an emergency exists which makes it absolutely essential
that the excavation be permitted. Any excavation granted by the Business
G. After satisfactory compliance with all conditions of the permit as
determined by the Engineer, the restoration guaranty shall be returned
to the applicant and his bond released.
§ 500-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-20.2
1:1053
Administrator under this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with
the standards set by the Township Engineer.
§ 500-20.3. Time period. [Added 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-25]
Every Township department or official charged with responsibility for any
work that may necessitate any opening, cut or excavation in said street
or sidewalk is directed to take appropriate measures to perform such
excavation work within said forty-five-day period so as to avoid the necessity
of making any openings, cuts or excavations in the new pavement in the
Township's streets or sidewalks during said five-year period.
§ 500-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-27-2006 by Ord. No.
06-07]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties,
and each day such violation shall be continued shall be deemed and taken
as a separate and distinct offense.
§ 500-20.2 VERNON CODE § 500-21
1:1054
ARTICLE III
Obstruction of Municipal Property
[Adopted 3-9-1987 by Ord. No. 87-5]
§ 500-22. Placing snow, mud and other materials in streets and
similar areas prohibited.
No person shall plow, shovel, blow, or otherwise move any snow, ice, mud,
earth, stones or other material into any municipal road, street, ditch, gutter,
storm sewer or culvert in the Township of Vernon.
§ 500-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-27-2006 by Ord. No.
06-07]
Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties.
§ 500-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-23
1:1055

ARTICLE IV
Road Vacation Application
[Adopted 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-10]
§ 500-24. Establishment of road vacation application form.149
The Township of Vernon hereby establishes a road vacation application form
which shall be required prior to requesting the vacation of a Township road.
149. Editor's Note: The road vacation application form is available from the Township offices.
The fee for review of the road vacation application form is included in Ch. 250, Fees and
Escrows, Art. II.
§ 500-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-24
1:1057

ARTICLE V
Dedication and Acceptance of Roads
[Adopted 8-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-22]
§ 500-25. Purpose.
This article establishes the procedure for the dedication and acceptance of
private roads and streets which are directly connected to improved public
state, county or Township roads and streets in the Township of Vernon.
§ 500-26. Procedure.
A. The owners of property abutting or adjoining a private road as set forth
above may petition the Township Council for the purpose of dedicating
the private road for acceptance as a public road. The petition, in the
form hereafter set forth, shall contain the signatures of a minimum of
51% of the property owners of property abutting or adjoining the
private road to be considered by the Township Council. The percentage
of signatures shall be verified by the Township Clerk, Assessor and
Engineer, in their sole determination. The percentage of signatures
shall be certified by the Township Clerk to the Council. At such time as
the signatures are confirmed and the fifty-one-percent threshold is met,
the Township shall proceed as hereafter set forth. In such cases as the
petition does not bear the signatures of 51% of affected property
owners (those property owners abutting or adjoining the subject road),
the Township shall so notify the designated petitioner(s), and the
petition shall not be further considered until such time as the
designated petitioner(s) may refile same with the required number of
signatures.
B. The petition shall be printed or typed and shall contain the full name of
each property owner with the current address by street or road number
and lot and block as set forth on the current Vernon Tax Map. The
petition shall be signed and dated by each petitioner requesting the
dedication and acceptance. The petition shall further contain the
approximate road frontage, in linear feet, of each and all properties
which will be affected by the dedication and acceptance whether or not
an owner signs the petition. A current full-size tax map shall be
attached showing the location of each and all affected properties with
the name of owner, lot and block and road frontage set forth on the
mapped lot. The petition shall be dated on each page and contain the
name or names of the person or persons designated by the petitioner(s)
as the designated petitioner(s), who shall be empowered with the
authority to receive notices from the Township, at the top of each page
of the petition, indicated as follows:
DATE:
DESIGNATED PETITIONER(S):
§ 500-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-26
1:1059
C. In such cases as the Township Clerk shall certify to the Council that a
petition has been signed by 51% or more of affected property owners,
the Township Council may, by resolution, authorize and direct the
Township Engineer to inspect the road under petition and to submit a
report regarding the condition of same and the preliminary cost
estimate to bring the subject road to current Township standards and
further authorize and direct the Director of Public Works to submit a
report regarding the estimate for prospective road maintenance and
snow removal. Said reports shall be submitted to the Council within 45
days from the date of the resolution.
(1) In such cases where the subject road meets current Township road
standards as certified by the Township Engineer, the Township
Council, may, in its sole discretion, proceed to accept dedication of
the road pursuant to state statute. In such cases as the Township
may notify the petitioner(s) of the decision to accept dedication, the
petitioners shall provide to the Township a proposed deed of
dedication, affidavit of title, title insurance commitment to the
Township of Vernon from a licensed title insurance company in New
Jersey (with policy to be provided upon acceptance) and such
further documents as may be required to transfer title of the
subject road to the Township free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances. Said documents must be acceptable to the
Township Attorney.
(2) In such cases as the Township Engineer shall report to the Council
that the subject road requires upgrading to Township standards,
the Township Council may, in its sole discretion, reject the petition
or notify the petitioners by sending a copy of the report and the
preliminary estimate of costs to the designated petitioner(s). Said
report must be provided by the designated petitioner(s) to all
affected property owners by certified mail, return receipt
requested. No further action shall be taken by the Township after
such a notice is sent by the Township to the designated
petitioner(s) unless the Township receives, within 30 days of notice
to the designated petitioner(s), a certification from the designated
petitioner(s) certifying that at least 51% of the affected property
owners desire to continue with the dedication and acceptance
process and a copy of the white or green certified mail cards as
proof of the notice to affected property owners. Upon receipt of
such notification and proof of mailing, the Township Council may, in
its sole discretion, proceed to accept dedication of the road
pursuant to state statute after the subject road is brought to
current Township standards by the petitioners and said
improvements are confirmed by the Township Engineer or, in the
Township Council's sole discretion, prior to improvement but
subject to the process set forth herein for assessment of the costs
of the road improvement. In either case, the petitioners shall
provide to the Township a proposed deed of dedication, affidavit of
title, title insurance commitment to the Township of Vernon from a
§ 500-26 VERNON CODE § 500-26
1:1060
licensed title insurance company in New Jersey (with policy to be
provided upon acceptance) and such further documents as may be
required to transfer title of the subject road to the Township free
and clear of all liens and encumbrances. Said documents must be
acceptable to the Township Attorney.
D. In such cases as the Township Council determines to accept dedication
of a road prior to improvement, the following shall occur in the order
set forth:
(1) The Township Attorney shall review the title commitment and
confirm that the subject road is free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances.
(2) The Township Engineer shall prepare a survey of the subject road
with metes and bounds description, prepare plans and
specifications for the improvements and necessary rights-of-way
and determine a final estimate of cost.
(3) Funds shall be appropriated, at the sole discretion of the Township
Council, from either the Township capital expenditure budget or by
bonding pursuant to state statute.
(4) The Township shall, at the sole discretion of the Township,
construct the project with Township personnel or advertise for
bids, award the contract(s) and proceed with construction by the
selected contractor(s).
(5) Upon completion of the construction, the Township Engineer shall
certify the completion of the project and present the cost
certification to the Township Council.
(6) The Township shall proceed with the assessment of the project
costs pursuant to state statute.
§ 500-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-26
1:1061

ARTICLE VI
Public Utility Poles and Underground Facilities
[Added 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-15]
§ 500-27. Authority.
The Township of Vernon hereby adopts the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A.
48:3-17a as hereafter set forth.
§ 500-28. Notification prior to construction or excavation.
Before a public utility places, replaces or removes a pole or an underground
facility located in the Township of Vernon within a twenty-four-hour period,
which pole, or underground facility is used for the supplying and
distribution of electricity for light, heat or power, or the furnishing of water
service or telephone or other telecommunications service on or below a
public right-of-way in Vernon, the public utility shall, in addition to other
requirements of law, notify an appropriately licensed municipal code official
of Vernon at least 24 hours before undertaking any construction or
excavation related to the placement, replacement or removal of such pole
or underground facility.
§ 500-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POLE — In addition to the commonly accepted meaning, means any wires
or cable connected thereto and any replacements therefor which are similar
in construction and use.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY — One or more underground pipes, cables,
wires, lines or other structures used for supplying and distribution of
electricity for light, heat or power, or the furnishing of water service or
telephone or other telecommunications service.
§ 500-30. Removal of equipment and debris; restoration of property.
After completing the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility pursuant to this article, the public utility shall remove
from such right-of-way any pole or underground facility no longer in use as
well as any other debris created from such actions and restore the property,
including, but not limited to, the installation of a hot patch as needed to
restore the property within the right-of-way to the previous condition as
much as possible. "Hot patch" means the installation of a mixture of asphalt
to restore the property within the right-of-way to the condition previous to
the construction or excavation of the disturbed site.
§ 500-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-31
1:1063
§ 500-31. Violations and penalties; time limit for installation of hot
patch.
In the event a public utility does not meet the requirements of this article
concerning the removal of debris and the restoring of property as set forth
herein within 90 days of the construction, the public utility shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $100 per day until the requirements of this article
are met, except that, if a public utility is unable to complete the installation
of the hot patch due to the unavailability of asphalt during the time period
from November through April, the public utility shall not be required to
install the hot patch until 60 days immediately following the end of said
time period. At least five business days prior to the end of the ninetyday
period set forth above, Vernon shall notify the public utility that the
penalties authorized herein shall be assessed against the public utility as
set forth herein unless the public utility complies with the provisions of this
article. Penalties imposed under this article shall be collected or enforced
in a summary manner, without jury, in any court of competent jurisdiction
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq. The Superior Court and a Municipal
Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this article.
§ 500-32. Liability for shared facilities.
In the case of the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or
underground facility utilized by two or more public utilities, the public
utility last removing pipes, cables, wires, lines or other structures shall be
liable for the provisions set forth herein unless the public utilities have
agreed differently in writing.
§ 500-33. Emergency conditions.
Under emergency conditions which significantly impact the placement of
a pole or underground facility resulting from natural forces or human
activities beyond the control of the public utility, or which pose an imminent
or existing threat or loss of electrical, water, power, telephone or other
telecommunication service, or which pose an imminent or existing threat to
the safety and security of persons or property, or which require immediate
action by a public utility to prevent bodily harm or substantial property
damage from occurring, the provisions of this article regarding notice
shall not apply when the public utility undertakes any construction or
excavation related to the activities set forth in this article in response to
such emergency, provided that notice is provided by the public utility at the
earliest reasonable opportunity and the public utility complies with all other
provisions of this article after responding to the emergency.
§ 500-31 VERNON CODE § 500-33
1:1064
ARTICLE VII
Standard Specifications
§ 500-34. Adoption of Revised Standard Specifications; violations
and penalties.
A. Specifications adopted. All construction works or improvements, public
or private, hereafter constructed, done or performed in the Township
pertaining to the construction, repair, replacement or maintenance of
roads or streets and their grading, curbing and paving; sanitary or
storm sewers; drainage; sewage disposal; portable water lines, storage
or transmission; the grading of land, the seeding thereof and the
planting thereon of trees; shall be constructed, done and performed in
accordance with the provisions of the "Revised Standard Specifications
of the Township of Vernon, New Jersey" prepared by the Township
Engineer, which are made a part hereof as though set forth at length
herein, and copies of which are on file in the office of the Township
Engineer and in the office of the Township Clerk.
B. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person who shall construct, do or perform any such work or
improvement to which the provisions of said "Revised Standard
Specifications of the Township of Vernon, New Jersey (1973)", as
amended, are applicable and who shall violate any of the provisions
therein contained, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days, and/or a term of community service not to
exceed 90 days.
(2) A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(3) The penalties herein provided shall not be construed to be in lieu
of, but shall be in addition to, any rights or remedies the Township
may have under and pursuant to any performance guaranty or bond
delivered and held by the Township in connection with any such
work or improvement.
§ 500-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-34
1:1065
Chapter 509
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Farmland and open space preservation — See
Ch. 244.
Payment of delinquent taxes and
assessments — See Ch. 341, Art. I.
§ 500-34 VERNON CODE § 500-34
1:1066
ARTICLE I
Hotel and Motel Room and Transient Accommodation Occupancy
Tax
[Adopted 7-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-26; amended 1-27-2020 by Ord.
No. 20-05]
§ 509-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2018,
c. 49, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1% on
charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before July
1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges for rent for every occupancy on
or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel or motel or transient
accommodation subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section
3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall be in addition to any
other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution
by any government entity upon the occupancy of a hotel or motel room or
transient accommodation.
§ 509-2. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room and transient
accommodation occupancy tax in the Township of Vernon, New Jersey,
which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of 1% for charges of rent
for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room or transient accommodation in
the Township of Vernon, New Jersey, on or after July 1, 2003, but before July
1, 2004, and 3% on charges for rent for every occupancy on or after July 1,
2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel or motel or transient accommodation
subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.
30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3), sales tax.
§ 509-3. Applicability of other taxes.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room, motel room or
transient accommodation.
§ 509-4. Responsibility to pay tax; violations and penalties.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2018, c. 49:
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
§ 509-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 509-4
1:1067
§ 509-5. Collection of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the Township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel or transient
accommodation customer. Each person required to collect the tax herein
imposed shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required
to be collected from the customer. Any such person shall have the same
right in respect to collecting the tax from the customer as if the tax were
a part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided that the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township shall be joined as a party in any action or
proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 509-6. Required distribution of copies of Article.
A copy of this article shall be transmitted to the State Treasurer and to each
hotel and/or motel and/or provider of transient accommodations and other
affected business entities within the Township.
§ 509-7. Definition of transient accommodation.
"Transient accommodation" means the accessory use of a dwelling unit for
occupancy by someone other than the unit's owner or permanent resident
for a period of 30 or less consecutive days, up to a cumulative total period of
not to exceed 180 days in a calendar year, which dwelling unit is advertised
or held out to the public as a place regularly rented to transient occupants.
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be $100 for
each offense.
§ 509-4 VERNON CODE § 509-7
1:1068
Chapter 518
TOWING
§ 518-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Vernon Township Towing and Storage
Ordinance."
§ 518-2. Definitions.
ABSORBENT — A granulated or powdered substance used to soak up fluids
used in the operation of motor vehicles, i.e.: Speedy-dry.
ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGES — Charges for post accident services;
included but not limited to services such as inspection, telephone or fax
calls, paperwork, etc.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township of Vernon Police
Department.
CRUISING — The operation of a tow truck within the Township of Vernon
for the purpose of soliciting business.
DISABLED VEHICLE — A motor vehicle which has been abandoned or
rendered inoperable by mechanical failure or accident. Any motor vehicle
which constitutes a hazard to the motoring public due to its location shall
be deemed disabled for the purposes of this chapter.
GARAGE — A building or property within the Township of Vernon, deemed
and zoned a commercial property, where motor vehicles can be sheltered,
stored, repaired, and made ready for use, including but not limited to a
gasoline station.
OWNED — For the purpose of this chapter shall mean owned, rented, or
leased.
PERSON — Any individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, corporation or
other organization; either singular or plural, masculine or feminine, unless
the contrary is clearly expressed.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Township of Vernon Police Department.
POLICE TOWING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to this chapter and
the New Jersey Predatory Towing Prevention Act, N.J.S.A. 56:8-1, et seq.,
allowing a person to tow vehicles at the request of the Township of Vernon
Police Department.
RECOVERY — The procedure in which the tow operator uses the tow vehicle
and/or equipment to return a vehicle to the roadway and position it in a
manner in which it can be towed.
STORAGE DAY — Twenty-four hour period or any portion thereof.
TOW VEHICLE — A vehicle, including a flatbed, wrecker or tow truck,
employed for the purpose of towing, transporting, impounding or otherwise
§ 509-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-2
1:1069
removing any and all kinds of vehicles that are unable to be operated under
their own power.
WAITING TIME — Additional time that a tow operator spends at the scene
other than time required to perform the tow duties. Examples of this may
include but are not limited to emergency medical services being provided
and/or police investigation.
WINCHING — The use of the tow vehicle's tow cable to extricate a vehicle.
Winching is not pulling a vehicle onto a tilt bed or flatbed, nor lifting a motor
vehicle with a conventional tow sling.
§ 518-3. Applications for Police towing permit.
Applications for a Police Towing Permit shall be made to the Chief of Police.
All applications shall be submitted upon the forms prepared by and made
available from the Police Department and shall state under oath:
A. The applicant will be available on a twenty-four hour basis, when
scheduled, to provide towing and emergency road service and
impounding of vehicles.
B. The applicant will provide service according to the police towing
rotation schedule as established and provided be the Chief of Police or
his designee.
C. The applicant will arrange for another tow service approved by the
Township of Vernon to replace them when unable to meet his
commitment for any portion of his on-call status or when they do not
have the proper equipment to fulfill his duties. [Amended 2-22-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-04]
D. The applicant will provide the location and description of the tow trucks
owned by the applicant, including the year, make, model, type, color,
VIN and registration as well as a list of the operators and copies of their
driver's licenses.
E. The applicant has a commercial property within the Township of Vernon
which has been approved and zoned for the storage of motor vehicles
and such property can properly accommodate and protect the vehicles
stored there. Such property must be able to accommodate both indoor
and outdoor storage. [Amended 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
F. The location in which the vehicles are stored when towed under the
provisions of this chapter, and the premises shall meet all applicable
Township Code property maintenance requirements as such currently
exist and/or as may be amended in the future.
G. The applicant will comply with the service rates as established and
provided by this chapter.
§ 518-2 VERNON CODE § 518-3
1:1070
§ 518-4. Insurance coverage and indemnity.
H. The applicant will provide, and update when needed, a telephone
number(s) to be utilized by the Police Department on a twenty-four hour
basis to request towing and/or emergency service.
I. The applicant will sign a statement agreeing to abide by the rules,
regulations and provisions governing the towing services.
J. The applicant must have and properly maintain a minimum of one
wrecker/conventional tow truck and one flatbed tow truck. At a
minimum, the following equipment is required on the responding tow
vehicle: emergency warning lights, broom and shovel, minimum of 50
pounds liquid absorbent, and an ample supply of business cards to
provide the owner/operator of the vehicle to be towed.
K. The applicant agrees to provide any further information which the Chief
of Police shall deem necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
L. The tow vehicles have been properly licensed and equipped in
compliance with Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey's Motor
Vehicle and Traffic Regulations, including the tow truck decal, as well
as the provisions of this chapter. No tow vehicle shall be licensed as a
tow vehicle that is using dealer license plates.
M. The insurance policies and tow vehicle decals as required by Motor
Vehicle Commission have been procured and supplied. The insurance
coverage must meet or exceed the limits described in this chapter.
N. All tow vehicles will have the business name, town and telephone
number permanently affixed on both sides of the vehicle. The letters
and numbers shall be a minimum of two inches in height.
O. The applicant shall comply at all times with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
56:8-1, et seq., the "New Jersey Predatory Towing Prevention Act."
The Chief of Police or designee shall inspect all premises and towing
vehicles prior to the grant of any permit under this chapter.
A. A permittee shall maintain liability insurance which meets or exceeds
the following:
(1) In the case of each light-medium duty tow truck, motor vehicle
liability coverage for the death of, or injury to, persons and damage
to property for each accident or occurrence in the amount of at
least $750,000 single limit; and
(2) In the case of each heavy-duty tow truck, motor vehicle liability
coverage for the death of, or injury to, persons and damage to
property for each accident or occurrence in the amount of at least
$1,000,000 single limit; and
§ 518-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-4
1:1071
§ 518-5. Powers and duties of the Police.
(3) A garage liability policy including business auto covering the
operation of the applicant's business, equipment and vehicles for
any bodily injury or property damage in the minimum amount of
$750,000.
B. A permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township of Vernon,
for liability from any and all obligations, liabilities, judgments, claims,
and demands, for personal injuries, including wrongful death. This will
also include all claims for damages to property which may arise out of
this agreement and the work performed hereunder, provided same
results from the negligent actions or omissions of the applicant. The
applicant further agrees to save and hold harmless the Township of
Vernon and to defend, at its own cost and expense, any such claims or
lawsuits instituted by third parties against the Township, provided same
results from the negligent actions or omissions of the applicant.
C. Vernon Township shall be named as an additional insured under the
liability potion of the policy, and shall provide proof of insurance to the
Chief of Police prior to engaging in any towing activities pursuant to
this chapter.
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules
and regulations for the inspection and operation of tow vehicles as well
as the design, construction, maintenance and conditions for the safe
conduct of a towing service business, in accordance with the standards
outlined in the chapter. The Police Department shall have the right at all
times to inspect all licensed tow vehicles for safety purposes.
B. If, at any time, the Police Department finds the equipment inadequate
or unsafe, the Chief of Police or designee shall have the power to
demand immediate correction. If the problem is not corrected to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police, he shall have the power to revoke or
suspend the permit and schedule a hearing depending upon the nature
and the circumstances of the violation.
C. The Chief of Police shall have the power to revoke or suspend his
approval of a particular towing company for violation of these rules and
regulations, or any conviction of moral turpitude by the towing
operator.
D. The Chief of Police is also hereby authorized and empowered to
establish, from time to time, additional rules and regulations, not
inconsistent herewith, as may be reasonable and necessary in carrying
out the provisions of this chapter.
E. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish a system of rotation
in the assignment of tow vehicles on the towing list.
F. The Chief of Police shall keep a record of the following information for
tow companies approved under this Ordinance: business name,
§ 518-4 VERNON CODE § 518-5
1:1072
§ 518-6. Conduct of owners and operators.
business owner's name, description and registration number of tow
vehicles, date of the last inspection of tow vehicles, all towing company
operators and employees' names and driver license numbers, and proof
of insurance.
G. During exigent circumstances, the Police Department has the authority
to deviate from existing policy. This deviation and reason for same will
be reported to Police Communications and documented. Examples of
this may be, but are not limited to, motor vehicle accident next to local
wrecker facility, excessive traffic congestion, heavy-duty tow,
overwhelming amount of vehicles to be towed all at the same time,
extreme weather occurrences, etc.
H. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to review and recommend to
the Township amendments to the service rates on yearly basis, if
needed.
An appeal of revocation or suspension by the Chief of Police shall be
filed with the Township Council within ten days of the Chief's decision.
A hearing may be held within thirty calendar days of the filing, with
a ruling forthcoming from the Township Committee within twenty
calendar days of the final hearing.
A. No operator shall respond to the scene of a motor vehicle accident
except upon notification by the Vernon Police Department, or upon
request of the driver/owner of a disabled vehicle.
B. No operator of a tow vehicle shall engage in cruising.
C. No operator shall solicit, demand or receive from any person any
commission or fee except the proper fee for transporting the disabled
vehicle in accordance with the regulation.
D. No person shall pay any gratuity, tip or fee to any police department
employee for information as to the location of any accident or for
soliciting the employment of the operator's services.
E. A vehicle impounded by the police shall not be released without prior
permission from the Police Department.
F. It shall be the responsibility of the towing company to obtain proper
proof of ownership and identification prior to the release of any vehicle.
G. After receipt of notification of an incident by the Police Department, it is
the responsibility of the tow operator to be en route to the location
within 10 minutes during the day and 15 minutes at night, unless
unforeseen circumstances arise. The operator must continue to be
accessible via cellular phone in case the operator is needed to be
diverted to a more urgent situation or location. If there is to be any
delay in responding, the tow operator must notify Vernon Police
§ 518-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-6
1:1073
§ 518-7. Rotating call list and schedule. [Amended 2-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-04]
§ 518-8. Service rates.
Dispatch when they receive the initial call. [Amended 2-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-04]
H. All operators shall at all times comply with all provisions of the New
Jersey Predatory Towing Prevention Act, N.J.S.A. 56:8-1, et seq.
I. During daytime hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., the tow operator and
his equipment must be located within a 10 minute drive time to Vernon
Police Headquarters. During other hours the operator and his
equipment must be located within a 30 minute drive time to Vernon
Police headquarters. These times shall be calculated driving at or below
the posted speed limits. [Added 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
J. At no time is any tow operator authorized to exceed any posted speed
limit or violate any other motor vehicle law while responding to or
return from any incident. [Added 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
K. Any tow operator who is assigned a spot in the rotation by the Chief of
Police must agree that while "on-call" for Vernon Township they will not
be "on-call" for any other agency during the same time period. [Added
2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
A. A rotating on call list of no less than two (2) and no more than four (4)
qualified permittees shall be maintained by the Chief of Police, with the
number to be set at the discretion of the Chief of Police. In the event the
on-call tow service is not available, the next tow service in the rotation
on the tow list will be used to assure fairness. Substitute operators are
acceptable, but only tow services on the on call or alternate tow list are
allowed absent exceptional circumstances, to be determined by the
Chief of Police.
B. The Chief of Police may designate up to four (4) alternate tow
operators. Alternate tow operators are not part of the tow rotation but
may be used as needed. Alternate tow operators are not subject the
restrictions set forth in § 518-3F or § 518-6I.
A. Day rate shall be from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday thru
Friday.
B. Night rate shall be from the hours of 6:01 p.m. to 7:59 a.m. Monday
thru Friday and on all weekends and Federally recognized holidays.
C. Labor rate shall be an added charge when additional services are
needed such as: winching, recovery, extensive roadway clean-up of
motor vehicle debris, operator waiting time, tree removal, guide rail
removal, etc. This rate is chargeable in quarter hour increments with a
minimum one half hour allowed.
§ 518-6 VERNON CODE § 518-8
1:1074
§ 518-9. Impounded vehicles.
All vehicles impounded at Vernon Township impound yard shall not be
released until the tow company has been paid in full for their services. If the
vehicle was impounded at the tow company's yard, the owner of the vehicle
must get a release form from the Vernon Township Police Department and
then pay the tow company in full prior to the release of the vehicle.
§ 518-10. Vehicle owners request.
Whenever towing or emergency road service is required, the vehicle's
owner or operator may request a specific towing service provided the
vehicle does not impede the follow of traffic or present a hazard and
provided the requested tow service is available within a reasonable period
of time. Depending on the circumstances, the police officer at the scene will
make the decision whether to utilize the requested tow service or the oncall
tow company.
§ 518-11. Towing services for Township vehicles. [Added 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-29]
The towing permit holder shall provide all towing services free of charge
to all Township of Vernon motor vehicles, ten thousand (10,000) pounds or
less, within a thirty (30) mile radius. The Township will incur half (1/2) of
the initial tow service fee set forth in § 518-8C, for towing of all Township
INITIAL TOW: [Amended 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
Day rate tow - $125
Night rate tow - $150
ADDITIONAL CHARGES: [Amended 2-22-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-04]
Mileage rate (one way) - $4.00 per mile
Labor rate - $80 per hour (when applicable)
Administrative charge - $40
Yard charge - $40
Absorbent charge - $25
Cover vehicle charge - $35
DWI tow - $50 (when applicable)
STORAGE PER DAY:
Motor vehicle outside - $50 [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-29]
Motor vehicle inside - $75 [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-29]
Motorcycle outside - $25
Motorcycle inside - $35
§ 518-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-11
1:1075
vehicles that are outside a thirty (30) mile radius from the Township/
Municipal Building located at 21 Church Street, Vernon and no other
charges or fees.
Chapter 524
USED OIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling — See Ch. 452.
§ 524-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted in order to prevent oil contamination of the soil,
surface water and groundwater, thus protecting the health and welfare of
Vernon Township residents and preserving and enhancing the quality of the
environment.
§ 524-2. Controlling standards.150
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection has promulgated
certain regulations known as the "Used Oil Recycling Regulations," New
Jersey Administrative Code 7:26A-6.1 et seq. through and including 3-11.8,
which establish standards for the collection, storage, recycling, use and
disposal of used oil and shall be controlling unless higher standards are
prescribed herein by the Vernon Township Mayor and Township Council.
§ 524-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OIL RETAILER — Any person who sells to consumers more than 500
gallons of lubricating or other oil annually in containers for use off the
retailer premises.
PERSON — Person, persons, partnerships, firms, corporations or other
entities.
RECYCLE — To prepare used oil for reuse as a petroleum product or
petroleum product substitute by rerefining, reclaiming, reprocessing,
or to use used oil in a manner that substitutes for a petroleum product
made from new oil.
USED OIL — A petroleum-based or synthetic oil which is used in an
internal combustion engine as an engine lubricant, or as a product
used for lubricating transmissions, gears or axles, which, through use,
storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose due
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 518-11 VERNON CODE § 524-3
1:1076
§ 524-4. Acts prohibited.
§ 524-5. Posting requirements.
§ 524-6. Used oil collection sites.
to the presence of chemical or physical impurities or loss of original
properties.
USED OIL COLLECTION AREA — The location on the used oil
collection site (private and/or retail) where the used oil is collected,
stored or transferred from one container to another.
USED OIL COLLECTION SITE (PRIVATE) — Any site which collects
used oil only from their own vehicles into a used oil collection tank.
USED OIL COLLECTION SITE (RETAIL) — Any Motor Vehicle
Commission reinspection station, oil retailer, or retail service station,
which has a used oil collection tank(s) existing on the premises, or any
site which accepts used oil for recycling.
USED OIL COLLECTION TANK — Any tank, drum or other receptacle,
whether above or below ground, into which used oil is drained and
stored.
B. Throughout the text of this chapter, the singular shall constitute the
plural and the plural shall constitute the singular unless a contrary
definition is expressly provided herein.
A. No person shall contaminate the soil, surface water or groundwater of
Vernon Township with used oil.
B. No person shall store or dispose of used oil except at a used oil
collection site. No person shall dispose of more than five gallons of used
oil per day to any one used oil collection site.
C. Any person handling used oil must use containers free from dirt, debris,
antifreeze, water, food products or other substances which would
degrade the quality of the used oil.
D. No person shall discharge water, antifreeze, industrial waste or any
other contaminant into a used oil collection tank.
A. All oil retailers shall post and maintain, at or near the point of sale, a
durable and legible sign, not less than 11 inches by 15 inches in size,
informing the public of the importance of the proper collection and
disposal of used oil, how and where used oil may be properly disposed
of.
B. All operators of used oil collection sites shall post and maintain a
durable and legible sign not less than 11 inches by 15 inches in size,
easily visible to the public, informing the public that it is a collection
site for the disposal of used oil.
§ 524-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-6
1:1077
§ 524-7. Used oil collection area.
§ 524-8. Draining of used oil.
Draining of used oil shall be done in a manner which prevents spillage,
contamination, etc., of surface water, groundwater or soil. This oil must be
collected and transported to a used oil collection site as provided by this
chapter.
§ 524-9. Registration required. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord.
08-21]
A. All used oil collection sites (retail) shall accept up to five gallons of used
oil per day from any person, unless collection tank or tanks are at
capacity. No used oil collection tank or tanks shall remain at capacity
for more than five consecutive calendar days. No used oil collection site
(retail) shall accept more than five gallons of used oil per day from any
person.
B. The operator of a used oil collection site (private and/or retail) shall
collect used oil in a manner which is safe for users of the site.
C. The operator of a used oil collection site (private and/or retail) shall
transfer used oil only to a used oil hauler, a used oil recycler, or the
operator of a used oil storage facility who complies with the
Department of Environmental Protection's special waste manifest
system, N.J.A.C. 7:26A-6.1 et seq.
A. All used oil collection tanks are to be installed and maintained in a
manner which prevents soil and water contamination.
B. A cement slab large enough to prevent spillage from contaminating soil
or water is required in the area where the waste oil tank is filled and
emptied.
C. All spillage must be contained and removed as per the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
A. All existing oil retailers and used oil collection sites (private and/or
retail) must register with the Vernon Township Health Officer by July 1,
1988, using the form provided by the Health Officer.
B. Any new oil retailers or used oil collection sites must register with the
Vernon Township Health Officer within 10 days of commencement of
operations.
C. Any change, addition, repair, or modification to a used oil collection
area must be reported to the Vernon Township Health Officer.
§ 524-6 VERNON CODE § 524-10
1:1078
§ 524-10. Oil spills reported.
All oil spills which contaminate or may contaminate the soil, surface water,
or groundwater must be immediately reported by the person involved in
the spill and/or the owner of the effected property to the Vernon Township
Department of Health and Human Services or the Vernon Township Police
Department.
§ 524-11. Used oil haulers.
§ 524-12. Storage, disposal and transportation of used oil.
No person may store, dispose of, or transport used oil except as provided by
this chapter.
§ 524-13. Fees.
(Reserved)
§ 524-14. Inspections. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
The Health Officer or his representative may inspect an oil retailer or used
oil collection site at any time during regular business hours.
§ 524-15. Violations and penalties.151
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19,
Violations and penalties. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 524-16. Copies of adopted standards on file. [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
Three copies of this adopted chapter have been placed on file in the office
of the Municipal Clerk of Vernon Township and will remain on file in said
office for the use and examination of the public.
A. All used oil haulers shall comply with the Department of Environmental
Protection's special waste manifest system, N.J.A.C. 7:26-7 et seq.
Compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:26-7 et seq. shall include the total amount
collected, and an itemization of the amounts transferred to other used
oil haulers, used oil storage facilities, used oil recyclers, including those
facilities not located in the State of New Jersey.
B. Used oil haulers shall transfer used oil to other used oil haulers, used oil
storage facilities, or used oil recyclers who comply with N.J.A.C. 7:26-7
et seq.
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 524-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-16
1:1079
Chapter 528
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY
§ 528-1. Sewer Utility Authority created; purpose.
§ 528-2. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-10]
Vernon Township Municipal Sewer Utility Authority hereby created is a
utilities authority as contemplated and provided for by said Municipal and
County Utilities Authority law, except as limited by this chapter and shall
have and exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties provided
for by said Municipal and County Utilities Authority law and any other
powers which may hereafter be conferred by law upon municipal utilities
authorities within the territorial boundaries of the Township of Vernon,
County of Sussex, State of New Jersey. The Municipal Utilities Authority
shall operate on a calendar fiscal year.
§ 528-3. Limitation of powers.
A. Pursuant to the Municipal and County Utilities Authority law, N.J.S.A.
40:14B-1, et seq., there is hereby created a public body corporate and
politic as an agency and instrumentality of the Township of Vernon,
County of Sussex, State of New Jersey, under the name and style of the
Vernon Township Municipal Sewer Utility Authority.
B. While the purpose of a municipal utility authority may include other
areas pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-19, the Vernon Township Utility
Authority is established for the sole purpose of having authority and
jurisdiction over the billing, policy, maintenance, and planning for
Township's existing sewer system and future extensions within the
sewer service area as set forth in Sussex County's Wastewater
Management Plan as approved by the N.J.D.E.P.
A. Pursuant to the approvals granted by the Local Finance Board on April
5, 2011, the Vernon Township Municipal Sewer Utility Authority shall:
(1) Not pay or grant benefits for appointed members of the Authority;
(2) Create and maintain a website or a dedicated portion of the
Township's website that will include names and biographies of all
members, contact information, copy of the yearly budgets, and a
copy of the annual audits;
(3) Create and follow an anti-nepotism policy that directs that no
Authority employee can be related to Authority Commissioners or
to Township elected officials.
B. Any modification of the limitations set forth in subsection A must
receive Local Finance Board Approval.
§ 524-16 VERNON CODE § 528-4
1:1080
§ 528-4. Appointment of members.
The Vernon Township Municipal Sewer Utility Authority shall consist of 5
members; there may also be appointed 2 alternates who shall be designated
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2," respectively. Said members and
alternate members shall be appointed by resolution of the Council of the
Township of Vernon in the manner provided by law. The terms of the
members shall be 5 years, except that the members first appointed shall
have terms expiring on the first day of the first, second, third, fourth,
and fifth Februaries next ensuing after the date of their appointment. The
terms of the alternate members shall also be for 5 years, commencing on
February 1 of the year of appointment, but of the first alternate members so
appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of 4 years and one for a term
of 5 years.
Chapter 531
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping and littering — See Ch. 227.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 447.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 99.
§ 531-1. Standing of vehicles on streets.
No person shall leave any vehicle standing on a public highway or street for
the purpose of sale or repair, except in case of emergency.
§ 531-2. Removal of vehicles; cost for impoundment.
A. Whenever any member of the Vernon Police Department finds a vehicle
upon a public highway in the Township of Vernon, and such vehicle is
parked without current registration plates, or identification markers as
provided by the laws of the State of New Jersey; or such vehicle is so
disabled as to constitute an obstruction of traffic and the driver or
owner or person in charge of such vehicle neglects or refuses to move
the same to a place where the vehicle shall not obstruct traffic; or such
member has reasonable grounds to believe that such vehicle has been
abandoned (continuous parking of a vehicle on a public highway for a
period of 48 hours shall be deemed sufficient evidence of
abandonment); such member may remove or cause the removal of such
vehicle to such place as may be designated by the Chief of Police as a
place for the impounding of such vehicles, and such vehicles shall be
there impounded until the person owning said vehicle pays the cost of
such taking and removal together with a charge of $1 for each and
every day the vehicle is impounded. There shall be no charge for
impounding and storing Township vehicles.152
§ 528-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 531-2
1:1081
§ 531-3. Responsibility of registered owner of vehicle.
In any prosecution charging a violation of any regulation governing the
parking of a vehicle under this chapter, proof that the vehicle described in
the complaint was parked in violation of one or more of the provision of this
chapter, together with the proof that the defendant named in the complaint
was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall
create a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner was the person
who so parked such vehicle.
§ 531-4. Definitions.
§ 531-5. Violations and penalties.153
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties.
§ 531-6. Compliance with state laws.
Any provision or any section of this chapter which alters or in any way
nullifies the provisions of the laws of the State of New Jersey upon the same
subject shall be construed so as to comply with the provisions of the state
laws on the subject.
Chapter 542
B. Immediately after a vehicle is so removed, the Chief of Police or such
member acting for him shall notify its registered owner in writing, by
personal service or by registered mail at the last known address of said
owner, of the removal of such vehicle, the reason for same, the location
of the vehicle, and of the provision of Subsection C herein.
C. After the vehicle has been in the possession of the Police Department
for six months and the owner is unknown or cannot be found or fails to
remove such vehicle, the Township may proceed to sell such vehicle in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VEHICLE — Any device by which any person or property may be
transported upon a highway except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.
B. Where a highway is referred to or classified as a "street," it is the
intention to include such highway be the same known by a name other
than a street.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 531-2 VERNON CODE § 531-6
1:1082
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED SPORT BIKES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 518. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 99.
§ 542-1. Statement of policy.
Increased use of motorized sport bikes throughout the Township, without
any regard for the rights of the property owners whose property is used
for the operation of these motorized sport bikes, without the permission
of said landowners, and without regard for the noise emanating from said
motorbikes, and the dirt and dust raised up into the air by the operation
of these motorized sport bikes, has increased to such a degree that these
motorized sport bikes are not only hazardous and detrimental to property
owners and residents but also to those who operate them with no regard for
their own safety or the safety of others.
§ 542-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORIZED SPORT BIKE — Any two-, three- or four-wheeled bicycle that
is motor-propelled or contains a motor to assist the operation of said vehicle
and which vehicles are commonly referred to as dirt bikes, minibikes,
go-carts, all-terrain vehicles (ATV), dune buggies, and trail bikes, which
vehicles by their nature and design are not intended to be used and
operated along paved roads and highways but are intended rather to be
operated in dirt, sand, up and down hills, along trails, and in similar type
areas.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All lands and buildings in the Township of Vernon
not included in the definition of "public property" or part of the public road
system.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Lands and buildings owned or leased by the
Township of Vernon, the Vernon Township Board of Education, the County of
Sussex, or the State of New Jersey or any other equivalent public body. This
definition specifically excludes any public roadways owned or maintained by
any of the aforementioned public entities.
§ 542-3. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful:
A. To operate a motorized sport bike upon public property at any time.
B. To operate a motorized sport bike on private property, other than that
private property owned by the family of the operator, without the
written consent of all of the owners of the private property.
§ 531-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 542-3
1:1083
C. To operate a motorized sport bike during the period of one hour after
sunset until four hours after sunrise.
D. To operate a motorized sport bike, that either cannot be registered with
the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles or is not registered with
the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles, upon any public street,
roadway, highway, or within the boundaries of the public right-of-way
within the Township of Vernon.
E. To operate a motorized sport bike that causes noises that are disturbing
and bothersome to adjoining property owners.
F. To operate a motorized sport bike so as to cause it to propel sand, dirt,
dust, rocks, gravel, or other similar materials into the air so as to be
likely to injure persons and/or damage property.
G. To operate a motorized sport bike on public or private property in such
a way as to harass, worry, or disturb farm animals, domestic livestock,
or wildlife, or further to destroy or damage crops or farm produce.
H. To operate a motorized sport bike without the motorized sport bike
containing a muffler or other similar device to reduce the sound coming
from the engine of the vehicle.
I. To operate a motorized sport bike near any public roadway so that the
operation of said motorized sport bike would cause operators of
automobiles, motorcycles, or trucks to have to take evasive or irregular
action to move away from said motorized sport bike.
J. To operate a motorized sport bike near any public roadway so that the
operation of said motorized sport bike would cause operators of
automobiles, motorcycles, or trucks to have to take evasive or irregular
action to move away from said motorized sport bike.
K. To operate a motorized sport bike without the motorized sport bike
being in proper operating condition, which means that all of the original
operating equipment specified by the original manufacturer must be
present on the bike or replacement equipment equal to the
specifications of the original manufacturer's equipment are present and
in operating condition at least equal to the manufacturer's
requirements for the proper operation thereof.
L. To operate a motorized sport bike on any private street or right-of-way
within the Township of Vernon without the permission of the owner of
the private street or right-of-way. [Amended 8-9-2004 by Ord. No.
04-24; 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-17]
M. To operate a motorized sport bike in a careless, reckless, or negligent
manner which endangers the safety of any person, including the
operator himself, or the property of any person.
N. To operate a motorized sport bike while under the influence of liquor or
drugs in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.
§ 542-3 VERNON CODE § 542-4
1:1084
§ 542-4. Operation of motorized sport bikes.
§ 542-5. Impoundment.
§ 542-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-9-2004 by Ord. No.
04-24; 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-17]
In addition to the impoundment penalties set forth in § 542-5 of this chapter,
for any conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of the terms of § 542-3,
Unlawful acts, and/or § 542-4, Operation of motorized sport bikes, of this
chapter, the offender shall be liable for a penalty of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,250 and may be sentenced to a period of community service
not to exceed 90 days for the first offense. For a second offense which
occurs within one year of a plea of guilty or a conviction for a prior offense,
the offender shall be liable for a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,250, may be sentenced to a period of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days
and shall be sentenced to a period of community service of not less than 10
days nor more than 90 days. For a third offense and for each subsequent
offense which occurs within one year of a plea of guilty or a conviction for a
prior offense, the offender shall be liable for a penalty of not less than $100
nor more than $1,250, shall be sentenced to a period of imprisonment not
A. The operator of a motorized sport bike shall wear a helmet upon his
head and goggles or face shields on his face.
B. No person operating a motorized sport bike or motorcycle shall engage
in fancy or trick riding or ride without maintaining full control of the
motorized sport bike or remove both hands from the handlebar.
C. No person operating a motorized sport bike shall carry any other
person on it except in a place designated for such purpose and
equipped for such purpose as part of the original manufacture for said
purpose.
A. It shall the duty of any police officer to:
(1) Impound any motorized sport bike operated on public or private
property and alleged to be in violation of § 542-3, Unlawful acts.
(2) Impound any motorized sport bike operating on the public
roadways in violation of any state statute or regulation.
B. The period of impoundment for the motorized sport bike shall be from
the date of the alleged violation until the disposition of the alleged
offense by the Vernon Township Municipal Court, or other court of
competent jurisdiction. The owner and operator shall be responsible to
pay the reasonable cost of the removal of the motorized sport bike and
for the storage constituting the impoundment, which costs are to be in
accordance with the Rate Schedule of the Rules and Regulations
Governing Towing Services within the Township of Vernon. The expense
of removal and storage shall be in addition to any other fine or penalty
levied or collected under the terms of this chapter.
§ 542-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 542-6
1:1085
to exceed 90 days and shall be sentenced to a period of community service
of not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days.
Chapter 555
WATER SUPPLY, POTABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public noncommunity and nonpublic water
systems — See Ch. 560.
Water use restrictions — See Ch. 566.
§ 555-1. Continuous water supply.
Any corporation, company, partnership, association, entity, person or
persons, hereinafter known as the "supplier," engaged in the full-time or
seasonal supply of potable water to two or more dwelling units in Vernon
Township via a system of aqueducts, reservoirs, pumps, well(s), storage
tank(s), pipeway(s), control valves and appurtenances, or any combination
thereof (hereinafter known as the "system") shall supply potable water to its
appropriate customers, and/or dwelling units on a continuing regular basis.
§ 555-2. Registration of supplier; emergency telephone number.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
Each supplier shall register with the Vernon Township Health Officer within
90 days of the enactment of this chapter, or within 30 days of transfer and/
or change of the nature of ownership of the system(s) once this chapter is
in effect.
§ 555-3. Quantity of potable water per dwelling unit.
The supplier(s) shall provide and maintain a system(s) capable of providing
at least 600 gallons of potable water per day per dwelling unit serviced by
the system(s), or at least 200 gallons of potable water a day per bedroom
per dwelling unit serviced by the system, whichever is greater.
A. The aforementioned registration shall include the name, address and
telephone number of the supplier, a thorough description of the
system(s), its capacity of storage and delivery, the number of dwelling
units currently serviced by the system and the maximum number of
dwelling units and/or bedrooms allowed to be serviced by the system.
B. The supplier, and/or its agent, shall maintain an emergency service
telephone number on a twenty-four-hour-a-day, seven-day-a-week basis.
Every customer serviced by the system(s), the Vernon Township Health
Officer and the Vernon Township Police Department shall be provided
with that emergency service telephone number by the supplier,
identifying the system(s) to which it applies.
§ 542-6 VERNON CODE § 555-4
1:1086
§ 555-4. Extent of system.
The system shall include the watershed, reservoirs, pumps, wells, tanks,
pipeways, valves, rights-of-way, power and whatever combination of the
above and all other appurtenances that may be required to provide potable
water to the dwelling units up to and including any water meters and/or
shutoff valves controlling the supply to the dwelling unit.
§ 555-5. Capacity of system. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
The supplier shall provide the Vernon Township Health Officer with a
certified statement of system capacity, stamped and signed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey or a photocopy
of a similar document containing the same information on file with the
New Jersey Public Utilities Commission, Department of Environmental
Protection or any other public entity exercising regulatory control over the
system.
§ 555-6. Notifications. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
§ 555-7. Emergency measures.
§ 555-8. Permits. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
A. The supplier shall immediately notify the Vernon Township Health
Officer of any service interruptions of potable water to one or more
dwelling units supplied by the system. In the event the service
interruption occurs on a weekend, holiday or time when the Vernon
Township Health Officer is closed for business, the supplier shall notify
the Vernon Township Police Department.
B. The supplier shall notify the Vernon Township Health Officer of any
proposed disconnections from, or cessation of service to, any dwelling
unit or units connected to the system at least two weeks prior to said
disconnection or cessation.
A. If a system cannot provide the required volume of potable water
specified by this chapter for a continuous period of over 24 hours, the
system shall constitute a failing system. In this event, temporary
measures on the part of the supplier to provide an emergency water
supply to all customers on the systems must be immediately initiated,
implemented and maintained during the period the system is deemed
failing. Such temporary measures must be approved by the Vernon
Township Health Officer, and water provided must be certified potable.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
B. Every effort must be made on the part of the supplier to reinstate a
failing system to its original and/or approved design specifications;
however, such conditions shall not exceed 10 days. Failure to fulfill
emergency measures shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 555-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-8
1:1087
§ 555-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 555-10. Defenses.
§ 555-11. Word usage.
Throughout the text of this chapter, the singular shall constitute the plural
and the plural shall constitute the singular unless a contrary interpretation
is expressly provided therein.
A. The supplier shall obtain a permit from the Vernon Township Health
Officer prior to adding one or more dwelling units to the system. The
nature of the addition to the system shall be kept in a file on the system
at the Vernon Township Health Officer. The permit issued by the Vernon
Township Health Officer shall declare that such an addition is within the
certified capacity of the system and that a sealed affidavit by a
professional engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey shall attest to
same and be kept on file and be made part of the permit.
B. In the event that any permit or certification required by this chapter is
denied by the Vernon Township Health Officer, a hearing shall be held
thereon before the Mayor and Township Council within 30 days after
the request is made by the applicant. Upon such hearing the Mayor and
Township Council shall grant or deny the issuance of the permit and
place the reason for its decision on the public record.154
A. Any supplier violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter
1, Article II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties, per violation.155
B. Violations involving more than one dwelling unit shall constitute
separate offenses.
C. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. The inability of a supplier to restore service to a system due to
circumstances beyond the control of the supplier who is acting in good
faith may constitute a defense for violations of § 555-3 of this chapter.
B. A supplier may be excused from § 555-3 of this chapter during a
drought emergency declared by the Governor of the State of New
Jersey for this region or other regulatory authority empowered to
declare such emergencies.
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 555-8 VERNON CODE § 555-11
1:1088
Chapter 560
WATER SYSTEMS, PUBLIC NONCOMMUNITY AND
NONPUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Potable water supply — See Ch. 555. Water use restrictions — See Ch. 566.
§ 560-1. Adoption of standards.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection has promulgated
certain regulations known as the "Standards for the Construction of Public
Non-Community and Non-Public Water Systems," New Jersey
Administrative Code 7:10-12.1 through 7:10-12.43 which establish
standards for the location, construction, and use of water supplies, other
than public community, and is hereby adopted and shall be controlling
unless higher standards are prescribed herein by the Vernon Township
Mayor and Township Council.
§ 560-2. Permit required; term; renewal; application.
A. No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall locate, construct, or
alter any water supply system until a permit for the location,
construction, or alteration of said water supply system shall have been
issued by the Vernon Township Health Officer. [Amended 11-13-2008
by Ord. No. 08-21]
B. Said permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
approval. In the event that a certificate of compliance is not issued
within that one-year period, the permit must be renewed and shall be
subject to regulations and ordinance requirements in effect at the time
of renewal.
C. Applicants shall submit the following plans, information, and
documentation in connection with applications to locate, construct,
alter, or use a water supply system:
(1) A plot plan for the entire property that is the subject of the
application at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet.
(2) The plot plan shall include the location of all wells, structures,
property lines, roadways, septic systems, watercourses, etc., within
150 feet of the proposed well.
(3) The well shall be located at least 100 feet from the outer perimeter
of any sewage disposal area unless the design engineer states valid
reasons why the well cannot be located at least 100 feet away from
the sewage disposal area including reserve area. This distance may
be reduced to 50 feet under the authority of the Health Officer,
§ 555-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-2
1:1089
provided the reasons for such reduction are deemed valid.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(4) The plot plan shall be prepared and sealed by a New Jersey
licensed professional engineer when proposing location and
construction of a well on a lot where a drilled well has not been
located previously.
(5) The plot plan shall be prepared and sealed by a New Jersey
licensed professional engineer or surveyor when proposing
location and construction of a well on a lot where a drilled well has
been located previously.
(6) Only a well driller or well pump installer may install a well pump,
water service line, pitless adapter, sanitary seal, pressure tank or
other components of the water distribution system connecting a
water well to the plumbing system of a structure or structures.
[Added 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 89-1; amended 3-28-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-2]
(a) A water distribution system as defined by this chapter is for all
public noncommunity and nonpublic water systems and
extends from the well and includes the well pump up to, but not
including, the main water supply valve which is required under
National Standard Plumbing Code/87 Section 10.12.2 and is
regulated by the State of New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code.
(b) A water distribution permit application shall be completed by
the well driller or well pump installer and submitted to the
Health Officer for approval prior to installing any component of
the water distribution system. [Amended 11-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-21]
(c) Lateral discharge line. [Amended 3-28-1989 by Ord. No.
89-3]
[1] The lateral discharge line which extends from the pitless
adapter into the foundation shall be placed on a minimum
of six inches of sand covering the line. The lateral
discharge line shall be composed of those materials
pursuant to Section 3.8.1 of the National Standard
Plumbing Code and the discharge line shall have a
minimum pressure rating of 160 pounds per square inch at
73° F.
[2] The lateral discharge line shall be at least a horizontal
distance of 10 feet from any oil or gas storage tank or any
fitting or piping attached thereto or emanating therefrom.
(d) Inspection of the pitless adapter and lateral discharge line is
required prior to any backfilling of those components.
§ 560-2 VERNON CODE § 560-2
1:1090
[1] The Health Officer must be given 72 hours' notice of a
requested inspection; however, all attempts will be made
to provide an inspection within 24 hours. [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
[2] The sand which is required around the lateral discharge
line shall be under the line and mounded to either side of
the line prior to requesting an inspection so that the top of
the line is still exposed for inspection.
(e) The remaining backfill shall be free of large stones or sharp
objects which might puncture or damage the line.
(7) Geothermal wells. [Added 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
(a) No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall locate,
construct, or alter any monitoring or geothermal well until a
permit for the location, construction, or alteration of said well
shall have been issued by the Vernon Township Health Officer.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(b) Said permit shall be valid for a period of one year from date of
approval. If said well is not drilled within that one-year period,
the permit must be renewed and shall be subject to regulations
and ordinance requirements in affect at the time of renewal.
(c) In the event the use of said well is abandoned for more than
one year or due to improper operation and/or maintenance
may cause pollution of groundwater, the well shall be sealed as
per New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP) regulation and the Vernon Township Health Officer
notified at least 72 hours prior to said well being sealed.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(d) Construction requirements.
[1] A closed loop geothermal well shall be constructed
according to the conditions and requirements as set forth
in the permit issued by the NJDEP for the installation of
said well. These conditions include, but are not limited to,
the minimum diameter of the borehole, the grouting
mixture and placement, the content of the circulating
fluids, the pipe materials and method of joining these
materials. These wells shall be installed a minimum of 50
feet from the outer perimeter of any sewage disposal area.
[2] An open loop geothermal well shall be constructed with a
waterproof casing which is pressure or displacement
grouted into an oversize drill hole having a diameter of not
less than four inches greater than that of the casing to be
installed. The wells shall be located a minimum of 100 feet
from the outer perimeter of any sewage disposal area or
§ 560-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-2
1:1091
§ 560-3. Approval of existing sewage disposal system required prior
to alteration of existing well. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-21]
No permits to repair or alter an existing well less than 100 feet to an
existing system shall be issued to lots with on-site drilled wells until the
existing sewage disposal system is approved by the Vernon Township Health
Officer. Approval shall be based upon the standards as set forth in "Standard
Operating Procedures Environmental Health," Chapter VI, Section C,
Design Requirements — Alterations.
§ 560-4. Sewage disposal permit required for new construction.
No permit shall be issued to any lot, improved or unimproved, not presently
supplied water by an on-site drilled well without a sewage disposal system
permit. The requirements of said sewage disposal permit shall be for new
construction as specified in Chapter 462, Sewage Disposal Systems,
Individual Subsurface.
§ 560-5. Conversion of seasonal residences to year-round
residences. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
Lots with seasonal residences which convert to year-round occupancy will
not be granted a permit unless the existing sewage disposal system is
approved by the Vernon Township Health Officer. Approval shall be based
on the standards set forth in Chapter 462, Sewage Disposal Systems,
Individual Subsurface, and in Chapter VI, Sections A and B of the "Standard
Operating Procedures, Environmental Health." A "seasonal residence" shall
be defined as a dwelling that is supplied by a water system which is in
operation for less than 300 days per year.
§ 560-6. Inspections. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
The Health Officer may require an inspection during the construction or
alternation of the water supply system. Twenty-four hours prior to
commencement of construction, the applicant shall notify the Director of
potable water well unless there is a minimum of 50 feet
of casing and it is installed to a minimum depth of 20 feet
into unweathered rock. If a minimum of 50 feet of casing
is provided and installed as described above, the minimum
distance to a septic system may be reduced to 50 feet and
there is no minimum distance to a potable water well.
(e) A plot plan shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a New
Jersey licensed professional engineer or land surveyor showing
the location of the proposed geothermal well and all wells,
structures, property lines, roadways, septic systems,
watercourses, and wetlands within 150 feet of said proposed
well.
§ 560-2 VERNON CODE § 560-6
1:1092
the Department of Health and Human Services or his designated agent to
schedule inspections as may be required by the said Director.
§ 560-7. Fees. [Amended 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 89-1; 6-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-1156]
The fees for well permits are included in Chapter 250, Fees and Escrows,
Article II.
§ 560-8. Certificate of compliance required prior to operation.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
No water supply system shall be put into operation until all inspections,
as required by the Vernon Township Health Officer, are completed and a
certificate of compliance has been issued.
§ 560-9. Appeals. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
Should a permit for a water supply system be denied by the Health Officer,
the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the Mayor and Township
Council. The applicant shall file a notice of appeal within 10 calendar
days after the permit denial. The original and 10 copies of the notice of
appeal shall be filed with the Health Officer, along with 10 copies of plans,
information, and documentation as set forth in § 560-2 herein. The notice
of appeal shall contain a statement by the applicant setting forth in detail
the reasons why the denial should be invalidated and the permit should be
issued. The burden of proof shall rest with the applicant. The appeal shall
be placed on the agenda of the Mayor and Township Council and a hearing
shall take place thereon not less than seven nor more than 30 days after
filing the notice of appeal. Upon such hearing, the Mayor and Township
Council shall grant or deny the issuance of the permit and shall place the
reasons for said decision on the public record.
§ 560-10. Stop-work order.
The Director of the Vernon Township Department of Health and Human
Services may issue a stop-work order against any person, firm, corporation,
or other entity which, in the discretion of the Director, is violating any
provision of this chapter. The person, firm, corporation, or other entity
against whom the stop-work order was issued may appear at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Township Council to give
testimony under oath as to why a violation did not occur and further give
reason as to why the stop-work order should be withdrawn.
§ 560-11. Violations and penalties.157
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 560-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-11
1:1093
II, § 1-19, Violations and penalties. Each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 560-12. Word usage.
Throughout the text of this chapter, the singular shall constitute the plural
and the plural shall constitute the singular unless a contrary definition is
expressly provided herein.
Chapter 566
WATER USE RESTRICTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Right to farm — See Ch. 240.
§ 566-1. Purpose.
Protracted periods of high temperatures and limited rainfall have in the
past and may in the future result in an excessive demand being placed upon
the underground aquifers which provide the source of domestic potable
water for the citizens of Vernon Township and have in the past and may
in the future lead to a lowering of the water tables of said aquifers so as
to jeopardize well supplies and threaten the shortage and nonavailability
of water to residents within the Township. During such conditions it is in
the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the Township's inhabitants
to take all reasonable precautions and measures to conserve water for
sanitary, domestic and fire-fighting purposes and restrict nonessential uses
of water.
§ 566-2. Authorization to declare emergency.
In case of emergent conditions which threaten the availability and supply
of water, the Mayor and Township Council may, by resolution, declare the
existence of a water emergency. The resolution adopted by the Mayor
and Township Council shall state that an emergency exists requiring the
implementation of measures for the conservation of water for domestic and
sanitary purposes and fire protection in accordance with § 566-3 below.
§ 566-3. Restrictions on water usage upon declaration of
emergency; exemption for agriculture operations. [Amended
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
A. Upon the declaration of emergency, the Mayor shall devise and
prescribe regulations requiring the full or partial curtailment of
nonessential water usage and consumption. Such regulations may
include an absolute prohibition of the use and withdrawal of water, or
§ 560-11 VERNON CODE § 566-3
1:1094
§ 566-4. Restrictions on burning after declaration of emergency.
[Amended 4-27-15 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
Upon the declaration of emergency pursuant to this chapter, the Mayor
shall be empowered to devise and prescribe regulations prohibiting one or
more of the following:
§ 566-5. Effect of regulations.
The proclamation of an emergency shall be conclusive as to the fact of
the existence of an emergency and shall be binding upon all persons upon
its filing in the office of the Township Clerk and publication in accordance
with § 566-6 of this chapter. Any regulations included in the proclamation
and any regulations subsequently promulgated shall have the same force
as specifically set forth in this chapter. Every owner, tenant, occupant and
resident within the Township shall, upon a proclamation of regulations,
become bound by them and shall conform to them in the use of water and
restrictions on burning.
limitations upon the ability to withdraw and use water, for one or more
of the following purposes:
(1) Sprinkling or watering of lawns, vegetation, shrubbery and
plantings.
(2) Washing of automobiles, trucks, or any other type of mobile
equipment.
(3) Washing of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, porches or other
outdoor surfaces.
(4) The filling of swimming and wading pools.
(5) The washing of the outside of dwellings and the outside of office
buildings.
(6) The washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment
and machinery, unless such washing and cleaning are needed to
satisfy health and sanitary codes and regulations.
(7) Any other use of water for any purpose not necessary to health and
safety of the public.
B. Commercial farming and agricultural operations shall be exempt from
the regulations.
A. Open fires.
B. Burning of trash or other materials in open trash barrels.
C. The burning of grass and leaves.
D. The burning of charcoal other than in an Underwriters Laboratories
(UL) approved barbecue grill or device.
§ 566-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 566-6
1:1095
§ 566-6. Notice of declaration.
Immediately following the passage of any emergency declaration, a copy of
the declaration shall be published in all newspapers having a daily Monday
through Friday or Sunday circulation within the Township and such other
publications as may be determined by the Mayor and Township Council.
Said declaration shall also be posted in the Township Municipal Building.
Regulations promulgated to implement the emergency declaration shall be
published and posted in the same manner.
§ 566-7. Termination of emergency.
The declaration of emergency shall continue in full force and effect, except
as amended, until terminated by resolution of termination adopted by the
Mayor and Township Council.
§ 566-8. Use during emergency to be violation; enforcement.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to use water at any
time during the water emergency in a manner prohibited by the declaration
of emergency, and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, issued in
accordance with this chapter. Any police office, together with the Health
Officer, Zoning Official, Construction Official and Fire Inspectors of the
Township of Vernon, shall, in connection with all duties imposed by law,
diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 566-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found guilty of violating any prohibition or limitation of the
use of water and restrictions on burning promulgated pursuant to a
declaration of emergency issued in accordance with this chapter shall
be subject to a maximum fine of:
(1) One hundred dollars for the first offense;
(2) Three hundred dollars for the second offense;
(3) Five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent offense.
B. After the second offense for any violation of this chapter, community
service will be required in addition to the fines set forth above.158
C. No person shall be fined for any violation of any declaration or
implementing regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such a
violation occurs less than 48 hours after adoption of the declaration or
issuance of the regulations.
D. It shall be a complete defense to any charge of violating this chapter if it
can be shown that the defendant could not have reasonably known the
158. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 566-6 VERNON CODE § 566-9
1:1096
Appendix
Chapter A600
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT RULES OF PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and escrows — See Ch. 250. Land development — See Ch. 330.
violation was occurring because it was due to a latent defect in
plumbing or other water conduits.
§ 566-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 566-9
1:1097

ARTICLE I
Officers
§ A600-1. Appointment of officers.
At the organization meeting of the Board to be held annually in January, the
Board shall elect from among its members a Chairman, a Vice Chairman,
a Secretary and shall appoint an Assistant Secretary when necessary. The
Assistant Secretary need not be a member of the Board.
§ A600-2. Order of procedure determined by Chairman.
The Chairman, subject to these rules, shall decide all order of procedure
governing the meetings, unless otherwise directed by a majority of the
Board in session at the time.
§ A600-3. Reports by Chairman.
The Chairman shall report at each meeting on all official transactions that
do not otherwise come to the attention of the Board.
§ A600-4. Duties of Secretary.
A. Subject to these rules and under the direction of the Chairman, the
Secretary shall conduct all official correspondence, compile the
required records, maintain and keep in order the necessary files and
indexes and generally perform the secretarial work of the Board. He
may assign such parts of his duties as he may decide to the Assistant
Secretary, and he or his assistant shall notify the members of the Board
and the officer charged with enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance159 of
all meetings of the Board and shall provide them with a list of the
matters scheduled for a hearing at each meeting.
B. The Secretary or the Assistant Secretary shall attend all meetings of the
Board and shall have the care and custody of all records, documents,
maps, plans and papers of the Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55-38.160
C. When votes are taken he shall call the roll in the order of the
arrangement of the seats of the members, left to right, and the
Chairman shall be called last.
D. He shall make record of and keep on file the minutes of the proceedings
at each meeting of the Board and shall enter therein with the other
proceedings such resolutions and orders as are adopted and a copy of
synopsis of every report, petition and other papers presented.
E. He shall cause to be mailed to each member of the Board at his
residence address and to the Secretary of the Planning Board within
159. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
160. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
§ A600-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-4
1:1099
five days preceding each meeting, a true copy of his minutes of previous
meeting.
F. He shall issue notices of meetings to the members of the Board and the
officer charged with enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance161 with the
agenda for the next meeting and shall perform such other duties as
usually pertain to his office.
G. He shall mail a notice of decision to the applicant in each case and also
publish such notice of decision in the official newspaper of the
Township pursuant to the rules governing civil practice in the Superior
Court (Rule 4:88-14). The notice shall state the name of the applicant,
the location of the property and in brief the nature of the application
and the effect of the determination or resolution, and shall advise that
the determination of resolution has been filed in the office of the Board
Secretary.
161. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
§ A600-4 VERNON CODE § A600-4
1:1100
ARTICLE II
Meetings
§ A600-5. Location and time. [Amended 7-7-1975 by Ord. No. 75-14]
The meetings of the Board shall be held at the Municipal Building, Vernon,
New Jersey, at 8:00 p.m. on such days of each month and such other dates
as the Board may set from time to time.
§ A600-6. Call of meetings.
Meetings may be called by the Chairman, or in his absence by the Vice
Chairman, at any time or upon the written request of two members,
provided notice thereof is mailed or given to each member of the Board at
least three days prior thereto.
§ A600-7. General rules.
§ A600-8. Order of business.
The roll of business shall be:
A. All meetings shall be open to the public.
B. A quorum for the conducting of business shall consist of at least three
members. The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order or determination of an administrative
officer or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is
required to pass.
A. Roll call.
B. Application for adjournment of scheduled cases.
C. Calendar of new business.
D. Communications.
E. Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
F. Calendar of unfinished business.
G. Report of findings.
H. Adjournment.
§ A600-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-8
1:1101

ARTICLE III
Appeals
§ A600-9. Requirements for Board to hear appeals.
No appeal, whether for a variation or modification of the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance162 of the Township of Vernon, or otherwise, shall be heard
by this Board, except in a specific case and from an order, requirement,
decision or determination made by an administrative officer or body on the
ground that the proposed plan or use is contrary to the said ordinance.
§ A600-10. Filing and fee.
No such appeal shall be entertained unless filed with the Secretary of the
Board together with the fee 10 days prior to the hearing date.
§ A600-11. Conformance required.
Every appeal shall be made on the forms provided for by this Board and
shall be accompanied by all the data required by such forms, together with
the fee of $25 and shall only be considered filed when the same conforms
with the rules of the Board.
§ A600-12. Filing of notices.
At the time of filing an appeal, the appellant shall forward all copies of the
required notice of appeal with the Secretary of the Board.
§ A600-13. Procedure; public hearing; service of notice.
A. As soon as any such appeal is completed by the filing of the notice of
appeal and other data required by the rules of this Board, the case shall
receive a number and shall be placed on the calendar. The appellant
shall be notified of the time set for the public hearing when the appeal
is filed. The above notice to the appellant shall also be accompanied by
an official copy of a form of notice which the appellant is required to
sent to each of the property owners entitled to notice of the appeal.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal, giving due notice thereof to the appellant. Said appellant
shall, at least 10 days prior to the time appointed for said hearing, give
personal notice to all owners of property situated within or without the
municipality as shown by the most recent tax lists of the municipality or
municipalities, whose property or properties as shown by said lists are
located within 200 feet of the property to be affected by said appeal.
Such notice shall be given by sending written notice thereof by
registered or certified mail to the last known address of the property
owner or owners as shown by the most recent tax lists of said
162. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
§ A600-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-13
1:1103
§ A600-14. Advisory capacity of Board.
The Board shall not under any circumstances assume to act in an advisory
capacity to any individual, corporation or organization; but nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to limit the power of the Board to act in an
advisory capacity to the Mayor and Township Council under the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55(d)164 or Section 1713(d) of the ordinance.165 Regardless of
any assistance which might be rendered to the applicant by the Township
of Vernon, or any of its employees, the responsibility for full and complete
compliance with the statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations aforesaid
shall be upon the applicant.
municipality or by handing a copy thereof to the said property owners
or by leaving a copy thereof at their usual place of abode.
C. Where the owner is a partnership, service upon any partner as above
provided shall be sufficient, and where the owners are corporations,
service upon any officer, as set forth, shall be sufficient. The appellant
shall by affidavit present satisfactory proof to the said Board of
Adjustment at the time of the hearing that said notices have been duly
served as aforesaid. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person
or by agent or by attorney.
D. The appellant shall also publish a notice of the public hearing at least
10 days in advance of said hearing as required by the Zoning
Ordinance.163 The Board may require notices of the appeal to be sent to
the owners of such additional property as it may deem to be affected
and shall require publication in the official newspaper of the Township.
E. At the hearing, the appellant and all persons in favor of the appeal shall
be heard, then the opposition shall be heard and the appellant shall
have an opportunity to reply.
163. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
164. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
165. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
§ A600-13 VERNON CODE § A600-14
1:1104
ARTICLE IV
Communications
§ A600-15. Proper filing and forms.
Any communications purporting to be an appeal or petition asking for a
modification or change in the Zoning Ordinance166 shall be regarded as
a mere notice of intention to seek such relief until it is filed in the form
required by these rules, and the sender thereof shall be given the proper
official forms for presenting his appeal, but until the same is properly
executed and filed, the matter shall not be considered as officially before
the Board.
166. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 330, Land Development.
§ A600-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-15
1:1105

ARTICLE V
Final Disposition of Cases
§ A600-16. Adopting resolution.
Every decision of the Board on any case may be embodied in a resolution
adopted by the concurring vote of at least three members.
§ A600-17. Withdrawal of appeal.
Any appellant may withdraw his appeal at any time prior to action thereon
but the filing fee shall not be returnable.
§ A600-18. Review of decisions.
The Board may, within 45 days after notice of its decision has been
published as provided in Article I, § A600-4G, review any decision it has
heretofore made, provided motion for review is made by a member who
voted with the majority when such decision was made and such motion
is duly adopted, but only after due notices of such intended action shall
have been served on all interested parties, and provided further that no
such review shall prejudice the rights of any person or corporation who
shall have acted in good faith upon the decision sought to be reversed
or modified. In the case of every review of a decision unfavorable to an
appellant, the appellant shall give notice thereof to each of the owners
of every lot or plot of ground any part of which is within 200 feet of the
premises in respect to which the appeal was made, provided the Board may
require that notice of the review be sent to the owners of such additional
property as it may deem to be affected and shall require publication in the
official newspaper of the Township.
§ A600-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-18
1:1107

ARTICLE VI
Records
§ A600-19. Manner of filing records.
All appeals shall be filed in their numerical order with the Secretary of the
Board in such manner that they shall be accessible as public records.
§ A600-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-19
1:1109

ARTICLE VII
Inspections
§ A600-20. Inspection of premises.
In any case in which the Board may deem it necessary, an inspection of the
premises in question may be ordered by the Board. Such inspection shall be
made by members designated by the Chairman, and they shall report their
findings to the Board and to all interested parties. Where persons other than
the appellant are interested in the appeal, the Chairman shall announce
at the public hearing the designation of such members, the purpose of
such designation and specify the date of the public hearing at which the
report shall be made. Whenever an appeal shall be taken to the Board of
Adjustment, the Board shall render its decision upon such appeal within 60
days from the date of the hearing on such appeal, and in any event within
90 days from the date of the filing of the appeal, and upon failure so to do
such appeal at the expiration of such time shall be deemed to be decided
adversely to the appellant in the same manner as though this Board had
rendered a decision to that effect.
§ A600-21. Expiration of exceptions or variances.
Any exception or variance from this chapter granted by the Board to the
appellant shall expire within one year from the date of granting such
variance or exception, unless such permitted use has been established.167
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 330, Land Development.
§ A600-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-21
1:1111

ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ A600-22. Procedure for amending rules.
Amendments to these rules or procedure may be made by the Board at
regular meeting, provided notice of such amendments has been given in
writing to each absent member of the Board three days prior to such
meeting. The suspension of any rule may be ordered at any meeting by
unanimous vote.
§ A600-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-22
1:1113
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Township of
Vernon adopted since the publication of the Code indicating its inclusion in
the Code or the reason for its exclusion. Enabling legislation which is not
general and permanent in nature is considered to be Special ordinances and
is not codified. Special ordinances are designated by "S." The last legislation
reviewed for the original publication of the Code was Ordinance No. 05-25,
adopted 9-26-2005.
Supplement No. 1 for Volume I includes Ordinance Nos. 05-29, 06-01, and
06-04.
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
05-29 1-9-06 Amends Administration — Department
of Recreation & Leisure Services,
Department of Public Works —
Chapter 5
05-30 1-9-06 Amends Land Development —
Schedule B — maximum building
height in TC Zone — Chapter 330
05-31 1-9-06 Bond ordinance - S
06-01 1-23-06 Escrow deposits for review of
applications — Chapter 250
06-02 1-23-06 Lease Agreement - S
06-03 1-23-06 Amends Land Development —
Schedule B — max building height in
TC zone — Chapter 330
06-04 2-16-06 Amends general penalty to $2,000 —
Chapter 1
06-05 2-16-06 Street dedication - S
06-06 2-27-06 Bond ordinance - S
06-07 2-27-06 Adopting ordinance — Chapter 5
06-08 3-27-06 Amends Storm water control —
Chapter 330
06-09 Not adopted
06-10 4-10-06 Special assessment of properties - S
§ A600-22 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1114
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
06-11 10-2-06 Amends Land Development -
environmentally sensitive areas —
Chapter 330
06-12 5-22-06 Amends Land Development -
construction of two-family dwellings in
the R-4 Zone District — Chapter 330
06-13 6-12-06 Amends construction of two-family
dwellings on farm assessed properties
— Chapter 330
06-14 6-12-06 Amends minor site plan checklists —
Chapter 330
06-15 Not adopted
06-16 6-12-06 Amends filed community plans for
private lake communities — Chapter
330
06-17 6-12-06 Budget appropriation limits and to
establish a CAP Bank - S
06-18 Number Not Used
06-19 6-26-06 Bond ordinance - S
06-20 Number Not Used
06-21 7-10-06 Amends Zoning Map and regulations
for the MR Zone — Chapter 330
06-22 10-2-06 Grants municipal historic designation
— Chapter 330
06-23 7-24-06 Amends animals — impoundment —
Chapter 148
06-24 Number Not Used
06-25 Not Adopted
06-26 Number Not Used
06-27 8-28-06 Amends reference to the MRPCD Zone
— Chapter 250
06-28 8-28-06 Acquisition of real property - S
06-29 8-28-06 Authorizing the collection of an open
space tax (failed to obtain voter
approval) — Chapter 244
06-30 9-18-06 Lease - Women's Club - S
06-31 Number Not Used
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1115
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
06-32 9-18-06 Establishes requirements for a
Mountain Resort in the MR Zone
District — Chapter 330
06-33 10-2-06 Amends § 250-16(A) fees — Chapter
250
06-34 10-23-06 Amends building subcode fees —
Chapter 250
06-35 10-23-06 Establishes redevelopment plan for
the Mountain Creek Redevelopment
Area — Chapter 330
06-36 10-2-06 Amends Ordinance #00-35 — Salary
ranges - S
06-37 10-23-06 Amends license fees — Chapter 250
06-38 11-13-06 Amends Powers, Functions and Duties
of the Township Clerk — Chapter 5
06-39 Number Not Used
06-40 Not adopted
06-41 Not adopted
06-42 Number Not Used
06-43 Not Adopted
07-01 2-15-07 Grants municipal historic designation
to certain property — Chapter 330
07-02 Number Not Used
07-03 1-22-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement - S
07-04 1-22-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement on Block 141 Lot 15.04 - S
07-05 1-22-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement on Block 148 Lot 8 - S
07-06 2-15-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement on Block 141 Lot 13 - S
07-07 2-15-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement on Block 141 Lot 12.02 - S
07-08 2-15-07 Lease agreement with Catholic Family
and Community Services -S
07-09 2-15-07 Amends Schedule III—No Stopping or
Standing on
§ DL-1 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1116
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
Route 94
—
Chapter
99
07-10 3-12-07 Amends § 142-11 — alcoholic
beverages — Chapter 142
07-11 3-12-07 Amends § 250-17 — fees — raffles and
bingo — Chapter 250
07-12 3-12-07 Amends § 250-9 — fees — recreation
— Chapter 250
07-13 3-12-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement on Block 145 Lot 1.02 - S
07-14 3-12-07 Acquisition of real property location at
part of Block 142 Lot 9 -S
07-15 3-26-07 Amends 250-14 — fees for marriage
certificates and civil unions — Chapter
250
07-16 4-23-07 Amends Chapter 130 — abandoned
property, unfit buildings — Chapter
130
07-17 4-23-07 Amends fees for the reimbursement of
expenses for marriages and civil
unions — Chapter 250
07-18 7-9-07 Authorizing the collection of an open
space tax (Failed to obtain voter
approval) — Chapter 244
07-19 6-11-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement on Block 141.04 Lot 3 - S
07-20 5-14-07 Authorizing the transfer of a right-ofway,
temporary construction easement
and quit claim deed - S
07-21 6-25-07 Authorizing to sign a lease agreement
with the Historical Society - S
07-22 6-11-07 Authorizing transfer of a right-of-way
for road purposes and drainage
easement - S
07-23 6-11-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement on Block 148 Lots 3 and 4 -
S
07-24 Bond Ordinance - S
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1117
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
07-25 6-11-07 Budget appropriation limits and to
establish a CAP Bank - S
07-26 6-11-07 Acquisition of easement - Block 141
Lot 10.01 - S
07-27 6-25-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement on Block 145 Lot 1.05 - S
07-28 6-25-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement on Block 141.04 Lot 2 - S
07-29 6-25-07 Acquisition of a real property
easement Block 184 Lot 13 - S
07-30 Not adopted
07-31 7-9-07 Acquisition of property at Block 184
Lots 1.03 and 1.04 - S
07-32 7-23-07 Acquisition of property easement on
Block 141 Lot 16.02 - S
07-33 8-13-07 Acquisition of property easement on
Block 148 Lot 14 - S
07-34 8-13-07 Lease agreement with the Vernon
Township P.A.L. - S
07-35 8-13-07 Acquisition of easement on Block 141
Lot 10.01 - S
07-36 8-13-07 Bond Ordinance - S
07-37 9-10-07 Determine the range of compensation
for Officers and Employees - S
07-38 8-27-07 Amending peddling and soliciting,
Chapter 428 §§ 428-10, 428-15, 428-16
and 428-18 - 428
07-39 8-27-07 Authorizing the transfer of Block 232
Lot 12.02 - S
07-40 10-11-07 Amending Chapter 330 adding Article
XX—Tree Preservation — Chapter 330
07-41 Not adopted
07-42 10-11-07 Grants municipal historic designation
to certain property — Chapter 330
07-43 10-11-07 Establishing a redevelopment plan —
Chapter 330
07-44 11-15-07 Amends Fees and Escrows — copies —
Chapter 250
§ DL-1 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1118
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
07-45 12-10-07 Amends Traffic — Main Street Speed
Limit — Chapter 99
07-46 12-10-07 Amending Chapter 99, 99-33 Schedule
IX Stop Intersections — Chapter 99
07-47 Number Not Used
07-48 Number Not Used
07-49 Number Not Used
07-50 12-10-07 Authorizing an Emergency
Appropriation N.J.S.A. 40A:4-53 - S
07-51 12-10-07 Easement for power lines to Jersey
Central Power and Light Company - S
08-01 1-24-08 Authorizes position of the Township
Assistant Manager — Chapter 5
08-02 5-8-08 Amending the Land Development Code
— Town Center and subdistricts —
Chapter 330
08-03 5-8-08 Establishes a redevelopment plan for
the Mcafee Village redevelopment
area — Chapter 330
08-04 5-8-08 Establishing a redevelopment plan for
the Mcafee Village redevelopment
area — Chapter 330
08-05 4-10-08 Amends a Bond ordinance - S
08-06 4-10-08 Budget appropriation limits and to
establish a CAP bank - S
08-07 4-10-08 Prohibiting sex offenders from
residing and/or loitering near certain
facilities — Chapter 465
08-08 4-24-08 Acquisition of real property location at
Block 184.02 Lot 7 - S
08-09 Number Not Used
08-10 6-12-08 Providing for various improvements by
the Township - S
08-11 Not adopted
08-12 6-26-08 Bond ordinance - S (Repealed by Ord.
No. 08-17)
08-13 6-26-08 Lease agreement with Catholic Family
and Community Services - S
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1119
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
08-14 7-24-08 Determining positions eligible for the
defined contribution retirement
program — Chapter 5
08-15 (Towing service operators) Not
adopted
08-16 9-11-08 Traffic signal at intersections Route
515 and Main Street — Chapter 99
08-17 9-11-08 Various improvements by the
Township - S
08-18 Not Adopted
08-19 9-11-08 Creates the Municipal Land Use Board
— Chapter 330
08-20 11-13-08 Regulates towing service operators for
the Police Department — Chapter 518
08-21 11-13-08 Amends Administration — Repeals
Department of Health and Human
Services; create Bureau of Animal
Control — Chapters 5 and 148
08-22 12-1-08 Amends Bond Ordinance 07-36 - S
08-23 12-1-08 Amends Fees and Escrow — Animals
— Chapter 250
08-24 12-1-08 Amending Food Establishments, Retail
License Required — Chapter 281
09-01 Failed 3
09-02 2-26-09 Repeals Public Access to
Records—Chapter 110
3
09-03 2-26-09 Term of Land Use Board; alternate
members of Land Use Board—Chapter
330
3
09-04 2-26-09 Adopts Zoning Map—Chapter 330 3
09-05 2-26-09 Health and Human Services
Fees—Chapter 250
3
09-06 2-26-09 Repeals Sex Offender Residency
Restrictions—Chapter 465
3
09-07 4-23-09 McAfee Village Redevelopment
Area—Chapter 330 Appendix
3
09-08 4-13-09 Release of executive session minutes
of Council—Chapter 5
3
09-09 4-13-09 Construction Code Fees—Chapter 250 3
§ DL-1 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1120
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
09-10 Not adopted 3
09-11 4-13-09 Bulky waste cleanup fee—Chapter 250 3
09-12 4-13-09 Repeals alcoholic beverages in
Township parks—Chapter 413
3
09-13 6-25-09 Lease agreement with Sussex County
for Senior Citizen Nutrition Site—S
3
09-14 9-10-09 Grant of historic designation—Board
of Education property Block 144.01
Lot 7—Chapter 330
3
09-15 9-10-09 Appropriation—S 3
09-16 9-10-09 Appropriation—S 3
09-17 10-8-09 Lease agreement with Board of
Education—S
3
09-18 10-8-09 Salary Ordinance—S 3
09-19 10-8-09 Health benefits upon retirement for
full-time employees not subject to a
collective bargaining agreement—S
3
09-20 11-12-09 Capital Ordinance—S 3
09-21 Removed 3
09-22 11-12-09 Regulations for mailboxes and
basketball equipment on Townshipowned
rights-of-way—Chapter 454
3
09-23 Tabled—No action taken 3
09-24 11-12-09 Temporary signage in commercial
zones—December 1, 2009—January
19, 2010—Chapter 330
3
09-25 12-10-09 Authorization of use of third parties
for electronic payroll
disbursement—Superseded by
Ordinance No. 10-03
3
09-26 12-10-09 Waiver of Township fees for local
volunteer ambulance squads and local
fire departments—Chapter 250
3
09-27 Tabled—No action taken 3
09-28 Failed 3
10-01 Failed 3
10-02 3-11-10 Salary Ordinance—S 3
10-03 3-25-10 Adds Payroll—Chapter 81 3
10-04 5-13-10 Public health nuisances—
Chapter 374 4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1121
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
10-05 5-13-10 Sale of property—S 4
10-06 6-24-10 Historic designation to High Breeze
Farm—S
4
10-07 6-10-10 Land Use Board-alternate
members—Chapter 330
4
10-08 6-24-10 Defined Contribution Retirement
System—Chapter 46
4
10-09 6-24-10 Minutes from Council
meetings—Chapter 5 superseded by
Ord. 11-21
4
10-10 6-24-10 Bond Ordinance—S 4
10-11 8-26-10 Grant of franchise expansion—S 4
10-12 7-22-10 Salary Ordinance—S 4
10-13 7-22-10 Alcoholic beverage license
fees—Chapter 250
4
10-14 Not used 4
10-15 8-26-10 Bicycles, scooters, skateboards and
roller skate—Chapter 160
4
10-16 Tabled—per Clerk 6-28-11 4
10-17 Tabled—per Clerk 6-28-11 4
10-18 Withdrawn 4
10-19 10-14-10 Grant of franchise—S 4
10-20 11-29-10 Referendum question for Charter
amendment—direct election of Mayor
by voters—Chapter 5
4
10-21 Not adopted 4
10-22 11-29-10 Grant of franchise—S 4
10-23 Failed 4
10-24 12-16-10 Fire insurance claims—Chapter 258 4
10-25 12-16-10 Donation clothing bins—Chapter 190 4
10-26 12-16-10 Fees-copies of records—Chapter 250 4
10-27 Not adopted 4
10-28 Not adopted 4
10-29 Not adopted 4
11-01 2-28-11 Alcoholic beverage
control—violations—Chapter 142
4
11-02 3-14-11 Sale of property—S 4
§ DL-1 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1122
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
11-03 3-14-11 Campsites—Chapter 179 4
11-04 3-14-11 Construction appeals—Chapter 205 4
11-05 3-14-11 Contract with United Water Mid-
Atlantic Utilities Corporation—S
4
11-06 3-14-11 Alcoholic beverage control—Chapter
142
4
11-07 3-28-11 Bond Ordinance—S 4
11-08 3-28-11 Bond Ordinance—S 4
11-09 Not adopted 4
11-10 4-28-11 Sale of property—S 4
11-11 Failed-Reintroduced as Ordinance No.
11-12
4
11-12 5-23-11 Delete Municipal Sewer Department-
Add Municipal Utilities
Authority—Chapter 5, Chapter 528
4
11-13 5-12-11 Bond Ordinance—S 4
11-14 6-9-11 Solar energy facility—Chapter 330 4
11-15 6-9-11 Repeal Stream Buffer Conservation
Overlay Zone—Chapter 330
4
11-16 8-8-11 Amends 179-7, Individual Sewer
Connection from camping
vehicles—Chapter 179
4
11-17 8-8-11 Salary ranges—S 4
11-18 8-8-11 Create position: Purchasing
Agent—Administration
4
11-19 8-8-11 Changes election from regular to
general; Extends term of Mayor and
Council to December 31 for
changeover period to general elections
in the year 2011—Chapter
5—Administration
4
11-20 9-12-11 New Flood Hazard
regulations—Chapter 275 Flood
Damage Prevention
4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1123
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
11-21 9-26-11 Supplementing Chapter 1 "General
Provisions"; Replacing Chapter 5
"Administration of Township
Government"; Changing the Municipal
Election from May to November of
each year; Supplementing Chapter
500 regarding Roads; Replacing
Chapter 413 regarding Parks and
Recreation; Supplementing Chapter
89 regarding Retirement Benefits;
Deleting Chapter 244, Farmland and
Open Space Preservation; Amending
Chapter 330 Chapter 1, 5, 89, 244,
330, 413 and 500
4
(Includes Ordinance No. 12-03
adopted March 12, 2012)
11-22 11-14-11 Bond—Sanitary Sewer, Special 5
11-23 11-14-11 Bond—Sanitary Sewer, Special 5
11-24 11-14-11 Temporary Commercial Signage, 330 5
11-25 Defeated 5
11-26 12-12-11 Municipal Historic Designations, 330 5
11-27 1-23-12 Permission to Maintain Solar Energy
Equipment and Facilities, Special
5
12-01 1-23-12 Salary Range, Special, Suspended
based on referendum, failed on ballot
5
12-02 3-12-12 Sale of Property, Special 5
12-03 3-12-12 Amends Administration—Fire Marshal
(codified with Supp. 4 at request of
Clerk), 5
5
12-04 4-9-12 Storage of Recreational Vehicles in
Residential Districts, 330
5
12-05 5-14-12 Signs, 330 5
12-06 4-9-12 Fire Prevention, 263 5
12-07 4-23-12 CAP Bank, Special 5
12-08 5-14-12 Appropriation—Improvements, Special 5
12-09 5-14-12 Sale of Property, Special 5
12-10 6-25-12 Municipal Sewer Utility Authority, 528 5
12-11 7-9-12 Modification of Lease, Special 5
12-12 6-30-12 Create Vernon Township Affordable
Housing Irrevocable Trust, 133
5
§ DL-1 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1124
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
12-13 8-13-12 Vacation of Street, Special 5
12-14 8-27-12 Alcoholic Beverage License Fees, 250 5
12-15 8-27-12 Appropriation—Improvements, Special 5
12-16 9-10-12 Sale of Property, Special 5
12-17 12-10-12 Municipal Historic Designation, 330 5
12-18 1-7-13 Acquisition of Property, Special 5
13-01 2-25-13 Appropriation—Improvements, Special 5
13-02 2-25-13 Appropriation—Purchase of mower,
Special
5
13-03 4-8-13 CAP Bank, Special 5
13-04 3-25-13 Town Center District and Design
Guidelines for Town Center District
and C-2 Commercial District, 330
5
13-05 5-13-13 Municipal Historic Designation, 330 5
13-06 Not introduced 5
13-07 5-13-13 Public auction—land, Special 5
13-08 5-13-13 Public auction—land, Special 5
13-09 5-30-13 CAP, Special 6
13-10 6-24-13 Highlands Preservation Area
application requirements, 330
6
13-11 6-24-13 Definition—major development;
performance and maintenance
guarantees, 330
6
13-12 6-24-13 Solar: zoning and standards, 330 6
13-13 6-10-13 Sale of property, Special 6
13-14 Not
Adopted
6
13-15 9-9-13 Appropriation, Special 6
13-16 9-9-13 Approval for Cross River Fiber, Inc. to
co-locate telecommunications
equipment and facilities, Special
6
13-17 10-17-13 Appropriation, Special 6
13-18 12-9-13 Fee—Township shredding of
residential documents, 250
6
13-19 12-9-13 Cable television and communications
agreement, 170
6
14-01 1-27-14 Repealed by Ord. No. 14-06 6
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1125
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
14-02 2-24-14 Appropriation, Special 6
2014-03 4-14-14 CAP, Special 7
2014-04 4-28-14 Salary, Special 7
2014-05 4-28-14 Appropriation, Special 7
2014-06 4-14-14 Repeals Ord. No. 14-01 7
2014-07 6-9-14 Appropriation, Special 7
2014-08 5-29-14 Amends Ch. 94, Police Department;
94-1, 94-2, 94-10, 94-13, 94-16,
amends from Manager to Mayor
7
2014-09 7-14-14 Amends Ch. 330, Land Development;
Repeals Ord. 13-10, Art. XIX,
Highlands, and replaces with new Art.
XIX, Highlands Preservation Area
7
2014-10 7-14-14 Amends Ch. 330, Land Development;
Amends Zoning Map, 330-158 to
include Highlands Preservation
Overlay Zones and Highlands
Preservation Area Map Inserts
7
2014-11 6-23-14 Appropriation, Special 7
2014-12 6-23-14 Bond, Special 7
2014-13 7-14-14 Bond, Special 7
2014-14 7-28-14 Amends Ord. No. 2014-05 7
2014-15 8-11-14 Property acquisition, Special 7
2014-16 9-22-14 Amends Ch. 330, Land Development;
Adds 330-275, Redevelopment plan
tax exemptions and abatements
7
2014-17 Defeated 7
2014-18 10-16-14 Amends Ch. 330, Land Development;
330-158, Zoning Map
7
2014-19 12-22-14 Amends Ord. No. 14-09, Ch. 330, Land
Development, corrections and
amendments to Article XIX, Highlands
Preservation Area
7
2014-20 12-9-14 Acquisition of equipment, Special 7
2014-21 12-22-14 Amend Ch. 250, Fees and Escrows;
250-15, Dog license fees
7
2015-01 3-23-15 Amends Ch. 330, Land Development;
330-158, Zoning Map
7
§ DL-1 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1126
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2015-02 2-23-15 Establishes November general
elections, Amends Ch. 5,
Administration; 5-3G and 5-4C
7
2015-03 3-9-15 Sale of property, Special 7
2015-04 3-23-14 COLA, Special 7
2015-05 4-13-15 Agreement for use of streets, Special 7
2015-06 4-13-15 Amends Ch. 52, Fire Department;
Adds 52-7, Clothing allowance
7
2015-07 Rejected 7
2015-08 4-27-15 Amends Volume I and II to reflect
change in form of government and
remove certain references to the
"Township Manager"
7
2015-09 4-27-15 Amends Ch. 99, Traffic; 99-5,
Violations; Ch. 250-10, Traffic
Offenses; and Penalties for 137
(alarms), 148 (animals), 269-9. Fire
Zones and 269-10, Penalties
7
2015-10 4-27-15 Deletes Ch. 59, Advisory Board of
Health
7
2015-11 5-11-15 Lease agreement 7
2015-12 5-11-15 Amends Ch. 447, Property
Maintenance; Adds 447-7, Registration
of creditors in foreclosure
7
2015-13 5-11-15 Appropriation, Special 7
2015-14 6-22-15 Acquisition of easement, Special 8
2015-15 5-28-15 Sale of property, Special 8
2015-16 5-28-15 Bond, Special 8
2015-17 5-28-15 Appropriation, Special 8
2015-18 5-28-15 Appropriation, Special 8
2015-19 Suspended based on referendum,
failed on ballot
8
2015-20 6-22-15 Salary range, Special 8
2015-21 6-22-15 Amends Ch. 142, Alcoholic Beverages,
142-1, number of plenary retail
consumption licenses
8
2015-22 Not adopted 8
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1127
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2015-23 8-10-15 Amends Ch. 142, Alcoholic Beverages,
Art. 4, Underage possession and
consumption on private property,
142-21—142-23
8
2015-24 10-15-15 Municipal consent to United Water
New Jersey, Inc. to provide water
service to Block 263, Lots 1, 1.02,
1.03, 1.04
8
2015-25 12-14-15 Special assessment, Special 8
2016-01 1-25-16 Amends Ch. 5, Administration of
Government; 5-9, employment
restrictions for former elected officials
8
2016-02 2-22-16 CAP Bank, Special 8
2016-03 2-22-16 Salary, Special 8
2016-04 2-22-16 Amends Ch. 518, Towing; 518-3,
applications for permit; 518-6, conduct
of owners and operators; 518-7,
rotating call list; 518-8, rates
8
2016-05 3-28-16 Amends Ch. 250, Fees and Escrows;
250-13, Department of Public Worksfreon
disposal
8
2016-06 4-11-16 Transfer of property, Special 8
2016-07 5-9-16 Amends Ch. 330, Land Development;
amends Article XXVI, Tax Exemptions
for Redevelopment Areas
8
2016-08 5-9-16 Sale of property, Special 8
2016-09 5-23-16 Acceptance of deed, Special 8
2016-10 5-23-16 Capital, Special 8
2016-11 See Supplement No. 9 (9/16) 8
2016-12 5-23-16 Amends Ch. 250, Fees and Escrows;
250-21, reoccupancy review and
inspection; violations and penalties
8
2016-13 5-23-16 Acceptance of right-of-way, Special 8
2016-11 6-13-16 Amends Ch. 330 Land Development
330-153.1 Municipal Historic
Designation of Properties, United
Methodist Cemetery, Block 148, Lot 2
9
2016-14 6-27-16 Amends Ch. 330 Land Development;
330-158 Zoning Map
9
2016-15 6-13-16 Bond, Special 9
§ DL-1 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1128
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2016-16 6-13-16 Repealed by Ord. No. 2016-21 9
2016-17 6-27-16 Purchase of Property, Special 9
2016-18 7-27-16 Bond, Special 9
2016-19 8-8-16 Salary, Special 9
2016-20 Tabled 9
2016-21 8-8-16 Repeals Ord. No. 2016-16 9
2016-22 9-26-16 Salary, Special 9
06-09 Not Adopted (Removed 330-153.1A) 10
06-15 Not Adopted (Removed 330-153.1B) 10
06-40 Not Adopted (Removed 330-153.1D) 10
06-41 Not Adopted (Remove from Schedule
A — Permitted Conditional and
Accessory Uses and Structures.) Bed
and Breakfast as Permitted in the R-1
and R-2 Zones
10
2016-23 11-14-16 Sale of Property, Special 10
2016-24 11-14-16 Adds Ch. 325, Illegal Dwellings
325-1—325-6
10
2016-25 11-28-16 Deletes Ch. 212, Curfew; 212-1—212-7 10
2016-26 11-28-16 Amends Ch. 5, Administration of
Government; 5-84—5-89
Environmental Commission
10
2016-27 12-12-16 Amends Ch. 330, Land Development;
330-184B(3), Permitted Uses in the
Town Center McAfee and C-2 Zones
10
2016-28 11-28-16 Salary, Special 10
2016-29 12-12-16 Amends Ch. 518, Towing; 518-8,
Service Rates; adds 518-11, Towing
Services for Township Vehicles
10
2017-01 2-16-17 CAP Bank, Special 10
2017-02 Not Adopted 10
2017-03 3-27-17 Amends Ch. 330, Land Development;
amends Zoning Map, 330-158 and new
Zoning Map 3-27-17 to Correct Zone
Designations for Various Lots per
Ordinance No. 2017-03
10
2017-04 Not Adopted 10
2017-05 3-27-17 Amends Ch. 250, Fees and Escrows;
250-7 Tax Collector, Fees for Copies
10
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1129
Ord. No. Date Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-06 5-8-17 Salary, Special 10
2017-07 5-22-17 Amends Ch. 99, Vehicles and Traffic;
99-25B Appalachian Trail Residential
Permit Parking Area
10
2017-08 Not Adopted 10
2017-09 6-26-17 Bond, Special 10
2017-10 Not Adopted 10
2017-11 7-10-17 Salary, Special 10
2017-13 7-24-17 Conveyance of Property, Special 10
2017-14 Not Adopted 10
2017-15 10-23-17 Amends Ch. 99 Vehicles and Traffic;
adds Traffic Controls for Street and
Highway Construction and
Maintenance Operations,
99-46—99-57
10
2017-16 11-13-17 Sale of Property, Special 10
Ord.
No. Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-01 1-22-2018 Municipal Consent for Water
Service
NCM 11
18-02 1-22-2018 Animals Amendment; Fees
and Escrows Amendment
Ch. 148;
Ch. 250
11
18-03 1-22-2018 Fees and Escrows
Amendment
Ch. 250 11
18-04 1-22-2018 Sale of Land NCM 11
18-05 1-22-2018 Sale of Property NCM 11
18-06 1-22-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5 11
18-07 2-15-2018 Bond NCM 11
18-08 2-15-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM 11
18-09 3-26-2018 Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 428 11
18-10 Not
Adopted
18-11 Not
Adopted
§ DL-1 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1130
Ord.
No. Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-12 4-9-2018 Personnel Policies: Health
Insurance for Retired Police
Officers Amendment; Waiver
of Health Benefits
Ch. 89,
Art. I; Ch.
89, Art. V
11
18-13 4-9-2018 Appropriation NCM 11
18-14 4-9-2018 Abandoned Properties; Unfit
Buildings: Registration and
Maintenance of Vacant and
Abandoned Residential
Properties and Vacant and
Abandoned Residential
Properties in Foreclosure
Ch. 130,
Art. I
11
18-15 4-9-2018 Fees and Escrows
Amendment; Soil Fill
Placement
Ch. 250;
Ch. 484
11
18-16 4-23-2018 Bond NCM 11
18-17 4-23-2018 Bond NCM 11
18-18 6-11-2018 Special Assessment NCM 11
18-19 6-11-2018 Salaries NCM 11
18-20 8-27-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 447 11
18-21 6-25-2018 Sale of Property NCM 11
18-22 8-13-2018 Fees and Escrows
Amendment
Ch. 250 11
18-23 8-13-2018 Fees and Escrows
Amendment; Soil Fill
Placement Amendment
Ch. 250;
Ch. 484
11
18-24 8-13-2018 Salaries Repealed
by Ord.
No. 19-04
11
18-25 9-10-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 330 11
18-26 8-13-2018 Authorization for Referendum NCM 11
18-27 10-11-2018 Sale of Property NCM 11
18-28 11-8-2018 Fees and Escrows
Amendment
Ch. 250 11
18-29 Not
Adopted
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1131
Ord.
No. Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-30 11-26-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment;
Court, Municipal
Amendment; Fire Department
Amendment; Assemblies,
Public Amendment; Land
Development Amendment
Ch. 5; Ch.
37; Ch. 52;
Ch. 153;
Ch. 330
11
19-01 9-9-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 330 1
19-02 1-28-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM 1
19-03 1-28-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 94 1
19-04 2-11-2019 Salaries NCM 1
19-05 3-25-2019 Personnel Policies:
Bereavement Leave for Non-
Union Employees
Ch. 89,
Art. VI
1
19-06 3-25-2019 Abandoned Properties; Unfit
Buildings: Registration and
Maintenance of Vacant and
Abandoned Residential
Properties and Vacant and
Abandoned Residential
Properties in Foreclosure
Amendment
Ch. 130,
Art. I
1
19-07 11-14-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 99 1
19-08
19-09 4-22-2019 Appropriation NCM 1
19-10 Not
Adopted
19-11 6-24-2019 Appropriation NCM 1
19-12 7-8-2019 Purchase of Property NCM 1
19-13 7-8-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 99 1
19-14 7-8-2019 Appropriation NCM 1
19-15 7-22-2019 Bond NCM 1
19-16 7-22-2019 Bond NCM 1
19-17 7-22-2019 Personnel Policies: Anti-
Nepotism Policy
Ch. 89,
Art. VII
1
§ DL-1 VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:1132
Ord.
No. Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
19-18 8-5-2019 Recreation Tax (Subject to
Referendum)
NCM 1
19-19 9-9-2019 Fees and Escrows: Fees and
Escrows Enumerated
Amendment
Ch. 250,
Art. II
1
19-20 9-9-2019 Parking, Veterans Ch. 408 1
19-21 10-17-2019 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5 1
19-22 10-28-2019 Appropriation NCM 1
19-23 10-28-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 94 1
19-24 10-28-2019 Parks and Recreation Areas Ch. 413 1
19-25 12-9-2019 Street and Sidewalks: Street
Excavations Amendment
Ch. 500,
Art. II
1
19-26 Not
Adopted
19-27 Not
Adopted
19-28 12-9-2019 Soil Fill Placement
Amendment
Ch. 484 1
20-01 1-27-2020 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM 1
20-02 1-27-2020 Lease NCM 1
20-03 Tabled
20-04
20-05 1-27-2020 Taxation: Hotel and Motel
Room and Transient
Accomodation Occupancy Tax
Ch. 509,
Art. I
1
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1133