Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Borough Council
[Adopted 8-17-1981 as Ord. No. 6-81]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Verona of
a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Verona, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 to
150, inclusive, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Verona," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after August 17, 1981.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Verona by impressing thereon the Seal of the borough, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code, so that reference to the Code of the Borough of Verona shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as amendments
and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Verona, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Borough
Council, who may arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Verona to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days,
or both, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code, and every part of each section, is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
§ 1-6 VERONA CODE § 1-11
1:4
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 12, 1979.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
K. Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries
or compensation of officers and employees; establishing workdays and
working hours of certain employees; and providing for holidays and
vacations for employees and keeping of employment records.
L. Any ordinance regulating traffic or parking.
M. The Zoning Map and all amendments thereto.
N. Any ordinance or legislation pertaining to fees and charges.
O. Any ordinance establishing standards for the control of air pollution.
P. Any ordinance establishing standards for the prevention of fire.
Q. An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance dated 11-12-1979.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one (1) or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section-number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C. Fees and charges. All specific fees and charges with respect to licenses,
permits and other activities required or regulated under provisions of
various legislation of the borough are hereby deleted in the following
sections of the proposed Code of the Borough of Verona, and these
sections are revised to include the reference, ".... as provided in
Chapter A175, Fees."2
D. Penalties.
1. Editor's Note: In conjunction with § 1-14B, the following sections have been amended or
revised. A complete description of these changes is on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk.§ 20-1, 20-15, 54-5A, 54-11A, 57-4, 60-5, 85-1, 85-2, 100-1B(2), 104-7A(2),
107-9A(5), 107-21E(2) and 146-15D. In conjunction with § 1-14B, the following sections or
subsections were deleted: former Sec. 10.6 of Ch. 10 of the Revised Ordinances adopted
8-20-1963; former Sec. 3.5(d) of Ch. 3 of the Revised Ordinances adopted 8-20-1963; Sec.
3(f), second paragraph of an ordinance adopted 7-1-1975 as Ord. No. 9-75; former Sec. 6.7
of Ch. 6 of the Revised Ordinances adopted 8-20-1963; and Sec. 6.26 of Ch. 6 of the
Revised Ordinances adopted 8-20-1963.
2. Editor's Note: In conjunction with § 1-14C, the following sections have been amended. A
complete description of these changes is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§§ 30-28, 54-4, 57-3A, 57-9A, 57-15, 57-26, 57-32D, 60-5, 68-3, 68-13, 68-17, 83-2A, 88-8,
104-14, 107-17, 107-25D, 115-5, 115-11, 118-4A, 118-7C, 121-3, 125-11A, 125-32,
127-6B(1), 129-13, 132-5A(1), D(1), (2) and (3), 132-8A and B, 143-2A, 146-12C, 146-15F,
146-17, 146-18E, 146-20G, 146-24A and 146-35.
§ 1-13 VERONA CODE § 1-14
1:6
(1) The penalty provisions of certain ordinances of the Borough of
Verona, as enumerated below, are hereby amended to provide for
penalties of a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.) or
maximum imprisonment of ninety (90) days, or both, and, where
applicable, that each day such violation is continued or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense.3
(2) The provisions of certain ordinances of the Borough of Verona, as
enumerated below, are amended by adding thereto penalty
provisions to read as follows: "Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both."4
3. Editor's Note: In conjunction with § 1-14D(1), the following penalty sections have been
amended. A complete description of these changes is on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk. §§ 68-26, 77-11, 83-11, 85-6, 100-5, 107-22A, 112-11A, 127-12A, 129-17, 136-8,
143-6, 146-40 and 150-54.
4. Editor's Note: In conjunction with § 1-14D(2), the following penalty sections or Articles
have been amended. A complete description of these changes is on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk. §§ 50-2, Art. VI of Ch. 57, 72-3, 96-4, 102-6, 104-16, 115-18B, 121-7, Art.
VII of Ch. 125 and 132-13.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
Legislation Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new ordinances were
approved by the Council for inclusion in the Code of the Borough of Verona.
Such new ordinances are noted in the histories of individual chapters as
"Adopted ... during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Article II."
During the course of normal supplementation, specific dates of adoption
will be inserted where pertinent in the various chapters. The enumeration
appearing below lists each chapter affected by any such legislation adopted
during codification.]
Chapter Ord. No. Adoption Date
Ch. 74, Fire
Prevention
5-81 8-17-1981
Ch. A175, Fees 4-81 8-17-1981
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
Chapter 6
ASSESSOR
§ 6-1. Establishment; purpose.
There shall be appointed, as provided in § 6-2 below, one (1) Assessor of
Taxes to appraise and value the property in the township.
§ 6-2. Appointment.
The Assessor shall be appointed by the Council.
§ 6-3. Compensation.
The compensation of such Assessor shall be set forth annually in the
township's Salary Ordinance.5
Chapter 10
CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims — See Ch. 62.
§ 10-1. Certifying and approval officer designation.
The Township Manager is hereby designated as certifying and approval
officer for claims payable by the township.
§ 10-2. Powers and duties of certifying and approval officer.
The duties of the certifying and approval officer shall include:
A. Certifying that the goods or services represented by a bill or demand
for payment have been received by the municipality or determining that
such bill or claim carries the certification of some officer or duly
designated employee of the municipality having knowledge of the fact
that such goods or services were received by the municipality.
B. Ascertaining the existence of proper and sufficient appropriations for
payments to be made.
C. Determining that there is legal authority for a payment, evidenced by
action of the municipal officer or agent in respect to the goods or
services ordered and the incurring of the expense therefor.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 1-14 VERONA CODE § 10-3
6:10
§ 10-3. Billing procedure.
Any person who makes a claim for payment from the Township of Verona
shall first present a detailed bill of items or demand, on forms to be provided
by the township, specifying particularly how the bill or demand is made up
and containing the certification of the party claiming payment that such bill
or demand is correct.
§ 10-4. Certification of goods and services received.
It shall be the duty of the Township Treasurer to require that the signature
of the officer or employee who has been designated by the Township
Manager to certify that the goods or services have been received appears
on every claim.
§ 10-5. Approval procedure.
Claims shall then be presented to the Township Manager, who, if satisfied
that the claims are proper, shall approve the same. Approval by the
Township Manager, certified by him to the governing body, shall be deemed
to be final approval. After approval of a claim, the Township Manager shall
file the claim with the Township Treasurer.
§ 10-6. Disapproval procedure.
If the Township Manager determines that a claim should not be approved,
the Township Manager may reject a claim which has been presented to
him, stating the reasons for such disapproval. Any disapproved claims shall
be referred back to the Township Treasurer with such instructions as the
Township Manager may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 10-7. Method of payment.
After the Township Treasurer receives back approved claims, the Township
Treasurer shall retain them and shall forthwith prepare the necessary
checks for payment thereof, which checks shall be signed by the Township
Clerk and thereafter countersigned by the Township Treasurer. After checks
are prepared for the payment of claims, the Township Treasurer shall
record them in proper books of account and thereafter mail or otherwise
distribute the checks to the claimants.
Chapter 13
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 13-1. Creation; powers; jurisdiction; seal.
The Municipal Court of the Township of Verona is hereby created and
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1, in such case made and provided,
with all the functions, powers, duties, privileges and jurisdiction now or
§ 10-3 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 13-1
13:11
hereafter conferred by law. Such Court shall have a seal which shall bear
the impression of the name of the Court.
§ 13-2. Appointment, term and compensation of Judge.
A Judge duly appointed by the Council shall preside over the Municipal
Court. Such Judge shall have the qualifications required by law and shall
be appointed for a term of three years, and until his successor is appointed
and qualified. His annual compensation shall be fixed and determined in the
Township Salary Ordinance6 and shall be in lieu of any and all other fees.
§ 13-3. Appointment, compensation and duties of Clerk.
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed by the
Township Manager. His annual compensation shall be fixed and determined
by the Township Salary Ordinance.7 The Clerk shall perform such functions
and duties as shall be prescribed by law, the rules applicable to Municipal
Courts and by the Municipal Judge.
§ 13-4. Representation by Municipal Public Defender; application
fee. [Added 8-11-1997 by Ord. No. 8-97; amended 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 3-2003]
A person applying for representation by the Municipal Public Defender
shall pay an application fee in the amount of $150. The Municipal Court
may waive the required application fee, in whole or in part, if the Court
determines, in its discretion, that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
Chapter 16
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Flood control — See Ch. 77.
Site plan review — See Ch. 118.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 127.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ 16-1. Establishment; purpose.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., there is hereby established an
Environmental Commission in the Township of Verona for the protection,
development or use of natural resources, including water resources, within
the territorial limits of the township.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 13-1 VERONA CODE § 16-2
16:12
§ 16-2. Membership; compensation; terms; alternate members.
§ 16-3. Powers.
A. The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven (7) members
appointed by the Mayor, one (1) of whom shall be a member of the
Township Planning Board and all of whom shall be residents of the
Township of Verona. The members shall serve without compensation
except as herein provided. The Mayor shall designate one (1) of the
members to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the Commission.
Members shall serve for terms of three (3) years or until a successor is
appointed and qualified, except that of the first members appointed, the
terms of three (3) members shall expire on June 30, 1993, the terms of
three (3) members shall expire June 30, 1994, and the term of one (1)
member shall expire June 30, 1995.
B. The Mayor or the governing body may remove any member of the
Commission for cause on written charges served upon the member and
after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel.
C. A vacancy on the Commission which occurs otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as the original appointment.
D. The governing body may appoint not more than two (2) alternate
members to be designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
The terms of the alternate members shall be for two (2) years, except
that the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be two (2)
years for Alternate No. 1 and one (1) year for Alternate No. 2. A vacancy
which occurs otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled by
the governing body for the unexpired term only.
E. An alternate member, after public hearing, if one is requested, may be
removed by the governing body for cause.
F. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
G. No member or alternate member shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he or she, either directly or indirectly, has any personal
or financial interest.
A. The Environmental Commission shall have power to conduct research
into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the municipality
and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for
similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute
§ 16-2 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 16-3
16:13
§ 16-4. Records and annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the township governing body.
§ 16-5. Appropriation of funds.
The township governing body may appropriate funds for the expenses
incurred by the Environmental Commission. The Commission may appoint
such clerks and employees as it may from time to time require and as shall
be within the limits of funds appropriated to it.
§ 16-6. Studies and recommendations.
The Environmental Commission shall have power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control,
soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
Chapter 17
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 36.
books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it
deems necessary for its purposes.
B. The Commission shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or
privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other
wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas
and may from time to time recommend to the Township Planning Board
or to the Mayor and Council plans and programs for inclusion in the
Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
C. The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the
governing body, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name
of the township by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any
of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject
to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to
acquire the fee or any lessor interest, development right, easement
(including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right
(including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or
reversions), as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve,
protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly
utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the township.
§ 16-3 VERONA CODE § 16-6
16:14
§ 17-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Township of Verona Code of Ethics."
§ 17-2. Findings.
The Township Council of the Township of Verona finds and declares that:
§ 17-3. Purpose; authority.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of assuring that
standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the Township of Verona shall be clear, consistent,
uniform in their application and enforceable on a township-wide basis and
to provide officers or employees of the Township of Verona with advice
and information concerning possible conflicts of interest which might arise
in the conduct of their public duties. This chapter is adopted under the
authority of the Local Government Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c.29,8 and under
the authority granted to the Township of Verona pursuant to the provisions
of Titles 40 and 40A of the New Jersey statutes.
§ 17-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Ethical Standards Board established in the Township of
Verona pursuant to this chapter.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, partnership, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other
legal entity.
A. Public office and employment are a public trust.
B. The vitality and stability of representative democracy depend upon the
public's confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed
representatives.
C. Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the private interests
and public duties of a government officer or employee, that confidence
is imperiled.
D. Governments have the duty both to provide their citizens with
standards by which they may determine whether public duties are
being faithfully performed and to apprise their officers and employees
of the behavior which is expected of them while conducting their public
duties.
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 16-6 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 17-4
16:15
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Township of Verona.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than ten percent (10%) of
the profits, assets or stock of a business organization but shall not include
the control of assets in a nonprofit entity or labor union.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCY — Any agency, board, governing body,
including the chief executive officer, bureau, division, office, commission or
other instrumentality within the Township of Verona, and any independent
local authority within the township, including any entity created by the
Township of Verona which performs functions other than of a purely
advisory nature, but shall not include the School Board.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE — Any person, whether compensated
or not, whether part-time or full-time, employed by or serving the Township
of Verona or any agency thereof who is not a local government officer, but
shall not mean any employee of the School Board.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICER — Any person, whether compensated or
not, whether part-time or full-time, and who is elected to any office of
the Township of Verona or who serves on an agency of the Township of
Verona which has the authority to enact ordinances or approve development
applications or grant zoning variances or who is a member of an
independent township authority or who is a managerial executive or
confidential employee of the Township of Verona, as defined in Section 3 of
the New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act, P.L. 1941, c.100 (N.J.S.A.
34:13A-3), but shall not mean any employee of a school district or member
of the School Board.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or an
employee of the Township of Verona.
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — A spouse or dependent child of an
officer or employee of the Township of Verona who resides in the same
household as such officer or employee.
§ 17-5. Standards. [Amended 5-18-1993 by Ord. No. 4-93]
Local government officers and employees shall comply with all of the terms
and provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.5 and as may be hereafter amended or
supplemented.
§ 17-6. Financial disclosure statements.
A. Local government officers shall annually file a financial disclosure
statement. All financial disclosure statements shall include the
following information which shall specify, where applicable, the name
and address of each source and the township officer's job title:
(1) Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding two
thousand dollars ($2,000.) received by the local government officer
or a member of his immediate family during the preceding calendar
year. Individual client fees, customer receipt or commissions on
§ 17-4 VERONA CODE § 17-6
16:16
Chapter 20
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
transactions received through a business organization need not
be separately reported as sources of income. If a publicly traded
security is the source of income, the security need not be reported
unless the local government officer or member of his immediate
family has an interest in the business organization.
(2) Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) from any single source
from personal appearances, speeches or writings received by the
local government officer or a member of his immediate family
during the preceding calendar year.
(3) Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having
an aggregate value exceeding four hundred dollars ($400.) from
any single source, excluding relatives, received by the local
government officer or a member of his immediate family during the
preceding calendar year.
(4) The name and address of all business organizations in which the
local government officer or a member of his immediate family had
an interest during the preceding calendar year.
(5) The address and brief description of all real property in this state in
which the local government officer or a member of his immediate
family held an interest during the preceding calendar year.
B. The Township of Verona Ethical Standards Board shall make financial
disclosure statement forms available in the form prescribed by the New
Jersey Local Finance Board.
C. Local government officers shall file the original financial disclosure
statement with the Municipal Clerk of the Township of Verona and shall
file a copy of such statement with the Township Ethical Standards
Board. The financial disclosure statements shall be filed on or before
April 30 of each year.
D. All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public record.9
9. Editor's Note: Former § 17-7, Ethical Standards Board, § 17-8, Adoption of Code of Ethics,
as amended, § 17-9, Powers and duties of Board, § 17-10, Advisory opinions, § 17-11,
Complaints, and § 17-12, Records of Board, which immediately followed, were repealed
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 4-08.
§ 17-6 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 17-6
20:17

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 2-1-1988 as part of Ord. No. 22-8710]
§ 20-1. Composition.
The Fire Department shall consist of a Chief and Assistant Chief and as
many firemen as shall be approved by the Township Council and who shall
not be less than 18 years of age.
§ 20-2. Election and resignation of members.
§ 20-3. Retirement.
Any member of the Fire Department who has arrived at the age of 50 years
may be retired from service by the Board of Fire Officers.
§ 20-4. Composition and jurisdiction of Board of Fire Officers.
The Chief and Assistant Chief of the Fire Department, together with the
Captain and Lieutenant of each company, shall constitute a Board of Fire
Officers, who shall meet monthly or more frequently for the transaction of
all business of the Department. Such Board shall have entire and absolute
control over and management of the Department and its government when
such Department is not upon active duty, subject the approval of the
Township Manager to which approval the acts of the Board of Fire Officers
shall only be subject as herein particularly and specifically provided.
§ 20-5. Adoption of bylaws by Board of Fire Officers.
The Board of Fire Officers is hereby authorized, empowered and required
from time to time to adopt a code of bylaws and rules for the control
management and government of the Fire Department and for the regulating
of the proceedings and business of the Board, which code or codes of bylaws
and rules after adoption by the Board and after approval by the members of
the Fire Department, shall become effective upon approval by the Township
Manager.
A. The names of all persons elected to membership in the two companies
and proposed as members of the Fire Department shall be presented
through the Board of Fire Officers, in writing, signed by the Captain and
Secretary of the company in which they are so elected, to be approved
by the Board of Fire Officers.
B. All resignations from the Department shall take the same course as
elections and propositions to membership as above provided for.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Ch. 20, Fire
Department, adopted 8-20-1963 as Secs. 7.1 through 7.19 of Ch. 7 of the Revised
Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, as amended.
§ 20-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 20-6
20:19
§ 20-6. Keeping of records by Board of Fire Officers.
The Board of Fire Officers is required to devise forms or methods of keeping
records and shall see that records are kept of all alarms of fire, fire losses,
methods of extinguishment, drills, hose, apparatus, minor equipment,
condition of hydrants and the inspection of apparatus by the starting of
motors.
§ 20-7. Establishment of Department officers.
The officers of the Fire Department shall be as follows: Chief, Assistant
Chief, Treasurer and Secretary and such other officers as the Fire
Department may seem necessary and approved by the Council.
§ 20-8. Election, terms and qualifications of Department officers.
The Chief, Assistant Chief, Secretary and Treasurer shall be elected by the
members of the Fire Department and shall hold office for two (2) years. No
member of the Fire Department shall be eligible for these posts who is not
habitually available in the township at all times, and who has not been a
member of the Department for at least two (2) years.
§ 20-9. Election of company officers.
Each of the companies of the Fire Department shall and may choose from
their own number a Captain, Lieutenant, Secretary and Treasurer in such
manner and at such times or time as the Board of Fire Officers may in
its rules and bylaws for the government of the Department provide and
prescribe.
§ 20-10. Composition of companies.
A. Number and strength of companies. The firemen shall be divided into
two (2) companies, each to consist of that number of firemen deemed
necessary and sufficient by the Township Manager for the adequate
protection of the citizens of Verona, of which no less than ten (10) must
be actually present within the township during daylight hours.
Whenever less than ten (10) members of the company are employed
within the township or are actually present within the township during
daylight hours, then a sufficient number of men shall be forthwith
dropped from membership so that by the election of new members
employed within the township or actually present within the township
during daylight hours, the minimum of ten (10) may be complied with.
B. In order to comply with this section, men shall be dropped from this
Department on the basis of seniority. The last man in will be the first
man out unless he shall be employed within the limits of the township or
he is actually present within the township during daylight hours.
§ 20-6 VERONA CODE § 20-11
20:20
§ 20-11. Company transfers.
Any member desiring to transfer his membership from one company to
another shall present to the Board of Fire Officers a certificate in writing,
signed by the Captains and Secretaries of both companies, showing the
consent of each company to the transfer. Upon receipt of such certificate,
the Board of Fire Officers shall permit or deny such transfer, its decision
being final and conclusive.
§ 20-12. Company duties upon outbreak of fire.
It shall be the duty of the fire companies, so often as any fire shall break
out, to repair immediately upon the alarm thereof to their respective fire
houses and to convey their apparatus to the place where the fire shall
happen unless otherwise directed by the Chief or other officer who may be
in charge, and upon such direction, they shall return their apparatus, well
washed and cleaned, to their several places of deposit.
§ 20-13. Supervision of Department.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the general supervision of the
Department when it is not in actual duty at a fire, which supervision shall
be subject to and not in connection with such rules and bylaws for the
government and management of the Department as may from time to time
be adopted by the Board of Fire Officers as herein provided. In all cases
of fire the Chief or, in his absence, an Assistant shall have full power and
absolute control and command.
§ 20-14. Commanding officer at fire in absence of superiors.
Should the Fire Chief and the Assistant Chief be absent from a fire, the
person having charge of the apparatus first arriving at the fire shall assume
the duties of the Chief until the arrival of his superior officer.
§ 20-15. Report by Fire Chief.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to report annually to the Manager
of the Township on the condition of the various pieces of apparatus and
appurtenances; the number of hydrants and the condition of same; the
number of fires during the year, their location and cause, and the date
of same and loss occasioned thereby; the number of members in each
company and the total number of active members in the Department; and
resignations and expulsions passed upon by the Board of Fire Officers.
§ 20-16. Emergency powers.
The Chief of the Fire Department and his assistants or officers in command
at any fire, without limiting such police authority, as hereby clothed with
full and complete police authority and are hereby authorized and directed
to require and secure the removal of any and all obstructions from in front
of and around fire hydrants. For such purposes, they are hereby authorized
§ 20-11 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 20-16
20:21
to call upon the heads of the municipal departments for aid and assistance
in securing such removal of obstructions.
§ 20-17. Trespassing in fire house or on equipment.
No person shall be allowed to enter any firehouse or handle any apparatus
or implements belonging to the Fire Department unless accompanied by an
active member of the Department.
§ 20-18. Suspension and expulsion of members.
§ 20-19. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Fire Officers shall, from time to time, make and establish such
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the laws of this state, this Code
or other ordinances of the township for the government and control of the
members of the Fire Department as may be deemed expedient and proper
by the Township Manager with a view to making the Fire Department and
all officers and members thereof efficient, vigilant, prompt and useful to the
township. All such rules and regulations shall be in writing and shall be
filed with the Township Clerk and the Chief of Fire Department. A written
or printed copy of such rules shall be delivered to each member of the
A. Any officer or member of the Fire Department or any company or
companies of the Fire Department who shall refuse or voluntarily
neglect to obey or execute any orders from the officer in charge of any
fire, or who shall violate or willfully neglect or refuse to be controlled,
governed or managed by any of the rules and bylaws of the Board of
Fire Officers that may be adopted from time to time as herein provided,
shall be subject to suspension or expulsion from the Department by the
Board of Fire Officers in such manner and upon such hearing or trial as
may be prescribed or provided by the bylaws and rules of the Board of
Fire Officers. The suspension or expulsion of any officer or member or
company or companies of the Department shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Manager.
B. The expelled or suspended member shall have the right to appear
before the Board of Fire Officers and state cause, if any, why such
penalty should not be confirmed, and in case of the nonappearance or in
case his appeal is not sustained, the Chief shall report his name to the
Manager of the township as expelled or suspended, as the case may be,
and such expulsion or suspension is subject to the final approval of the
Council.
C. All charges for offenses or neglect of duty or insubordination while on
duty at a fire that may be preferred against any company, officer or
member of the Department shall be tried and determined by the Board
of Fire Officers, as approved by the Township Manager; subject,
however, to an appeal from such decision to the Council, who shall
either approve or disapprove the action of the Board of Fire Officers or
refer the same back for retrial.
§ 20-16 VERONA CODE § 20-19
20:22
Fire Department, and a copy shall be posted in the headquarters of the
Fire Department. Such delivery and posting shall constitute notice of the
adoption and effectiveness of such rules to those persons subject thereto. It
shall be unlawful for any person subject to such rules to disobey or fail to
comply with such rules.
§ 20-19 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 20-19
20:23

ARTICLE II
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 8-30-1999 by Ord. No. 10-99]
§ 20-20. Program created.
A length of service awards program (LOSAP) is hereby created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, being N.J.S.A.
40A:14-183, et seq. to reward members of the Volunteer Fire Department
for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of the
Township of Verona.
§ 20-21. Deferred income account.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member who meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be established by the Mayor and Council of the
Township of Verona pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and that such plan shall
be administered in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the
United States Internal Revenue Code, and this article.
§ 20-22. Credit system.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
in accordance with the following credit system:
A. Credits based upon years of service. An active volunteer member shall
receive one credit for each year of active emergency service in the
Verona Volunteer Fire Department, inclusive of prior year service as
permitted by this article.
B. Credits based upon Fire Department point system. An active volunteer
member shall receive one credit for each qualifying year earned by
such member. A qualifying year shall be defined as a calendar year
during which such member has been awarded at least 100 points
pursuant to the following point system:
(1) Fire Department point system.
(a) Fire Department responses (50 points maximum, 30 points
minimum). Points are credited based upon the following
schedule of percent attendance at the Fire Department
responses to which the volunteer firefighters have been
dispatched:
[1] 40% to 49.9% attendance: 30 Points.
[2] 50% to 59.9% attendance: 40 Points.
[3] 60% and Up% attendance: 50 Points.
§ 20-20 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 20-22
20:25
(b) Drills (36 points maximum, 14 points minimum). Points are
credited for participation in fire company, Department, mutual
aid and special drills.
[1] 2 points per authorized drill.
(c) Training (30 points maximum). Points are credited for certified
firematic training courses upon receipt of certification of
completion.
[1] 10 points per authorized course where attendance
required is less than 20 hours.
[2] 20 points per authorized course where attendance
required is 20 hours but less than 40 hours.
[3] 30 points per authorized course where attendance
required is 50 hours and greater.
(d) Holder of an elected specified position (50 points maximum).
Points are credited for completion of a one-year term in an
elected position. Only one position can be credited per year.
[1] Department Chief: 50 points.
[2] Assistant Chief: 50 points.
[3] Captain: 30 points.
[4] Lieutenant: 30 points
[5] Ex-Chiefs: 10 points.
[6] Apparatus mechanics: 10 points.
[7] Drill instructors: 15 points.
(e) Meetings (36 points maximum, 14 points minimum). Points will
be credited for attendance at regular and special Department
and fire company meetings.
[1] 2 points per meeting.
(f) Miscellaneous officials and appointees (20 points maximum).
Points will be credited for completion of a one-year term in an
elected or appointed position. 5 points each.
[1] Secretary, Department and company: 5 points.
[2] Treasurer, Department and company: 5 points.
[3] Officers, relief association: 5 points.
[4] Officers, insurance association: 5 points.
[5] Representatives, relief association: 5 points.
§ 20-22 VERONA CODE § 20-22
20:26
§ 20-23. Maximum annual contribution.
The proposed maximum annual contribution for an active volunteer member
shall be $1,150 per year.
§ 20-24. Credit for prior years.
The LOSAP shall authorize the crediting of prior years service up to a
maximum of 10 years.
[6] Officers, exempt association: 5 points.
[7] Representatives, exempt association: 5 points.
[8] Safety officers: 5 points.
[9] Exempt fireman status: 5 points.
[10] North Jersey Volunteer Fire Association delegates and
alternates: 1 point per meeting attended.
(g) Miscellaneous activities (25 points maximum). Points will be
credited for participation in the following activities which are
deemed official Fire Department activities by the Board of Fire
Officers:
[1] Fire prevention activities: 2 points per occurrence.
[2] Fund raising activities: 2 points per occurrence.
[3] Firematic competition: 2 points per occurrence.
[4] Committee meetings: 2 points per occurrence.
[5] Parades: 2 points per occurrence.
[6] Attendance at outside firematic association activities: 2
points per occurrence.
[7] Public relations activities: 2 points per occurrence.
C. Contributions based on total credits. An eligible member shall be
awarded an annual contribution based upon the following schedule:
Total Credits Percentage of Maximum Contribution
40 and over 100%
30 to 39 80%
20 to 29 60%
11 to 19 40%
6 to 10 20%
1 to 5 10%
§ 20-22 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 20-25
20:27
§ 20-25. Amount to be budgeted.
The estimated total amount to be budgeted for the program is $17,500.
§ 20-26. Approval at general election; when effective.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by the voters as a
public question at the next general election as provided by New Jersey state
statute and, if approved, shall become effective January 1, 2000.11
11.Editor's Note: This Ord. No. 10-99 was approved at the general election held November 2,
1999.
§ 20-25 VERONA CODE § 20-26
20:28
Chapter 25
HEALTH, BOARD OF
§ 25-1. Establishment; composition; terms; appointments.
§ 25-2. Duties of the Health Officer.
The Health Officer shall act as executive officer for the Board when it is
not in session. He shall make investigations for the Board and enforce the
provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the Board and perform
such other duties as may be directed by the Board of Health. He shall have
all the power and authority conferred by law upon the Board when he is
performing such duties.
§ 25-3. Duties of the Registrar of Vital Statistics.
The Registrar of Vital Statistics shall perform all duties required by the
statutes of the state, and especially N.J.S.A. 26:8-1 et seq., such duties as
shall be required by the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of
the township and such other duties as the Board of Health shall determine.
The hours which the Registrar shall work shall be fixed from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Health. In lieu of fees, the Registrar shall be
entitled to such salary as shall be fixed in the annual Salary Ordinance of
the township.12
§ 25-4. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Board of Health shall have the power to adopt such rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary concerning any matter which involves
the protection or promotion of health, and all persons concerned shall
comply with the provisions thereof.
Chapter 30
LAND USE PROCEDURES
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq., the Council shall be the duly
constituted Board of Health.
B. There is hereby established a Township Health Department as a
department of municipal government which shall be under the
administrative control of the Township Manager.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 20-26 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 25-4
25:29

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 30-1. Establishment and composition.
There is hereby established pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291,13 in the Township
of Verona a Planning Board of nine (9) members consisting of the following
four (4) classes:
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one (1) of the officials of the municipality, other than a member
of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if
there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II
Planning Board member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among the Class
IV members.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV:
(1) Six (6) other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Council. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, position or employment, except that one (1) member may be
a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic
Preservation Commission and one (1) may be a member of the
Board of Education. If an Environmental Commission is established
by the Council, then a member of the Environmental Commission
who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Planning Board member unless there
be among the Class IV members of the Planning Board both a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic
Preservation Commission and a member of the Board of Education,
in which case the member of the Environmental Commission shall
be deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board. For the
purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board or
commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the
establishment of which is discretionary and not required by statute,
shall not be considered the holding of municipal office.
(2) In addition to the aforesaid members of Class IV, there shall be two
(2) alternate members in Class IV. They shall be designated by the
Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2," and they shall
serve in rotation during the absence or disqualification of any
regular member or members of Class IV. Alternate members shall
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 30-1 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-1
30:31
§ 30-2. Terms.
§ 30-3. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 30-4. Organization.
The Planning Board shall annually elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from the members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a
member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
The Planning Board shall organize and elect officers at the first meeting
following July 1 of each year.
be appointed by the same appointing authority as regular members
of that class and shall meet all of the same qualifications.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one (1) year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three (3) years or terminate at
the completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever shall first occur.
B. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
C. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent,
the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first
four (4) years after their appointment as determined by resolution of
the governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member
shall exceed four (4) years, and further provided that nothing herein
shall affect the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of
whom shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which
they were appointed. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be
appointed for terms of four (4) years except as otherwise herein
provided. All terms shall run from July 1 of the year in which the
appointment was made.
D. The initial terms of the alternate members of Class IV shall be one (1)
and two (2) years, respectively. Thereafter, alternate members of Class
IV shall serve for terms of two (2) years.
§ 30-1 VERONA CODE § 30-5
30:32
§ 30-5. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate
of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 30-6. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
§ 30-7. Powers and duties generally.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the township, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relation to
the planning of the township, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision Ordinance and
Site Plan Review Ordinance of the township14 in accordance with the
provisions of said ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
D. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
E. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six (6) years, and amendments
thereto, and to recommend the same to the governing body.
F. To consider and make report to the governing body within thirty-five
(35) days after referral as to any proposed development regulation
submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and
also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board
by the Township Council, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26b.
G. Application review.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 118, Site Plan Review,
respectively.
§ 30-5 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-7
30:33
§ 30-8. Time limits for decisions.
(1) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to
same restrictions as the Zone Board of Adjustment.
(a) Variances pursuant to Subsection 57c of Chapter 291 of the
Laws of New Jersey 197515 from lot area, lot dimensional
setback and yard requirements, provided that such relief from
lot area requirements shall not be granted for more than one
(1) lot.
(b) Direction pursuant to Section 25 of said act16 for issuance of
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area
reserved pursuant to Section 23 of said act.17
(c) Direction pursuant to Section 27 of said act18 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit, as the case may be.
H. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
A. Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within forty-five (45) days of the date of submission of a
complete application to the Planning Board or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of
Planning Board approval unless within such period a plat in conformity
with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law,19 or a
deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision, if filed by the
developer with the county recording officer, the Municipal Engineer
and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be signed
by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board before it will be
accepted for filing by the county recording officer.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of ten (10) or fewer lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within forty-
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
16.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
17.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.3 et seq.
§ 30-7 VERONA CODE § 30-8
30:34
§ 30-9. Procedure for filing applications.
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291,20 shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Planning Board. The applicant shall file at least fourteen
(14) days before the date of the monthly meeting of the Board three (3)
copies of a sketch plat; three (3) copies of applications for minor subdivision
approval; three (3) copies of an application for major subdivision approval;
or three (3) copies of an application for site plan review, conditional use
approval or planned development. At the time of filing the application but
in no event less than ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, the
applicant shall also file all plot, plans, maps or other papers required by
virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of the Planning Board.
The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the
five (45) days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of more than ten (10) lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within ninetyfive
(95) days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning
Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval for the
subdivision.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in § 30-7G of this chapter, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
approval of the application within ninety-five (95) days after submission
by the developer of a complete application or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board
to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application, and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the
failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant.
D. Final approval.
(1) Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within forty-five (45) days of submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant.
(2) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire ninety-five (95)
days from the date of signing of the plat unless within such period
the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the county
recording officer. The Planning Board may, for good causes shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to
exceed one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of signing of
the plat.
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 30-8 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-9
30:35
Planning Board. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the applicant of the
steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the regular meeting dates of
the Board.
§ 30-10. Submission of application to Environmental Commission.
[Amended 8-3-1992 by Ord. No. 9-92]
Whenever the Environmental Commission, established under Chapter 16,
Environmental Commission, hereof, has prepared and submitted to the
Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment an index of the natural
resources of the municipality, the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment shall make available to the Environmental Commission an
informational copy of every application for development submitted to either
Board. Failure of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment to make such
informational copy available to the Environmental Commission shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 30-11. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 30-12. (Reserved)
§ 30-9 VERONA CODE § 30-12
30:36
ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 30-13. Establishment and composition.
§ 30-14. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and shall also select a Secretary who may be either a Board
member or another municipal employee.
§ 30-15. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint, fix the
compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney.
§ 30-16. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. consisting of seven (7) residents of the Township of
Verona appointed by the governing body to serve for terms of four (4)
years from July 1 of the year of their appointment. The terms of the
members first appointed shall be so determined that to the greatest
practicable extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed
evenly over the first four (4) years after their appointment, provided
that the initial term of no member shall exceed four (4) years.
Thereafter the term of each member shall be for four (4) years. Nothing
in this chapter shall, however, be construed to affect the term of any
present member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall
continue in office until the completion of the term for which they were
appointed.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
D. In addition to the aforesaid membership, the governing body may
appoint two (2) alternate members. They shall be designated as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" by the governing body. The term
of each alternate member first appointed shall be until July 1, 1988, and
July 1, 1989, respectively. Thereafter, the term of each alternate shall be
for a period of two (2) years.
§ 30-13 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-16
30:37
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
§ 30-17. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In this
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 30-18. Powers generally.
§ 30-19. Appeals and applications.
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments and supplements
thereto and with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such Board, including, not by way of limitation, the authority in
connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter, or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof and the Zoning Map, in accordance
with the general rules of construction, applicable to legislative
enactments.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of the
Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute, the
Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in said P.L.
1975, c. 291,21 or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided,
and it shall from time to time furnish to any person requesting the same
a copy of its rules and information as to how appeals or applications
may properly be filed with the Board for its decision thereon.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Each
appeal shall be taken within the twenty (20) days prescribed by the
statute by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the
appeal was taken, together with three (3) copies of said notice, with the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Said notice of appeal shall
specify the grounds for said appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 30-16 VERONA CODE § 30-19
30:38
§ 30-20. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the abovementioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291,22 or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 30-21. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Board
of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or
structures or permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by
limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within nine (9)
months from the date of entry of the judgment or determination of the
Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the period of
limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal
from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to the governing body or to a
court of competent jurisdiction until the termination in any manner of such
appeal or proceeding.
§ 30-22. Power granted by law.
The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law to:
taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril of life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on an
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance.23
22.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
§ 30-19 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-22
30:39
§ 30-23. Additional powers.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers specified in
§ 30-22, have power given by law to:
§ 30-24. Time limit for decision.
B. To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the
board is authorized to pass in accordance with this chapter or in
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law.24
C. To grant variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, as amended.
A. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood
control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map.
B. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building
or structure not related to a street.
C. Grant to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6
of P.L. 1975, c. 291,25 or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67 whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval
of a use variance pursuant to § 30-22C of this chapter.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than one
hundred twenty (120) days after the date an appeal is taken from the
decision of an administrative officer or after the date of the submission
of a complete application for development to the Board pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
§ 30-22 VERONA CODE § 30-24
30:40
ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 30-25. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor shall he participate in any discussion or
decision relating thereto.
§ 30-26. Meetings.
§ 30-27. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less than once a month, and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for
lack of applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
request of any two (2) Board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New
Jersey 1975.26
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, Chapter 231 of the
Laws of New Jersey 1975.27 An executive session for the purposes of
discussion and studying any matters to come before either Board shall
not be deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
26.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 30-25 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-27
30:41
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 30-28. Fees; refund of application fees. [Amended 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 3-2003]
§ 30-29. Hearings.
A. Fees for applications to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment or for services to be rendered by the administrative staff of
such Boards shall be as established by Chapter A175 of the Verona
Code.
B. If an applicant withdraws an application before the Planning Board or
the Zoning Board of Adjustment prior to the commencement of the
hearing before such Board, then, upon the written request of the
applicant, the Township shall refund 80% of the application fee paid to
the Township less the Township’s administrative costs. A request for a
refund of application fees shall be made not later than 30 days after the
withdrawal of the application.
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing of such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 1938 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
§ 30-27 VERONA CODE § 30-30
30:42
§ 30-30. Notice requirements for hearing.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice to owners.
(1) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on
the current tax duplicate or duplicates, located within two hundred
(200) feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of
such hearing and whether located within or without the
municipality in which the applicant's land is located. Such notice
shall be given by:
(a) Serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on said current
tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the property.
(b) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner
at his address as shown on said current tax duplicate. A return
receipt is not required.
(2) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may he made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within two hundred (200) feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Clerk of such municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the
notice required to be given pursuant to Subsection B above to the
owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are located within
two hundred (200) feet of the subject premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within two hundred (200) feet of a municipal
boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
§ 30-30 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-30
30:43
§ 30-31. List of property owners.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the administrative officer
of the municipality, the Tax Collector, shall, within seven (7) days after
receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of payment of the fee
provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, make and certify a list from the current
tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to § 30-30B of this chapter.
§ 30-32. Form of decisions; copies.
development of property which exceeds one hundred fifty (150) acres
or five hundred (500) dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy
of any maps or document required to be on file with the Municipal
Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey
1975.28
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall
file an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding for the
hearing on the application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within ten (10) days
of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee
prescribed by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall
also be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy
of such filed decision available to any interested party upon payment of
a fee calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of
other public documents in the municipality.
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
§ 30-30 VERONA CODE § 30-33
30:44
§ 30-33. Publication of decision.
A brief of every final decision shall be published in the official newspaper
of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the Secretary of
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
without separate charge to the applicant. Said notice shall be sent to the
official newspaper for publication within ten (10) days of the date of any
such decision.
§ 30-34. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application, or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision
for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
§ 30-33 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-34
30:45

ARTICLE IV
Appeals
[Added 6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 4-9229]
§ 30-35. Appeals to the governing body.
Any interested party may appeal to the governing body any final decision of
the Board of Adjustment approving an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. Such appeal shall be made and heard in accordance
with all of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
29.Editor's Note: This ordinance redesignated former Art. IV as Art. V and former §§ 30-35
through 30-40 as §§ 30-36 through 30-41, respectively.
§ 30-35 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-35
30:47

ARTICLE V
Escrows
[Added 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 29-530]
§ 30-36. When required.
A. Escrow for professional review. In addition to application fees required
by this chapter, an applicant for development for approval of a
subdivision, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, rezoning or other form of development application authorized
or required by ordinance or statute shall be required to establish an
escrow account with the township for the purpose of paying and/or
defraying the township's costs and expenses for professional services in
connection with the review of an application for development.
Professional services contemplated under this section shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following: Township Engineer or consulting
engineer, Construction Code Official, Board Attorney, professional
planners, consultants, advisors to the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or any other professional or other expert hired or
engaged by the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment to aid and
assist such Board in reviewing, evaluating and acting upon a
development application when an application is of a nature beyond the
scope of the expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the
township.
B. Escrow for inspection of improvements. In addition to the escrow
account required under Subsection A above, an applicant for
development shall be required to establish an escrow account with the
township to cover fees and costs payable to the township for municipal
engineering inspections of such improvements which the Planning
Board or the Board of Adjustment may deem necessary or appropriate,
including streets; grading; pavement; gutters; curbs; sidewalks;
streetlighting; shade trees; surveyor's monuments, as shown on the
final map and required by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.;
water mains; culverts; storm sewers; sanitary sewers; or other means of
sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and
sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space and,
in the case of site plans only, other on-site improvements and
landscaping. An applicant shall execute an agreement with the
township, on a form to be provided by the township and approved by
the Township Attorney, whereby the applicant shall become obligated to
pay for fees and costs of municipal engineering inspections.
C. Exception. The Board having jurisdiction over a development
application shall have the right, by resolution, to waive escrows
required by this Article in connection with any development
application.
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance redesignated former Art. V as Art. VI and former §§ 30-36
through 30-41 as §§ 30-43 through 30-48, respectively.
§ 30-36 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-37
30:49
§ 30-37. Amount of escrow.
§ 30-38. Disposition of funds in escrow.
A. The initial amount of the escrow account required under § 30-36A for
professional review services shall be as set forth in Chapter A175, Fees.
B. The amount of the escrow account to be established under § 30-36B for
inspection of improvements shall be the greater of five hundred dollars
($500.) or five percent (5%) of the cost of the improvements referred to
in § 30-36B above, which cost shall be determined by the Township
Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
A. Escrow deposits shall be placed in an escrow account by the Township
Chief Financial Officer and shall be maintained in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
B. The Township Chief Financial Officer shall make all payments to
professionals for services rendered to the township and/or Board
having jurisdiction for review of applications for development, review
and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other
purposes under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. Fees or charges payable from escrows shall be based upon a schedule
established by resolution of the township governing body and shall be
subject to the limits provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
D. Payments charged against an escrow account shall be pursuant to
vouchers submitted by the professionals to the Township Chief
Financial Officer on a form provided by the Chief Financial Officer and
in a manner consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
Vouchers shall be submitted on a monthly basis. If services have been
provided by a township employee, the township employee shall prepare
and submit to the Chief Financial Officer a statement containing the
same information as required on a voucher. Statements shall be
submitted on a monthly basis. Informational copies of all vouchers or
statements submitted to the Chief Financial Officer shall be sent
simultaneously to the applicant.
E. If an escrow account established under this Article contains insufficient
funds to enable the township or the Board having jurisdiction over the
application to perform required application reviews or improvement
inspections, the Township Chief Financial Officer shall provide the
applicant with a notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In
order for work to continue on the development or the application, the
applicant shall, within a reasonable time period, post a deposit to the
account in an amount to be agreed upon by the township or the Board
having jurisdiction over the application.
F. In the case of escrows for professional review, at such time as the Board
having jurisdiction over an application has granted final approval and
has signed the subdivision plat or site plan, or, in the case of escrows for
§ 30-37 VERONA CODE § 30-38
30:50
§ 30-39. Failure to deposit escrow.
§ 30-40. Fees and charges to be a lien.
All fees and charges for professional services and inspection services
payable to the township under this Article shall draw the same interest from
the time they become due and payable as taxes upon real estate in the
township and shall be a lien upon the premises for which a development
application has been made. The township shall have the same remedies for
the collection thereof, with interest, costs and penalties, as it has by law for
the collection of taxes upon real estate.
§ 30-41. Miscellaneous.
inspection of improvements, at such time as improvements have been
approved in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, the applicant, the
professional whose services have been utilized in connection with the
application and the Township Chief Financial Officer shall follow the
closeout procedures with respect to the escrow account as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
A. Except as permitted under § 30-36C hereof, no application for
development shall be considered complete until the initial escrow
required under § 30-36A of this Article has been deposited with the
township.
B. Subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2:
(1) No application shall be given final approval until such time as the
applicant has deposited all escrow funds required under this
Article.
(2) No permits for construction shall be issued until an escrow account
has been established to cover municipal engineering inspections
and until the applicant has executed an agreement with the
township in accordance with § 30-36B hereof.
(3) If an applicant fails to pay any amounts due under this Article, the
township shall have the right to deny the issuance of any
construction permits, stop construction or withhold the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy until such time as all amounts due under
this Article have been paid to the township.
A. If the final total square footage (of a building or buildings in a
development application) is unknown, escrows and fees payable
therefrom shall be based upon the maximum floor area permitted in the
zoning district for which such application is made.
B. For site plans involving expansion, additions and modifications or a
change of use of an existing building, escrows and fees payable
therefrom shall be calculated on square footage area of the expansion,
addition, modification or change of use only.
§ 30-38 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-41
30:51
§ 30-42. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this Article or the application thereof
is held invalid for any reason, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of this Article that can be given effect without the invalid
section, clause or provision or application, and to that end, the provisions of
this Article are severable.
C. Applications involving site improvements only and no expansion,
addition, modification or change of use shall be required to deposit only
the minimum escrow established under this Article.
§ 30-41 VERONA CODE § 30-42
30:52
ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 30-43. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in Chapter 291
of the Laws of New Jersey 1975,31 such term is intended to have the
meaning set forth in the definition of such term found in said statute unless
a contrary intention is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 30-44. Repealer.
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan
Review Ordinance32 or any other ordinance of the Township of Verona which
contains provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and
are hereby, to the extent of such inconsistency, repealed.
§ 30-45. Provisions continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975,
Section 81, the substantive provisions of the existing Land Subdivision
Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance and Site Plan Review Ordinance of the
Township of Verona33 and the development regulations set forth therein
shall continue in full force and effect for a period of six (6) months from
the effective date of said act or until the township exercises the authority
delegated by said ordinance to regulate development, whichever occurs
first.
§ 30-46. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued.
§ 30-47. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Township of Verona."
§ 30-48. Filing of copies.
Copy to be filed with County Planning Board. Immediately upon adoption of
this chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall file a copy of this chapter with the
County Planning Board as required by law. The Clerk shall also file with said
County Planning Board copies of all other ordinances of the municipality
relating to land use, such as the Subdivision, Zoning and Site Plan Review
Ordinances.34
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Subdivision of Land, Ch. 150, Zoning, and Ch. 118, Site Plan
Review, respectively.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Subdivision of Land, Ch. 150, Zoning, and Ch. 118, Site Plan
Review, respectively.
§ 30-43 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 30-48
30:53
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Subdivision of Land, Ch. 150, Zoning, and Ch. 118, Site Plan
Review, respectively.
§ 30-48 VERONA CODE § 30-48
30:54
Chapter 31
MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE COMMITTEE
§ 31-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-9, there is hereby established a Municipal
Alliance Committee.
§ 31-2. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Alliance Committee, in consultation with the Local Advisory
Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, shall identify alcoholism and
drug prevention, education and community needs. The Committee also
shall implement the Alliance programs formulated pursuant to Section 8
of P.L. 1989, c. 51 (N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-8) and generally perform all functions
and duties authorized by N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-1 et seq., as it may hereafter be
supplemented and amended.
§ 31-3. Membership; appointment; terms.
Chapter 32
MUTUAL ASSISTANCE AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 20. Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
A. The Municipal Alliance Committee shall consist of one (1) ex officio
member and seventeen (17) public members. The ex officio member
shall be the Township Substance Abuse Awareness Counselor, who shall
also serve as Chairperson of the Committee. Public members may
include the Chief of Police; the President of the School Board; the
Superintendent Of Schools; a student assistance coordinator; a
representative of the Parent-Teacher Association; a representative of
the local bargaining unit for teachers; a representative of the Chamber
of Commerce; a Municipal Court Judge; representatives of local civil
associations; representatives of local religious groups; and private
citizens.
B. Public members shall be appointed by the Township Council and shall
serve for terms of three (3) years, except that, of the first members
appointed, six (6) shall be appointed for terms of one (1) year, six (6)
shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years, and five (5) shall be
appointed for terms of three (3) years.
C. Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal
for cause of any member shall be filled by the Township Council for the
unexpired term of such member.
§ 30-48 MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE COMMITTEE § 31-3
31:55

ARTICLE I
Supplemental Fire Assistance
[Adopted 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
§ 32-1. Ratification and approval.
The following mutual assistance agreement for supplemental fire assistance
among all the municipal corporations in the County of Essex be and it
hereby is ratified and approved, and the Mayor and Township Clerk be and
they hereby are authorized and directed to execute said agreement and
cause certified copies of this article, upon its adoption, to be distributed to
the other municipalities in Essex County.35
35.Editor's Note: The text of said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 32-1 MUTUAL ASSISTANCE AGREEMENTS § 32-1
32:57
Chapter 33
(RESERVED)
Chapter 34
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessor — See Ch. 6.
Claims — See Ch. 10.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 13.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 17.
Fire Department — See Ch. 20.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 36.
Police Department — See Ch. 38.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
§ 32-1 VERONA CODE § 32-1
33:58
ARTICLE I
Township Manager
§ 34-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-89, there is hereby created the
office of Township Manager.
§ 34-2. Appointment; term.
The Township Manager shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-92. The term of the Township Manager shall be governed by
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-93.
§ 34-3. General powers and duties.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-95, the Township Manager shall:
(1) Be the chief executive and administrative official of the
municipality.
(2) Execute all laws and ordinances of the municipality.
(3) Appoint and remove a Deputy Manager if one be authorized by the
Council, all department heads and all other officers, subordinates
and assistants, except a Municipal Tax Assessor, for whose
selection or removal no other method is provided in this Article,
except that he may authorize the head of a department to appoint
and remove subordinates in such department, supervise and
control his appointees, and report all appointments or removals at
the next meeting thereafter of the Municipal Council.
(4) Negotiate contracts for the municipality, subject to the approval of
the Municipal Council, make recommendation concerning the
nature and location of municipal improvements and execute
municipal improvements as determined by the Municipal Council.
(5) See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the
municipality or its inhabitants in any statute, public utility
franchise or other contract are faithfully kept and performed, and
upon knowledge of any violation, call the same to the attention of
the Municipal Council.
(6) Attend all meetings of the Municipal Council with the right to take
part in the discussions, but without the right to vote.
(7) Recommend to the Municipal Council for adoption such measures
as he may deem necessary or expedient, keep the Council advised
of the financial condition of the municipality, make reports to the
Council as requested by it and at least once a year make an annual
report of his work for the benefit of the Council and the public.
§ 34-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-3
34:59
§ 34-4. Administrative supervision and direction.
The Township Manager, to the extent not prohibited by law, shall:
§ 34-5. Budget preparation and control.
The Township Manager shall be responsible for preparation of the municipal
budget in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-96. He shall control the
expenditure programs of each department and office through the
application of work programs and periodic allotments of budget
appropriations. No department or office shall incur any expenditure in
excess of the amount so allocated. Whenever it shall appear to the Township
Manager that the amount appropriated for any department or any purpose
within a department, is in excess of the amount required to be expended
(8) Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department of
the municipality.
(9) Perform such other duties as may be required of the Municipal
Manager by ordinance or resolution of the Municipal Council.
B. The Municipal Manager shall be responsible to the Council for carrying
out all policies established by it and for the proper administration of all
affairs of the municipality within the jurisdiction of the Council. In
addition to the above, the Township Manager shall also:
(1) Represent the municipality and assert its proper interest in relation
to this state and other political subdivisions and with respect to
municipal contracts and franchises.
(2) Study the governmental and administrative operations and needs
of the municipal government and prepare and recommend to the
Council necessary and desirable plans and programs to meet
present and forseeable needs.
(3) Receive and reply to inquiries and complaints concerning Township
business, provide informations and assistance and remedy or cause
to be remedied the source of any just complaint.
A. Direct and supervise all departments and offices of the municipal
government and be responsible for the maintenance of sound personnel
policies and administrative practices.
B. Approve all bills and vouchers for payment.
C. Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations, work
programs and costs of municipal services.
D. Establish working, personnel, vacation and sick leave schedules and
appropriate records and reports.
E. Serve as the Purchasing Agent of the municipality unless the Council
shall authorize the appointment of a Purchasing Agent.
§ 34-3 VERONA CODE § 34-5
34:60
to provide the quantity and quality of service authorized by the budget,
the Township Manager may, by administrative order, reduce the amount
available for expenditure by any department during the remainder of any
year.
§ 34-6. Purchasing.
A. All materials, supplies and equipment, work and labor under contract
required by any department, office or agency of the municipality shall
be purchased by or under the direction and supervision of the
Purchasing Agent.
B. Purchases shall be authorized only upon requisition of a department
head, which requisitions shall be made to the Purchasing Agent at such
times and in such forms as he may prescribe or approve, except as the
Purchasing Agency may specifically authorize in case of emergency.
C. The Purchasing Agent shall establish and enforce suitable
specifications and standards for all supplies, material and equipment to
be purchased for the municipality; shall inspect deliveries to determine
their quality, quantity and compliance with these specifications and
standards; and shall accept or reject the deliveries in accordance with
results of his inspection.
D. The Purchasing Agent shall control any general storerooms or
stockrooms. He may make transfers of supplies, material and
equipment between departments and offices. With Council
authorization, the Township Manager may sell surplus, obsolete,
unused or waste supplies, material and equipment.
§ 34-5 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-6
34:61

ARTICLE II
Township Attorney
§ 34-7. Creation.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:87-15, there is hereby created the
office of Township Attorney.
§ 34-8. Term. [Amended 11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 18-2003]
A Township Attorney shall hold office for a term of one year from the date
of his appointment and until his successors shall have him legally appointed
and qualified in his stead. Such appointment shall be made by the Council.
§ 34-9. General powers and duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Township Attorney to attend all meetings of
the Council.
B. He shall advise the Council or the Township Manager, when thereto
requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of the
Township business.
C. He shall prepare or review ordinances when requested by the Council
or Township Manager.
D. He shall give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted
by the Council or by the Township Manager.
E. He shall prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which
the Township is a party and shall approve as to form all bonds required
to be submitted to the Township.
F. He shall also defend, as Attorney and counsel for the Township, all
actions which may be brought by or against it or any Township officer or
in which the Township is interested in any court of this state when
requested by the Township Council.
G. He shall have the power to adjust, settle, compromise or submit to
arbitration any action, causes of action, counterdebts, claims, demands
and matters in favor of or against the Township, or in which this
Township is concerned as debtor or creditor, now existing or which may
hereinafter arise, provided that the money to settle claims generally has
been appropriated and is available therefor, subject to the approval of
the Council.
H. He shall immediately report the outcome of any litigation in which the
Township has an interest to the Council.
I. He shall perform all legal services auxiliary to the Council action in
connection with the appropriation of property to public use and in the
levying of assessments.
§ 34-7 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-9
34:63
§ 34-10. Compensation.
The Township Attorney shall receive as an annual retainer as may be fixed
in the annual Salary Ordinance36 adopted by the Council, and in addition
to such retainer, he shall receive other compensation for legal services
as he may be directed to perform during the year by the Council, upon
presentation of a voucher sworn to as required by law.
J. He is authorized, with the consent of the Council, to employ additional
counsel to aid in the trial, defense or argument of such causes or
proceedings if importance in which the Township may be a party or be
interested, as he may deem necessary.
K. Upon the expiration of his term of office or his resignation or removal
therefrom, he shall forthwith surrender to the several Township officers
charged with custody therefor all deeds, leases, conveyances,
obligations, bonds, contracts, agreements, maps, reports or other
papers in his hands belonging to the Township and shall deliver to his
successor in office all legal papers, documents and other papers
relating to business of the borough together with a written consent of
substitution of his successor in all actions then pending and
undetermined in which the Township is a party.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 34-9 VERONA CODE § 34-10
34:64
ARTICLE III
Township Public Defender
§ 34-11. Creation.
There is hereby created the office of Public Defender.
§ 34-12. Term.
The Township Public Defender shall be appointed by the Council and hold
office for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment and until his
successor shall have been legally appointed and qualified in his stead.
§ 34-13. General powers and duties.
The duties of the Public Defender shall be established by the Court.
§ 34-14. Compensation.
The compensation of the Public Defender shall be fixed in the annual Salary
Ordinance37 adopted by the Council.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 34-11 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-14
34:65

ARTICLE IV
Township Prosecutor
§ 34-15. Creation.
There is hereby created the office of Township Prosecutor.
§ 34-16. Term.
The Township Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Council and hold office
for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment and until his
successor shall have been legally appointed and qualified in his stead.
§ 34-17. General powers and duties. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 4-97]
Pursuant to P.L. 1996, c.95, § 14,38 the Township Prosecutor, under the
supervision of the New Jersey Attorney General or County Prosecutor,
may represent the state, county or municipality in any matter within the
jurisdiction of the central Municipal Court or any other Municipal Court.
§ 34-18. Compensation.
Compensation of the Prosecutor shall be fixed in the annual Salary
Ordinance39 adopted by the Council.
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:12-27.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 34-15 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-18
34:67

ARTICLE V
Township Engineer
§ 34-19. Creation.
There is hereby created the office of Township Engineer.
§ 34-20. Appointment.
The Township Engineer shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-95.
§ 34-21. General powers and duties.
A. It shall be his duty to act as Superintendent of Public Works and to
attend meetings of the Council when requested by the Township
Manager.
B. He shall be a licensed operator in charge of the sewage treatment
plant.
C. He shall be a licensed operator in charge of the Water Department.
D. He shall be responsible for the construction and maintenance of curbs,
sidewalks, highways, sanitary sewers and storm drains; also water
mains and municipal buildings. He shall prepare and supervise the
preparation of specifications and construction plans and prepare
designs for sewer extensions, pavements and structural work of varied
types.
E. He shall supervise and operate the garbage and refuse collection.
F. He shall be responsible for the plowing and removal of snow and ice
control of Township highways.
G. He shall be responsible for all engineering and planning of public works
projects for the Department of Public Works and the Township as a
whole. He shall analyze municipal construction needs and make
appropriate recommendations and reports; cooperate with municipal
officials and civic groups in preparing specifications and plans for longrange
municipal improvements; and establish and maintain all records,
maps and files.
H. He shall prepare all budgets under the Department of Public Works.
I. He shall be responsible for the reading of water meters, installations,
testing and repairing of the same.
J. He shall take care of all purchasing for Department of Public Works and
the Municipal Building.
§ 34-19 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-22
34:69
§ 34-22. Compensation.
Compensation of the Township Engineer shall be fixed in the annual Salary
Ordinance40 adopted by the Council.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 34-22 VERONA CODE § 34-22
34:70
ARTICLE VI
Township Tax Collector
[Added 4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 8-88]
§ 34-23. Creation.
There is hereby created the office of Township Tax Collector.
§ 34-24. Appointment.
The Township Tax Collector shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-95.
§ 34-25. Term.
The Township Tax Collector shall hold office as provided by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-142 et seq.
§ 34-26. Compensation.
Compensation of the Township Tax Collector shall be fixed in the annual
Salary Ordinance adopted by the Council.
§ 34-23 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-26
34:71

ARTICLE VII
Deputy Municipal Clerk
[Added 4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 8-88]
§ 34-27. Creation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135, there is hereby created the office of Deputy
Municipal Clerk.
§ 34-28. Appointment.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-95.
§ 34-29. Term.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall hold office for a term of one (1) year from
the date of his appointment and until his successor shall have been legally
appointed and qualified in his stead.
§ 34-30. General powers and duties.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall assist the Municipal Clerk in the
performance of his duties. During the absence or disability of the Municipal
Clerk, the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall have all the powers of the Municipal
Clerk and shall perform the functions and duties of such office.
§ 34-31. Compensation.
Compensation of the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be fixed in the annual
Salary Ordinance adopted by the Council.
§ 34-27 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-31
34:73

ARTICLE VIII
Chief Financial Officer
[Added 2-6-1989 by Ord. No. 1-89]
§ 34-32. Creation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., there is hereby created the office
of Chief Financial Officer.
§ 34-33. Appointment.
The Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall be appointed pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-95.
§ 34-34. Term.
The Chief Financial Officer shall hold office as provided by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq.
§ 34-35. General powers and duties.
The Chief Financial Officer's duties shall be to carry out the responsibilities
set forth under N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq.
§ 34-36. Compensation.
Compensation of the Chief Financial Officer shall be fixed in the Annual
Salary Ordinance adopted by the Council.41
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 34-32 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-36
34:75

ARTICLE IX
Chief of Police
[Added 2-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1-96; amended 4-18-2005 by Ord. No.
7-2005]
§ 34-37. Creation.
There is hereby created the office of Chief of Police.
§ 34-38. Appointment.
The Chief of Police shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:69A-95.
§ 34-39. Term.
The Chief of Police shall hold office from the date of his appointment and
until a successor shall have been legally appointed and qualified in his
stead.
§ 34-40. General powers and duties.
The general powers and duties of the Chief of Police are to:
A. Be responsible for the execution and enforcement of all laws, statutes
and ordinances pertaining to public safety of the public at large and the
citizens of the Township of Verona.
B. Be the head of the Police Department and to direct and supervise the
operations of the Police Department.
C. Have administrative responsibility over the Township Fire Department
and the Office of Emergency Management and to assure an efficient
system of fire prevention and protection of the citizens within the
Township of Verona.
D. Plan, organize and coordinate police, fire and emergency management
functions within the Township of Verona.
E. Keep the Township Manager informed of all matters concerning the
public safety needs of the Township, including levels of personnel and
the status of all public safety-related buildings and equipment within
the Township of Verona.
F. Develop an appropriate and efficient traffic control program.
G. Administer and maintain an efficient safety program for implementation
by the crossing guards within the Township of Verona.
H. Develop, administer and maintain a program for the removal and
storage of abandoned vehicles, disabled vehicles or other vehicles
§ 34-37 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-40
34:77
§ 34-41. Compensation.
Compensation of the Chief of Police shall be fixed in the Annual Salary
Ordinance adopted by the Mayor and Council.42
which have been impounded or caused to be stored by action of the
Township of Verona and its legal agents.
I. Develop and maintain a system of appropriate filing documents and
those writings necessary for proper crime reporting within the Police
Department.
J. Provide technical information to the Township Manager, Mayor and
Council, the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment on
matters of public safety when requested.
K. Periodically review Township ordinances that pertain to public safety so
as to assure that such ordinances reflect the prevailing public safety
needs of the Township of Verona.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 34-40 VERONA CODE § 34-41
34:78
Chapter 36
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 17. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
§ 34-41 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 34-41
36:79

ARTICLE I
General Policies
§ 36-1. Employee list and duty schedules adopted by reference.
The schedules, consisting of a complete list of the employees of the
township, giving suggested titles for each employee and the department to
which such employee is assigned and a duties classification of employees,
setting forth suggested titles to be used for the employees of the township,
their respective duties, distinguishing characteristics, examples of work,
minimum qualifications for the purpose of examination, recommended to
this Township Council for adoption by the Civil Service Commission of the
state, are hereby made part of this section as though specifically set forth
herein, such schedules being filed with the Township Clerk coincident with
the passage of this section.
§ 36-2. Amendments to list and schedules.
Whenever new offices, employments or positions are created or changes
in title are made by proper ordinance or resolution of the Council, in
accordance with law, the schedules referred to in the preceding section
shall be amended accordingly, with the approval of the Civil Service
Commission, whenever necessary.
§ 36-3. Employee compensation.
The salaries of all officers and employees of the borough shall be fixed in the
annual Salary Ordinance43 or by other ordinances or resolutions heretofore
or hereafter duly adopted.
§ 36-4. Assignment changes.
The assignment of any officer or employee may be changed from time to
time by the Township Manager.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 36-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 36-4
36:81

ARTICLE II
Longevity Pay Plan
§ 36-5. Establishment; effective date.
In addition to salary compensation and retainers, every permanent
employee of the Township of Verona, for meritorious, long and faithful
service, shall be paid longevity pay.
§ 36-6. Specific policies.
A. Longevity payments shall be due and payable on quarterly basis by
March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year. Such
quarterly payments shall be based on the annual salary paid to eligible
employees who have completed the full period of years of service herein
designated:
(1) After five (5) years: two percent (2%).
(2) After ten (10) years: four percent (4%).
(3) After fifteen (15) years: six percent (6%).
(4) After twenty (20) years: eight percent (8%).
(5) After twenty-five (25) years: ten percent (10%).
B. For those employees receiving longevity payments for the first time,
original longevity payments will begin on the first of the month
following the employee's anniversary date. Each month shall be
considered one-twelfth (1/12) of a year for longevity payment purposes.
Following this, the schedule will be followed as noted above.
C. For those employees who will receive an increase in longevity
payments, original longevity payments will begin on the first of the
month following the employee's anniversary date. Each month shall be
considered one-twelfth (1/12) of a year for longevity payment purposes.
Following this, the schedule will be followed as noted above.
D. Longevity payments shall be excluded in computing overtime
compensation. Longevity payments shall become part of an employee's
base pay for pension purposes only.
E. Longevity payments shall be paid notwithstanding the maximum salary
or compensation provided by ordinance for any employee.
F. Any authorized leave with or without pay shall be credited to an
employee of the township in computing this period of service. Terminal
leave is excluded.
G. Longevity payments are offered to employees to reward continuous
township service. However, if an employee, on one (1) occasion only,
terminates his employment and is reemployed so that no more than one
§ 36-5 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 36-6
36:83
hundred twenty (120) calendar days elapse between termination and
reemployment, no longevity time will be forfeited. If an employee,
on one (1) occasion only, terminates employment and is reemployed
after one hundred twenty (120) calendar days have elapsed between
termination and reemployment, the employee after five (5) years of
reemployment shall be entitled to restoration of original longevity time
[up to five (5) years] at the beginning of the sixth year of reemployment.
No retroactive longevity payments shall be made for the five (5) years
of reemployment.
H. A retiring employee on terminal leave shall receive longevity payments
up to and including the last day of terminal leave. The longevity
payments received by a retiring employee who retires prior to April 1
shall be based on the salary received by the employee in the calendar
year prior to retirement. For those employees retiring after April 1, the
longevity payments shall be based on salary received during the year of
retirement.
§ 36-6 VERONA CODE § 36-6
36:84
ARTICLE III
Defense and Indemnification of Officers and Employees
§ 36-7. Duty of municipality; exceptions.
Whenever an officer or employee of the municipality is a defendant in any
action or legal proceeding arising out of or incidental to the performance of
his/her duties, the Township Council shall provide the officer or employee
with the necessary defense or, at its option, means for the defense of such
action or proceeding and shall hold said officer or employee harmless from
any payment, settlement or judgment resulting from the proceeding, except
in the following situations:
A. Where the action has been brought by the municipality itself against
said officer or employee.
B. Where the officer or employee has been specifically found by the trier of
fact in proceedings, civil or criminal to have acted with actual fraud,
actual malice or willful misconduct.
C. Where the officer or employee is found to have acted in violation of
Chapter 17, Ethics, Code of, of the Code of the Township of Verona.
§ 36-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 36-7
36:85
Chapter 38
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 36-7 VERONA CODE § 36-7
38:86
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 38-1. Department established; composition. [Amended 1-4-1993
by Ord. No. 20-92; 2-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1-96; 2-2-1998 by Ord. No.
2-98; 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
There is hereby established a Township police force as an executive and
enforcement function of municipal government. The police force is
established as a department of municipal government and shall be
authorized to consist of a total of 31 appointed members and such civilian
employees as may be authorized by resolution of the Township Council.
§ 38-2. Administrative authority; powers and duties. [Amended
1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 20-92]
§ 38-3. Chief of Police; duties. [Amended 2-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1-96; 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and he
shall be directly responsible to the Township Manager for the efficiency
A. The Township Manager shall have overall executive and administrative
control of the Police Department. [Amended 2-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1-96]
B. In addition to such other powers and duties that may be conferred upon
him by law, the Township Manager shall have the following powers and
duties:
(1) To establish a Table of Organization within the Police Department,
consistent with § 38-5 of this chapter.
(2) To promulgate such administrative rules as, in his judgment, may
from time to time be proper for the efficient management of the
Police Department.
(3) To enforce the rules and regulations promulgated by him.
(4) To report to the Township Council from time to time on such
matters as may require the action of the Township Council, with his
recommendation thereon, relating to conditions of the Police
Department and its improvement and needs.
(5) To perform such other matters in connection therewith as may be
prescribed by the Township Council.
(6) To examine all applicants for positions on the police force and to
approve appointments.
(7) To prefer charges against and to suspend, pending a final hearing
of the charges, officers or members of the police force as the
Manager may deem proper.
§ 38-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 38-3
38:87
and day-to-day operations of the Police Department. In addition to such
other powers and duties which may be conferred upon him by ordinance
and pursuant to policies established by the Township Manager, the Chief of
Police shall, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118:
§ 38-4. Other offices and duties. [Added 7-18-1988 by Ord. No.
20-88; amended 1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 20-92; 2-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1-96; 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99; 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001;
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
In addition to a Chief of Police, the following offices are established within
the Police Department. The duties of each office shall be as set forth herein
and, in addition thereto, shall include such duties as may be prescribed in
the Police Department rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Township Manager:
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the members of the Police
Department and its civilian personnel;
B. Direct the operations, functions, powers and duties of the police force;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members of the Police
Department and its civilian personnel;
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the police force to be exercised under his
direction and supervision; and
E. Report at least monthly to the Township Manager in such form as shall
be prescribed by the Township Manager on the efficiency and operation
of the police force during the preceding month and submit such other
reports as may be requested by the Township Manager.
A. Three Captains of Police. The duties of Captain of Police shall be to have
direct supervisory control over the Division to which such Captain of
Police has been assigned.
B. Four Police Lieutenants. The duties of Police Lieutenant shall vary
according to the following assignment:
(1) A Police Lieutenant assigned to a patrol squad shall be the squad
leader and shall assist the operations officer in planning and
administering the activities and operations of the uniform divisions.
As squad leader, he shall perform such other duties as may be
directed by the operations officer.
(2) A Police Lieutenant assigned to the Detective Bureau shall
command and control the Detective Bureau and shall be
responsible for the overall activities and operations of the
Detective Bureau. The Police Lieutenant shall be directly
responsible to the operations officer.
§ 38-3 VERONA CODE § 38-4
38:88
C. Six Police Sergeants. The duties of Police Sergeant shall vary according
to assignment:
(1) A Police Sergeant assigned to a patrol squad shall assist the squad
leader in planning and administering the activities and operations
of the uniform division and shall direct and supervise all activities
of personnel assigned to his authority during his tour of duty.
(2) A Police Sergeant assigned to the Detective Bureau shall assist the
Police Lieutenant in charge of the Detective Bureau in planning and
administering the activities and operations of the Detective
Bureau. If no Police Lieutenant is assigned to the Detective Bureau,
the Police Sergeant shall command and control the Detective
Bureau and shall be responsible for the overall operations and
activities of the Detective Bureau.
(3) A Police Sergeant assigned to the Traffic Bureau shall command
and control the Traffic Bureau and all personnel assigned to that
unit and shall be responsible for overall activities and operations
under authority of the operations officer.
D. Police officers. The number of police officers in the Police Department
shall be consistent with the total authorized personnel of the Police
Department. The duties of police officers shall be as required by law
and as may be prescribed in Police Department rules and regulations as
may be promulgated by the Township Manager.
§ 38-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 38-4
38:89

ARTICLE II
Organization
[Amended 7-18-1988 by Ord. No. 20-88; 1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 20-92]
§ 38-5. Organizational structure.
The Township Manager shall organize the Police Department to include
an Operations Division to provide for investigative services and for patrol
services and a Services Division to provide for community services,
administrative services and support services.
§ 38-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 38-5
38:91

ARTICLE III
Protective Custody for DWI Suspects
[Added 11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 17-2003; amended in its entirety
5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 6-2004]
§ 38-6. Protective custody.
A. Any individual arrested for a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 (DWI) shall be
held in protective custody until the person is no longer a danger to
himself or others.
B. A person is no longer deemed a danger to himself or others when the
person's blood alcohol concentration is less than 0.05% and the person
is no longer under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or narcotic or
hallucinogenic or habit-forming drug to the extent that the person’s
facilities are impaired. In no event shall a municipality hold a person in
protective custody for a period of longer than eight hours without
providing an appropriate hearing.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection B above, the Police Department may,
because of age, health, or safety of the arrested person, release the
person pursuant to P.L. 2001, c. 69 (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.22 et seq.) or
provide an appropriate alternative to protective custody. The
municipality shall not be subject to liability if a person is released from
custody pursuant to the provision of this subsection and the February
20, 2004, New Jersey Attorney General directive.
§ 38-6 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 38-6
38:93
Chapter 42
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims — See Ch. 10. Personnel policies — Ch. 36.
§ 38-6 VERONA CODE § 38-6
42:94
ARTICLE I
Method of Payment
[Adopted 2-1-1988 as part of Ord. No. 22-8744]
§ 42-1. Payment procedure.
From and after the effective date hereof, the following shall be the method
by which all township officers and employees shall receive the
compensation provided for in the annual Salary Ordinance of the Township
of Verona:
§ 42-2. Authorization of officers to certify payrolls.
The Township Manager or his designated representative is authorized to
sign warrants drawn in favor of the payroll account.
A. The Treasurer shall present monthly to the Township Manager approval
warrants, drawn to the order of the Township of Verona: Payroll
Account, as follows:
(1) In advance for all employees whose salaries are on an annual or
weekly basis.
(2) In advance for all employees whose compensation is on an hourly
basis when the compensation has been approved by some
responsible designated official and the Township Manager and so
certified to the Municipal Treasurer.
B. At the first meeting of the governing body in July of each year there
shall be approved an account to be designated the "Township of Verona:
Payroll Account," and from time to time, the Treasurer, upon receipt of
a warrant for the amount due such payroll account, shall deposit the
same to the credit of the payroll account charging the appropriate
budgetary accounts therewith.
C. The Treasurer shall thereafter draw checks on said payroll account to
the employees entitled to payment therefrom.
D. In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Treasurer shall and it
shall be his duty to see that such error or adjustment is properly
corrected and appropriate record made thereof.
44.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. I, Method of
Payment, adopted 2-6-1962.
§ 42-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 42-2
42:95
Chapter 44
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 107.
Trees — Ch. 136.
As to legislation adopted by the Shade Tree
Commission, consult Part IV of this Code.
§ 44-1. Creation; composition.
Pursuant to provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:64-1, there is hereby created a Shade
Tree Commission of and for the Borough of Verona, which shall consist of
three (3) members who shall be residents of the Borough of Verona and shall
serve without compensation, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 44-2. Appointments; terms; vacancies.
§ 44-3. Annual reorganization.
The Commission shall organize within thirty (30) days after the appointment
of its members and thereafter annually by the election of one (1) of its
members as President and the appointment of a Secretary who may or may
not be a member of the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 44-4. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall be vested with such powers and shall be charged with
such duties as is or may hereinafter be provided by law.
§ 44-5. Statutory authority for actions and appointments.
All actions heretofore performed by the Shade Tree Commission and the
appointments of the present members of the Shade Tree Commission are
hereby preserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:64-7.
A. The members of the Shade Tree Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor of the Borough of Verona and each shall be appointed for a full
five-year term to take effect January 1.
B. Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of
any Commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term.
§ 42-2 VERONA CODE § 44-5
44:96
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 50
ADVERTISEMENTS, PAMPHLETS AND HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 104.
§ 50-1. Distribution restricted.
No person, corporation or organization shall deliver, distribute or cause to
be delivered or distributed to any premises within the Borough of Verona
any unsolicited advertisements, newspapers, pamphlets, handbills or other
printed matter unless the same are deposited in a receptacle customarily
used and legally acceptable for the receipt of such items or attached to the
premises in a nonpermanent manner or placed in a portion of the premises
that would secure the materials so that the same do not thereby litter the
premises in any manner.
§ 50-2. Violations and penalties.45
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
Chapter 53
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 38.
§ 53-1. Legislative findings.
The township governing body finds that may owners and occupants of
residential and commercial premises within the township have installed
various types of alarm devices for the purpose of detecting or preventing
burglary, fire and other perils; that such devices are of different type,
character and quality; that many of such devices have external audible
alarm systems which emit loud noises; that many of such devices do not
contain automatic shut-off systems and, because of the absence or
45.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 44-5 ADVERTISEMENTS, PAMPHLETS AND § 53-1
50:97
unavailability of the owner or operator of such devices, it is often difficult or
impossible to control, terminate or shut-off such devices thereby exposing
persons in the vicinity of such devices to loud noises for lengthy and
indefinite periods of time; that these conditions are contrary to the public
health, welfare and well-being of persons in the community; and that
uncontrolled emission of alarm signals for lengthy and indefinite periods
of time is not necessary to the legitimate purpose to be served by such
devices. The governing body further finds that the public safety and welfare
interests of the municipality will be furthered if such devices conform to
certain standards. The governing body further finds that the occurrence of
false alarms from the various types of alarm devices and the intentional
or unintentional misuse of such devices cause unnecessary response by
the Police Department thereby resulting in unnecessary expense and an
unproductive diversion of police personnel and equipment from their
normal public safety functions.
§ 53-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations concerning the
operation and maintenance of certain alarm devices and systems within the
Township of the Borough of Verona and to provide penalties for the violation
of any of the provisions hereof.
§ 53-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The control panel or panels located in police
headquarters for the purpose of receiving alarm signals and for giving
alarm indications and locations.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm actuating equipment which provides
warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, burglary, flood or like peril including a
direct alarm, dial alarm or local alarm. For the purpose of this chapter, the
term "alarm device" shall not include self-contained smoke detectors with
an indoor audible alarm signal.
ALARM SYSTEM — The installation in one (1) or more buildings of one (1)
or more alarm devices.
DIAL ALARM — That type of alarm device which employs an automatic
dialing system which is precoded and connected to a telephone line in police
headquarters.
DIRECT ALARM — An alarm device which has a direct line to an alarm
console.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm where an emergency does not
exist, or an alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence or an unintentional
or intentional act of someone other than an intruder, and shall include
alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm, device alarm system or its
related equipment. The term "false alarm" shall not include alarms created
§ 53-1 VERONA CODE § 53-3
53:98
by malfunctioning of the Police Department alarm console or other Police
Department equipment or activations caused by public utility interruptions
where such interruptions have been reported to the police or activations
caused by a natural disaster or activations caused by testing or repair of
an alarm system or device provided that the Police Department has been
notified prior to the commencement of such tests of repairs or an activation
which is immediately followed by a telephone call to the Police Department
from the owner or operator of the device notifying the Police Department
that the alarm signal is to be disregarded.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm device, other than a direct alarm or dial alarm,
which when activated, produces an external emergency signal.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership or corporation, limited
partnership, association, business, club or organization.
§ 53-4. Registration.
Any person that owns, operates, maintains or has on his property any alarm
device within the Township of the Borough of Verona shall notify the Police
Department in writing and on registration forms available at the police
headquarters. Such notice shall state the name, address and telephone
number of the owner or operator of the alarm device, the location of the
device and the name, address and telephone number of at least two (2)
persons who can be reached in case of an emergency or malfunction in
order that the device can be shut-off or temporarily disconnected.
§ 53-5. Direct alarms.
Any connection of direct alarms to the police alarm console shall be of a
type inspected and approved by the contractor servicing the police alarm
console at the time of the installation of the direct alarm device. It shall
be the responsibility of the person causing the direct alarm device to
be installed to make arrangements with the approved contractor for the
payment of all connection fees and maintenance charges. The Township of
the Borough of Verona shall not be charged for alarm console connection
fees or maintenance charges. A schedule of connection fees and
maintenance charges shall be maintained at the Verona police
headquarters.
§ 53-6. Dial alarms.
All dial alarms shall conform to the following regulations:
A. Dial alarms shall be coded to select a special number assigned by the
Police Department. No such device shall dial any other telephone
number on the Police Department switchboard.
B. Prerecorded messages shall be approved by the Chief of Police or his
designee, as to content, clarity, length and the number of times the
message is to be repeated.
§ 53-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 53-6
53:99
§ 53-7. Local alarms.
All external audible alarms shall be registered with the Police Department
in accordance with this chapter and shall be equipped with a timing device
that will automatically silence the external audible alarm signal within
thirty (30) minutes after it is activated.
§ 53-8. False alarms; penalties.
The Police Department shall cause a record of all false alarms that occur in
the township. The owner or operator of an alarm device within the township
shall be subject to the following penalties for false alarms that occur during
any calendar year:
C. The device shall be provided with an automatic line seizure feature in
the event that the assigned telephone line is busy with another call.
D. All such devices shall be capable of being disconnected by the owner to
permit a call to the police switchboard in the event of a false alarm.
E. All components of such equipment shall be maintained by the owner or
operator in good repair.
F. In addition to the registration requirements of this chapter, the owner
or operator of a dial alarm device shall pay an annual fee to the
Township of the Borough of Verona in the amount of twelve dollars
($12.) to offset the cost of the special telephone line or lines required by
dial alarm devices. Such annual fee shall be payable on the first day of
June for each calendar year. Fees for the installation of a dial alarm
device during the calendar year shall be prorated.
G. In the event that a person who owns or operates a dial alarm device
fails to comply with this section, the Chief of Police, or his designee,
shall issue a written notice to such person stating the reasons why such
device does not comply with this section and demanding compliance
with this section. Failure of such person to comply with the notice and
demand within ten (10) days of the mailing of such written notice shall
be deemed a violation of this ordinance. Noncompliance for each day
after such ten-day period shall be considered a separate violation of this
ordinance.
A. For the first and second false alarms, a written warning shall be issued
to the owner or operator.
B. For the third and fourth false alarms, there shall be imposed a fine of
twenty-five dollars ($25.) for each false alarm.
C. For the fifth and subsequent false alarms, there shall be imposed a fine
of fifty dollars ($50.) for each such false alarm. In addition, in the case
of false alarms involving direct alarms or dial alarms, the Police
Department shall conduct an investigation as to the reasons for such
continued false alarms, and, upon a finding by the Police Department
§ 53-6 VERONA CODE § 53-8
53:100
§ 53-9. Indemnification of officers and employees.
As a condition prerequisite to the installation of a direct alarm on the Police
Department alarm console or the connection of a dial alarm with Police
Department headquarters, the owner or operator of such alarm device
shall be required to agree in writing to indemnify and hold harmless the
Township of the Borough of Verona, its agents, servants and employees,
including but not limited to members of the Verona Police Department, from
any and all damages arising out of connection of such owner's or operator's
equipment to Police Headquarters, including all damages arising out of or
as a result of any forced entry by police personnel into unattended premises
occurring during alarm response.
§ 53-10. When effective.
This chapter shall apply to alarm devices placed in service prior to or
subsequent to the effective date hereof; provided, however, that owners
or operators of existing alarm devices shall have thirty (30) days from
the effective date hereof to register such alarm devices with the Verona
Police Department in accordance with this chapter and one hundred twenty
(120) days from the effective date hereof to equip alarm devices having an
external audible alarm with an automatic silencing mechanism as required
by this chapter.
§ 53-11. Violations and penalties.
This chapter shall be enforceable in the Municipal Court of the Township of
the Borough of Verona. Any person who is guilty of violating any provision of
this chapter, other than a provision for which a specific penalty is indicated,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
that there has been abuse or neglect in the operation or maintenance
of any such alarm device and a failure to take reasonable action to
remedy the cause of such false alarms, the Chief of Police, or his
designee, may require that such alarm device be disconnected from
police headquarters, either temporarily or permanently. No
disconnection shall be made until after ten (10) days from the date the
Police Department has given written notice to the owner or operator
that the device will be disconnected. The owner or operator shall
have the right to appeal the decision of the Police Department to the
township governing body. Notice of an appeal must be in writing and
must be filed in the office of the Township Clerk not later than ten
(10) days from the date notice of intended disconnection is given by
the Police Department. If an appeal is filed as provided herein, the
Mayor and Council shall hold a public hearing on the matter and may
affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Police Department, and no
disconnection shall be made until the appeal is decided by the Mayor
and Council.
§ 53-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 53-12
53:101
§ 53-12. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof is held invalid for
any reason, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications
of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to that end, the provisions of this chapter are severable.
Chapter 54
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 38.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Park rules and regulations — See Ch. 100.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 102.
§ 54-1. Statutory authority; noncompliance unlawful.
§ 54-2. Licenses: application procedures; issuance; conditions.
Whenever original application or renewal application shall be made for
any alcoholic beverage license issuable by the Township Council, including
but not by way of limitation plenary retail consumption license, seasonal
retail consumption license, plenary retail distribution license, limited retail
distribution license, club license or any other form of license which may
be provided for or issued by the Township Council, and before any such
license shall be granted, the applicant, in addition to supplying all other
information in the manner required by the state law and this chapter
governing the subject, shall also:
A. It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the
township otherwise than as provided in this chapter and an Act of the
Legislature of the state entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic
Beverages," P.L. 1933, c. 436, as amended and supplemented,46 and the
rules and regulations promulgated or to be promulgated by the State
Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.47
B. Applications for licenses under this chapter and all licenses issued
hereunder and all proceedings in connection therewith shall be
subjected to the provisions of such state law and such rules and
regulations.
A. Furnish and file with the Police Department of the township a full and
adequate set of fingerprints of the applicant within three days from the
time of the presentation of the application. Such fingerprinting shall be
done by the Police Department.
46.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
47.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 33:1-39.
§ 53-12 VERONA CODE § 54-2
54:102
B. Furnish to the Chief of Police a photograph in triplicate of himself. Such
photograph shall be of a size two inches by two inches and shall be
satisfactory to the Chief of Police or other member in charge of the
Police Department and shall have been taken within one year from the
date when such photograph was submitted. The Police Department
shall furnish the licensee with an identification card showing
compliance with the provisions of this section which shall be on file on
the premises of the licensee so that it can be submitted upon demand at
any time during business hours. Such identification shall expire on June
30, of each year, at which time a new photograph shall be submitted as
requested by the Police Committee of the borough.
C. If the applicant be a corporation, then the requirements of Subsections
A and B of this section shall apply to the officers of the corporation and
those stockholders holding at least 25% of the stock thereof.
D. Before the time set for consideration of the application, the Chief of
Police or other person in charge of the Police Department shall report in
writing to the Police Committee of the borough whether or not the
requisite fingerprinting and photographing has been completed as
herein provided and shall report any facts which may be pertinent to
the granting or refusal of the application.
E. Every licensee shall make full and complete answers under oath in
writing, on forms furnished by the Police Committee of the borough to
all questions printed thereon as to the location, housing and situation of
any premises licensed.
F. Every licensee shall furnish to the Chief of Police of the borough a list of
all employees, including but not by way of limitation agents,
bartenders, cooks, chefs, porters, waiters, waitresses, entertainers,
which employees shall submit to the taking by the Police Department of
an impression of the thumb and fingerprints of both hands. At the time
of taking such fingerprints, such employee shall furnish to the Police
Department a photograph in triplicate of himself. Such photograph
shall be of a size two inches by two inches, shall be satisfactory to the
Police Committee and shall have been taken within one year from the
date when the photograph was submitted, and the Police Committee
shall then furnish the employee connected with or employed by such
licensee an identification card showing compliance with the provisions
of this section which shall be on file on the premises of the licensee so
that it can be submitted upon demand at any time during business
hours. Such identification shall expire on June 30 of each year, at which
time new photographs shall be submitted if requested by the Police
Committee. No licensee shall engage any employee connected with the
business of such licensee unless such employee has conformed to the
rules and regulations above set forth, and if any new employees are
hired by the licensee, such new employees shall comply with such
regulations before they shall be permitted to work in the licensed
premises.
§ 54-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 54-2
54:103
§ 54-3. Issuing authority.
The Borough Council shall constitute the authority for the administration of
the issuance of licenses pursuant to this chapter.
§ 54-4. Fees. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
License fees for licenses authorized to be issued by this chapter shall be as
provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, for the following:
§ 54-5. Limitation on number of licenses; renewals; transfers;
intention.
G. Every licensee and every agent or employee of a licensee shall make full
and complete answers under oath in writing, on forms furnished by the
Police Committee, to all questions printed thereon as to identity,
character, antecedents and general experience of any such licensee,
agent or employee.
H. All applications shall be referred by the Borough Council to the Police
Committee which shall investigate the character and fitness of the
applicant and the place for which a license is applied for, and such
Committee shall promptly report to the Borough Council its findings
and recommendations.
A. Plenary retail consumption.
B. Plenary retail distribution.
C. Limited retail distribution.
A. No more than five plenary retail consumption licenses, six plenary retail
distribution licenses and one limited retail distribution license shall be
in effect in this township at any one time, except as hereinafter
provided. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
B. No new plenary retail consumption license shall be issued in the
township unless and until the total number of all such licenses existing
in the township is fewer than four plenary retail consumption licenses,
and no new plenary retail distribution license shall be issued in the
township unless and until the total number of all such licenses existing
in the township is fewer than two plenary retail distribution licenses.
C. For the purposes of this section, any license for a new license term
which is issued to replace a license which expired on the last day of the
license term which immediately preceded the commencement of such
new license term or which is issued to replace a license which will
expire on the last day of the license term which immediately precedes
the commencement of the new license term shall be deemed to be a
renewal of the expired or expiring license, provided that such license is
of the same class and type as the expired or expiring license, covers the
same licensed premises, is issued to the holder of the expired or
§ 54-2 VERONA CODE § 54-5
54:104
§ 54-6. Suspension or revocation.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked
for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for violation of any of
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. or of any of the rules and regulations
promulgated by the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 54-7. Primacy of zoning legislation.
No license of any class shall be issued contrary to any Zoning Ordinance
now existing or hereafter enacted in the township.49
§ 54-8. Hours of sale. [Amended 5-7-1968; 12-4-1989 by Ord. No.
17-89]
expiring license and is issued pursuant to an application therefor which
shall have been filed with the proper township official prior to the
commencement of the new license term or not later than 30 days after
the commencement thereof. Licenses issued otherwise than as above
herein provided shall be deemed to be new licenses.
D. Nothing in this section shall prevent the renewal of licenses existing on
the effective date hereof or the transfer of such licenses or the renewal
of licenses so transferred.
E. Nothing in this section shall prevent the issuance in the township of a
new license to a person who, having held a license of the same class in
the municipality, surrendered his license or permitted it to expire
because of his induction into or service in the Armed Forces of the
United States; provided, however, that such ex-licensee shall have filed
the application for a new license within one year from the completion of
his active service in the armed forces.48
A. Subject to state regulation of retail package sales hours, no licensee
shall directly or indirectly sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer
the sale or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises except during the
following specified hours on the days indicated:
(1) On all weekdays (Monday through Saturday), from 7:00 a.m. until
2:00 a.m. on the following day.
(2) On all Sundays, from 12:00 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, except as
provided under Subsections A(3) and (4) hereof. [Amended
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 19-98]
48.Editor's Note: Subsection 3.5(d) of the former Code, which immediately followed this
subsection, and which concerned the gradual reduction of plenary retail distribution
licenses, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
§ 54-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 54-8
54:105
§ 54-9. Sale restrictions.
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver nor allow, suffer or permit the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any
mentally defective person, habitual drunkard or intoxicated person nor
permit such persons to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
§ 54-10. Serving in private rooms.
No person shall be served in any room which is not open to the use of the
public generally, except that in hotels, guests may be served in their rooms
or in private dining rooms.
§ 54-11. Presence of and sale to minors.
§ 54-12. View of interior required.
All premises in which alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed, excepting
guest rooms and private dining rooms in hotels, shall be so arranged that
a full view of the interior may be had from the public thoroughfare or from
(3) On Christmas Eve (December 24), only if it is a Sunday, from 9:00
a.m. until 12:00 midnight.
(4) On New Year's Eve (December 31), if it is a weekday (Monday
through Saturday), from 7:00 a.m. until 5:00 a.m. on the following
day, and on New Year's Eve (December 31), if it is a Sunday, from
9:00 am. until 5:00 a.m. on the following day.
B. A licensee shall be authorized to sell wine and malt alcoholic beverages
in original bottle or can containers for consumption off the licensed
premises on the same days and during the same hours as is permitted
for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as
set forth above.
C. During the hours that sales of alcoholic beverages are not permitted,
the entire licensed premises shall also be closed. This requirement shall
not apply to hotels and restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 or to
other establishments where the principal business is other than the sale
of alcoholic beverages. Where in other establishments the principal
business is the sale of alcoholic beverages, this requirement also shall
not apply, provided that all alcoholic beverages are concealed from
public view and are not exposed for public sale.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 19 to have, possess,
carry, distribute, transport or consume any alcoholic beverage on any
public street, highway, avenue, road or alley in the township.
[Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
B. No minor shall be allowed in any room on the licensed premises in
which a bar is located unless accompanied by his parent or guardian or
an adult person.
§ 54-8 VERONA CODE § 54-12
54:106
adjacent rooms to which the public is freely admitted. All such premises
shall be lighted sufficiently so that a full view of the interior thereof may
be had at all hours from the public thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms to
which the public is freely admitted.
§ 54-13. Misstating or misrepresenting age. [Added 11-13-1978 by
Ord. No. 14-78]
It shall be unlawful for a person to misrepresent or misstate his or her age
or the age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any retail licensee
to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a minor.
§ 54-14. Purchase for or delivery to minors. [Added 11-13-1978 by
Ord. No. 14-78]
It shall be unlawful for a person to purchase any alcoholic beverage for or
to deliver any alcoholic beverage to a minor.
§ 54-15. Writing requirement for persons of questionable majority.
[Added 11-13-1978 by Ord. No. 14-78]
No holder of a license for the off-premise consumption of alcoholic beverage
(this includes any of their agents, servants or employees) shall sell alcoholic
beverages to a person whose majority is questionable unless such person,
in writing, represents that he or she is of legal age to purchase or be
served alcoholic beverages. The representation in writing shall be made at
or prior to the time of sale. Such writing shall be signed by the person in
the presence of the licensee and shall give such person's name, address,
age, date of birth and, by signing the writing, a statement that he or she
is making the representation as to his or her age to induce the licensee
to make the sale. After the writing has been signed, the licensee shall
require the person signing the representation to show proper identification
as to his or her age, such as a birth certificate, valid driver's license, valid
county identification card or other suitable evidence of age. The signed
representation shall then be retained by the licensee. The procedure set
forth above must be followed each time a person of questionable majority
makes a purchase even though such person has made a previous purchase
and has previously signed a statement representing his or her age. Each
licensee shall post a sign in a prominent place setting forth the
requirements of the writing as set forth above.
§ 54-16. Official forms. [Added 11-13-1978 by Ord. No. 14-78]
The writing requirement provided for in § 54-15 shall be on forms provided
by the Borough of Verona, which forms shall be substantially in accordance
with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of the Division
of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 54-12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 54-17
54:107
§ 54-17. Submission of forms to Clerk. [Added 11-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 14-78]
At the close of each calendar month, each licensee shall submit to the
Clerk of the Borough of Verona all signed representations obtained from
persons of questionable majority in that month. If any licensee shall obtain
no signed representations in any calendar month, a certification in writing
and attesting to such fact shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk within
five days of the end of the month.
§ 54-18. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-13-1978 by Ord. No.
14-78]
Violations of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with Alcoholic
Beverage Law, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 54-19. Possession and consumption by persons under legal age.
[Added 5-7-1984 by Ord. No. 9-84; amended 12-4-2000 by Ord. No.
8-2000]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — An alcoholic beverage as defined in the
New Jersey Alcoholic Beverage Law, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
DIVISION — The New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
PERSON UNDER THE LEGAL AGE — A person under the age of 21
years and includes the term "underaged person."
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling or any other person related by blood or affinity.
B. Prohibition against possession or consumption on private property. It
shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age who, without legal
authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes an alcoholic
beverage on private property.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Nothing herein shall prohibit a person under the legal age from
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with
a religious observance, ceremony or rite or from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained the
legal age to purchase and to consume alcoholic beverages.
(2) Nothing herein shall prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by
any person under the legal age while such person is actually
engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
§ 54-17 VERONA CODE § 54-19
54:108
licensed under N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., or while actively engaged
in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or
hotel management program at a county vocational school or post
secondary educational institution, except that this section shall
not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under
this article or pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section
of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic
beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
D. Penalties.
(1) Upon the conviction of any person for a violation of this article, the
court shall impose a fine of $250.00 for a first offense and $350 for
any subsequent offense.
(2) In addition, the court may suspend or postpone for six months the
driving privilege of the defendant. Upon the conviction of any
person and the suspension or postponement of that person's
driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the Division
stating the first and last day of the suspension or postponement
period imposed by the court pursuant to this section.
(a) If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, is less
than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement,
including a suspension or postponement of the privilege of
operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months
after the person reaches the age of 17 years.
(b) If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, has a
valid driver's license issued by the State of New Jersey, the
court shall immediately collect the license and forward same to
the Division along with the report required hereunder. If for
any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall
include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color and sex of the person, as well as the first and last
date of the license suspension period imposed by the court.
(c) The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if
such person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during
the period of license suspension or postponement, the person
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A
person shall be required to acknowledge receipt of the written
notice in writing. Failure to receive a written notice or failure
to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall
not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of
N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
(d) If a person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate,
the nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the
§ 54-19 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 54-19
54:109
Chapter 57
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertisements, pamphlets and
handbills — See Ch. 50.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 54.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
Games of chance — See Ch. 80.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 102.
Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 104.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
age of the person and submit the required report to the
Division. The court shall not collect the license of a nonresident
convicted under this section. Upon receipt of a report by the
court, the Division shall give required notice to appropriate
officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
§ 54-19 VERONA CODE § 54-19
57:110
ARTICLE I
Carnivals
[Adopted 8-20-196350]
§ 57-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARNIVAL — A collection of shows, exhibitions, performances, games,
tricks, juggling, sleight of hand, feats of uncommon dexterity, agility of body
or exhibitions of a similar nature, any or all of which are grouped together
and carried on in the open air or under temporary structures for a short
period of time.
§ 57-2. License required.
No person shall conduct a carnival in the borough without first applying to
the Mayor and Council for a license to do so. Such license is to be issued by
the Borough Clerk.
§ 57-3. Fees; exemptions.
§ 57-4. Certificate of insurance.52
Before such carnival shall operate in the borough, the person receiving a
license for the operation of a carnival shall file with the Borough Clerk
a certificate of insurance in the sum of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.) as evidence that the proposed licensee is able to meet any and
all claims for damages incurred by reason of accidents or otherwise during
the operation of such carnival, such certificate of insurance to be approved
by the Mayor and Council.
A. The license fee for conducting such carnival shall be as provided for in
Chapter A175, Fees, and such fee shall be imposed for revenue as well
as regulation.51
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to churches, religious
corporations, fraternal organizations which have been in existence for
more than five (5) years prior to application for license or duly
incorporated nonprofit corporations which have been in existence for
more than five (5) years prior to application for a license hereunder.
50.Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from former Secs. 17.1 through
17.4 of former Ch. 17 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted
8-20-1963.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 57-1 AMUSEMENTS § 57-4
57:111

ARTICLE II
Motion Picture Theaters
[Adopted 8-20-196353]
§ 57-5. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, carry on or promote any
motion picture theater without having first obtained a license therefor.
§ 57-6. Application procedure and requirements.
§ 57-7. Issuance; display.
Upon approval by resolution of the Mayor and Borough Council, the
Borough Clerk shall issue a license upon payment of the fee herein
provided. Such license shall be prominently displayed in full public view in
and about the premises licensed.
§ 57-8. Duration.
The license required by this Article shall be valid for one (1) year, from
January 1 until December 31.
§ 57-9. Fees.
A. All applications for licenses required by this Article shall be made in
writing to the Mayor and Council on forms provided by the Borough
Clerk.
B. The application shall set forth the name of the applicant (or, in the case
of a corporation, the names of its four (4) principal officers), the place
where the business is to be carried on, a description of the building and
an agreement to abide by all the terms of this article or of any
amendments or supplements thereto.
C. The applicant shall also present with his application a certificate of
approval of the Building Inspector of the borough that the building or
place wherein the licensed business is to be carried on complies with all
the requirements of the Building and Zoning Ordinances of the borough
and all the laws of the state pertaining to such buildings or places.54
D. In addition thereto, the applicant shall also present with his application
a certificate of approval of the Chief of the Fire Department showing
that the building complies with all laws of the state and all local
ordinances pertaining to fire or safety.55
53.Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from former Secs. 17.5 through
17.11 of former Ch. 17 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted
8-20-1963.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform; and Ch. 150, Zoning.
55.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:3-3 et seq. and Ch. 74, Fire Prevention.
§ 57-5 AMUSEMENTS § 57-9
57:113
§ 57-10. Revocation.
Any license issued under this Article may be revoked by resolution of the
Mayor and Borough Council by reason of the violation of the terms of the
license, the violation of any municipal ordinance, state or federal statute, or
falsification in applying for a license or for violating any of the conditions
set forth in § 57-11. The licensed person must be granted a hearing by the
Mayor and Borough Council upon his request.
§ 57-11. Regulations.
Every applicant for the license provided for herein shall be subject to the
following conditions and, in accepting the license, shall agree to abide
thereby:
A. The fee for the license required under the terms of this Article shall be
as provided for in Chapter A175, Fees for the following divisions:56
(1) Five hundred (500) seats or less.
(2) Five hundred one (501) to one thousand (1,000) seats.
(3) Over one thousand (1,000) seats.
B. If the license is granted after July 1 of any year, the fee shall be fifty
percent (50%) of the yearly fee herein designated.
A. Such license shall not be transferable or assignable.
B. The building in which the exhibition is conducted shall in all respects
comply with the requirements of the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the borough respecting such building.57
C. No person under the age of fourteen (14) years shall be allowed to enter
the premises for the purpose of the viewing of a motion picture
exhibition unless such person shall be accompanied by his parent or
guardian or person standing in loco parentis.
D. Fees for entrance shall be uniform for all persons.
E. The licensee shall be responsible for any disorder, and any police officer
or fireman may enter at any time such place for the purpose of
inspection and to enforce obedience of the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the borough.
F. The Building Inspector shall have access at all times to such place of
business.
G. Smoking.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
57.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:3-1 et seq. in particular. See also Ch. 64, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 57-9 VERONA CODE § 57-11
57:114
(1) No smoking shall be permitted in that section of the building known
as the orchestra during hours in which motion pictures or
theatrical productions are being shown or conducted.
(2) Smoking may be permitted in the balcony or loges if written
approval is obtained from the Chief of the Fire Department. In the
event approval is given by the Chief of the Fire Department, the
same can be revoked or canceled after a hearing before the Mayor
and Council with notice to the owner or operator of the building,
who shall have an opportunity to attend such hearing and defend
the proposed revocation.
H. Sufficient personnel shall be hired to keep good order on the premises.
In the event that it is necessary for any of the personnel hired by the
licensee to have police power, then application shall be made to the
Mayor and Borough Council for their appointment as special police in
accordance with ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted.
§ 57-11 AMUSEMENTS § 57-11
57:115

ARTICLE III
Poolrooms and Bowling Alleys
[Adopted 8-20-196358]
§ 57-12. License required.
It shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct in the borough any
billiard room, poolroom or bowling alley without first presenting an
application for and receiving a license to operate the respective business
and paying the fee hereinafter prescribed for such license.
§ 57-13. Application procedure.
Each application for any license issuable under this Article shall be made
to the Borough Clerk in writing and shall set forth the location and type of
business sought to be licensed; the name, residence, age and occupation
of the applicant; and the number of pool tables, billiard tables or bowling
alleys the applicant desires to operate.
§ 57-14. Issuance or refusal.
All applications required by this Article shall be accompanied by the
appropriate license fee hereinafter named and shall be submitted to the
Borough Council, which, in its discretion, may grant or refuse such license,
and upon the granting of any license, the Borough Clerk shall issue such
license to the licensee, and upon failure to issue any license, the license fee
shall be promptly refunded to the applicant.
§ 57-15. Fees.59
The for the license required under this Article shall be as provided for in
chapter A175, Fees, and shall be paid for each pool or billiard table or
bowling alley.
§ 57-16. Duration; nontransferability.
The license required under this Article when issued shall run for one (1)
year from the date of its issuance and no longer and shall not be assigned
or transferred.
§ 57-17. Revocation.
The Mayor and Borough Council shall have the right to revoke a license
issued under this Article upon proof that the room or store in which such
pool or billiard tables or bowling alleys are operated is frequented by
boisterous or disorderly persons or that any disorderly conduct or practices
58.Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from former Secs. 17.12 through
17.21 of former Ch. 17 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona 8-20-1963.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 57-12 AMUSEMENTS § 57-17
57:117
are permitted therein, and in case of such revocation, no part of the license
fee paid shall be returned.
§ 57-18. License restricted to designated place; display.
Each license shall entitle the licensee to conduct the licensed business
or game only at the place designated in the license and shall not be
transferable either as to person or place. Each license shall be kept in
a position in the licensed premises where it is readily observable and is
prominently displayed.
§ 57-19. Minors.
No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be permitted to play
pool or billiards in any of the licensed premises in the borough.
§ 57-20. Exemptions.
This Article shall not apply to any church or fraternal order or other private
nonprofitmaking association which operates or maintains any of the herein
specified places or types of amusement or recreation solely for the use of its
own members.
§ 57-21. Hours.
No person who shall have received a license for a billiard room, poolroom
or bowling alley shall allow his billiard room or poolroom or bowling alley
to be open on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. or on
weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 57-17 VERONA CODE § 57-21
57:118
ARTICLE IV
Coin-Operated Music Machines
[Adopted 8-20-196360]
§ 57-22. License required.
No person shall install, maintain, operate or possess in any store, building
or other place where the public is invited or where the public may enter or
any building or place wherein any club or organization meetings are held,
within the borough, any music machine in which coins are inserted for its
operation without first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter
provided.
§ 57-23. Application procedure.
§ 57-24. Investigation of applicant.
A. Application for the installation, maintenance or possession of each
music machine regulated by this Article shall be made to the Borough
Clerk by the owner of such machine. The application shall be on a form
furnished by the Borough Clerk and shall state the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the machine.
(2) The name of owner and address of the establishment in which the
machine is to be installed, maintained or operated.
(3) The type of business conducted in the place where the machine is
to be installed, maintained or operated.
B. The application shall be accompanied by cash or a certified check in the
amount of the license fee, hereinafter provided for.
A. Upon receipt of any application for a license for a music machine, the
Borough Clerk shall forward same to the Police Department for
investigation. The investigation shall be made for the purpose of
determining the following:
(1) Whether the owner of the machine, the owner of the establishment,
their agents, servants or employees who are regularly in or about
the establishment in which the machine is to be installed,
maintained or operated have been convicted of:
(a) Any crime involving moral turpitude.
(b) A violation of any state law prohibiting the sale of liquor to
minors.
60.Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from former Secs. 17.22 through
17.30 of former Ch. 17 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted
8-20-1963.
§ 57-22 AMUSEMENTS § 57-24
57:119
§ 57-25. Issuance; grounds for refusal.
§ 57-26. Fee.63
The Borough Clerk shall issue a license for each music machine upon the
payment of the annual license fee provided for in Chapter A175, Fees.
(c) A violation of any federal, state or local law prohibiting the sale
of narcotics or other habit-producing drugs.
(2) Whether the place in which the machine is to be located is a place
in which the law is habitually violated.
B. In order to facilitate such investigation, any person or persons to be
investigated may furnish or file with the Police Department a full and
adequate set of fingerprints, and the Police Department may rely upon a
check of these fingerprints with proper authorities, in lieu of other
investigation.
A. Upon completion of the investigation, the Police Department shall, if it
approves the issuance of a license, return the approved application to
the Borough Clerk, who shall thereupon issue a license.
B. Upon completion of the investigation the Police Department shall, if it
disapproves the issuance of a license, forward the same to the Mayor
and Council for its consideration. The Mayor and Council shall, by
resolution, either authorize the issuance of a license or approve the
action of the Police Department by rejecting the application.
C. No application shall be rejected, however, unless:
(1) The owner of the machine, the owner of the establishment, or their
agents, servants or employees who are regularly in or about the
establishment in which the machine is to be installed, maintained
or operated have been convicted of:
(a) Any crime involving moral turpitude;
(b) Violation of any state law prohibiting the sale of liquor to
minors;61
(c) Violation of any federal, state or local law prohibiting the sale
of narcotics or other habit-producing drugs;62 or
(2) The place in which the machine is to be located is a place in which
the law is habitually violated.
61.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-77.
62.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 24:18-1 et seq.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 57-24 VERONA CODE § 57-27
57:120
§ 57-27. License identification.
The license shall have typewritten on its face the name and address of the
owner of the machine and where the machine is licensed to be installed.
§ 57-28. Display; nontransferability of ownership and location.
§ 57-29. Duration.
The license year shall be from January 1 to December 31.
§ 57-30. Revocation.
A. The license shall be prominently displayed near the licensed device.
B. The license shall not be transferable as to ownership or location, but
may be transferred to a new or different machine where ownership or
location are not changed.
A. Any license herein issued may be revoked by the Mayor and Council
after written notice has been served upon the licensee either personally
or by registered mail addressed to the address as the same appears on
the application for license, within not less than five (5) days before the
date set for the hearing thereon.
B. A license may be revoked on any ground on which the Mayor and
Council might refuse to grant a license, whether or not such ground
existed before or after the issuance of the license.
§ 57-27 AMUSEMENTS § 57-30
57:121

ARTICLE V
Mechanical Amusement Devices
[Adopted 7-1-1975 as Ord. No. 9-75]
§ 57-31. Definitions. [Amended 3-15-1982 by Ord. No. 3-82]
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any coin-operated mechanical or electrical device
or contrivance operated for profit which, by means of the insertion of a coin,
token, slug, disk or other article into a slot, crevice, opening or attachment
connected with or forming a part of any such devices or contrivances,
effects the operation thereof for use as a game, contest or amusement or
which may be so used. The term "amusement device" includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, pinball machines, electronic games, bagatelle, pool
tables and similar devices. The term "amusement device" does not include
jukeboxes or coin-operated music machines.
OPERATOR — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
in whose place of business any amusement device is placed or kept for
operation by the public.
§ 57-32. Licensing procedures. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81; 3-15-1982 by Ord. No. 3-82]
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an operator
of an amusement device in the Township of the Borough of Verona without
first having obtained a license and paid the required license fee.
A. Separate business premises shall require separate license applications
and license fees even though they have the same operator.
B. Any operator desiring to obtain a license shall file an application, in
duplicate, with the Township Clerk, and shall specify as follows:
(1) The name, address, social security number and telephone number
of the applicant and, if a firm, corporation, partnership or
association, the principals, stockholders and the principal officers
thereof and their addresses, social security numbers and telephone
numbers.
(2) The address of the location where the licensed device or devices
are to be operated, together with the character of the business as
carried on at such place.
(3) The name, address and social security number of the registered
agent of the applicant upon whom service of process is authorized
to be made.
(4) The name, address, social security number and telephone number
of the manager of the applicant who shall be in charge of the
applicant's business in the Township of the Borough of Verona.
§ 57-31 AMUSEMENTS § 57-32
57:123
(5) With respect to each person whose name appears on the
application:
(a) Whether or not such person was ever convicted in any
jurisdiction of any of the following: any crime involving moral
turpitude, any violation of a law prohibiting the sale of liquor to
minors, violation of any law prohibiting the sale of any
controlled dangerous substance or narcotic or other habitproducing
drug or violation of any gambling law, with a full
disclosure of the nature of the offense, time and place of
commission, legal proceedings and penalty imposed.
(b) Each such person shall voluntarily submit to the taking of his
fingerprints so that a proper investigation may be expedited.
C. The trade name and general description of the device or devices to be
licensed, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number of each
such device.
D. The application shall contain a certification, under oath, made by the
applicant, that the information contained in the application is complete,
accurate and truthful to the best of his knowledge and belief.
E. Each application shall be promptly forwarded to the Chief of Police,
who shall cause an investigation to be made and report its results to the
Mayor and Council. The purpose of this investigation is to establish that
the applicant is capable of operating amusement devices within the
township in a manner consistent with the public safety, good morals and
general welfare of the community and that all those persons involved in
such operation can reasonably be expected to operate in accordance
with the law and free from gambling and other illegal or immoral
impact.
F. If the application is approved by the Mayor and Council, the license
shall be issued by the Township Clerk. If the license is denied, the
license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
G. Each license shall expire on the first day of October. Licenses issued
after April 1 will be at one-half (1/2) price.
H. Each license shall be affixed to the machine or device for which it is
issued so that the license can be easily and quickly identified.
I. Operators of amusement devices shall be charged the fee provided for
in Chapter A175, Fees.
J. Licenses are nonassignable and nontransferable from one operator to
another or from one business premises to another. A license may be
transferred from one machine to another by giving notice to the
Township Clerk to that effect and giving a description of the new
machine including the manufacturer, model number and serial number.
§ 57-32 VERONA CODE § 57-32
57:124
§ 57-33. Regulations. [Amended 3-15-1982 by Ord. No. 3-82]
K. No amusement devices shall be located on any premises which is within
two hundred (200) feet of a public or private school or house of worship.
The distance shall be measured from the nearest entrance of the school
or house of worship to the nearest entrance of the premises on which
the amusement device is located or is sought to be located along the
route that a pedestrian would normally walk.
A. No operator shall offer or permit to be offered any prizes or awards,
whether in cash or otherwise, as an inducement to use amusement
devices.
B. No operator shall permit any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years
unaccompanied by a parent or guardian, or unaccompanied by the
parent or guardian of an accompanying minor, to operate any
amusement device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
C. Any machine or device not having affixed thereto the license therefor
may be taken into custody and disposed of by the Police Department.
For the purpose of determining whether said machines or devices are
so licensed, the Police Department shall have the right of entry into the
premises where such machines or devices are located.
D. No amusement device shall be operated upon a premises unless there is
adult supervisory personnel present at all times during the hours of
operation.
E. Any license herein issued may be revoked by the Mayor and Council
after a hearing, upon written notice which shall be served upon the
licensee either personally or by registered mail addressed to the
address as the same appears on the application for the license, said
notice to be served not less than five (5) days before the date set for the
hearing thereon.
F. A license may be revoked upon any ground for which the Mayor and
Council might refuse to grant a license, whether or not such ground
existed before or after the issuance of the license.
§ 57-32 AMUSEMENTS § 57-33
57:125

ARTICLE VI
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
§ 57-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
§ 57-34 AMUSEMENTS § 57-34
57:127
Chapter 60
(RESERVED)
Chapter 61
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 54.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 102.
§ 61-1. Purpose; exception. [Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 10-08]
§ 61-2. Hours of business; security requirements.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the opening and closing hours
of retail and commercial business establishments in order to avoid
noise, inconvenience and disturbance of residential areas within the
Township which are caused when retail and other commercial
establishments remain open during late hours. It is further the
determination of the Township of Verona that certain retail, commercial
and business establishments open during late evening and early
morning hours affect police facilities, the crime rate, public disorder,
public safety, public health, physical and mental health, public welfare,
noise pollution, littering, sanitation and local motor vehicle traffic. It is
hereby determined and declared to be in the best interests of the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township of Verona
that the retail and commercial businesses regulated by this chapter
conduct their business under the following rules and provisions.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to restaurants/taverns
that are governed by the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control or pharmacies, medical centers, hospitals or other like places of
business which primarily engage in providing products or services
related to the health and well-being of the public.
A. Every retail business and commercial establishment located within the
Township, excluding restaurants and/or businesses that are regulated
by the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control and medical
centers, hospitals, pharmacies or other similar places of business
whose main purpose is to provide medical products or medical services
to the public, shall be closed to the public and business with the public
therein shall be and is hereby prohibited between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 5:00 a.m. No such business whose hours of operation are
regulated by this chapter shall accept deliveries of supplies and or
equipment during any hours other than hours during which the
§ 57-34 VERONA CODE § 61-2
60:128
§ 61-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine for not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 61A
CATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 68.
§ 61A-1. Adoption of Cat Licensing Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.2, the Cat Licensing Code of New Jersey,
1987,65 heretofore approved by the New Jersey State Department of Health
and as may be hereafter amended or supplemented, is hereby adopted by
reference in its entirety.
§ 61A-2. Jurisdiction.
All references to "jurisdiction," as set forth in the Cat Licensing Code of
New Jersey, 1987, shall mean the Township of Verona.
§ 61A-3. License fees.
Fees for the licensing of cats shall be as set forth in Chapter A175 of the
Code of the Township of Verona, as may be from time to time amended by
the Verona governing body.
business is open to the public. [Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No.
10-08; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 17-0864]
B. In addition thereto, the business or commercial establishment shall
employ a security officer at the premises or the premises shall have in
operation a security device approved by the Chief of Police of the
Township of the Borough of Verona. Such security device may consist of
a silent and/or audible burglar alarm connected to a central security
monitoring system designed to activate police response or such other
device which can be activated instantaneously to notify law
enforcement officers that a crime or disorderly persons activity is in
progress.
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded Ord. No. 14-08, adopted 10-20-2008.
65.Editor's Note: A copy of this code is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 61-2 CATS § 61A-4
61A:129
§ 61A-4. Expiration of licenses.
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on September 30 of
each year.
§ 61A-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.) nor
more than fifty dollars ($50.) for each violation.
Chapter 61B
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
News vending machines — See Ch. 95. Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 143.
§ 61B-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAR — Any place, establishment or portion of a restaurant, including any
contiguous lounge or common area, in which the principal business is the
sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of such place
or establishment or in such portion of a restaurant.
HEALTH OFFICER — The administrative officer of the Township of Verona
authorized to enforce and administer health codes, regulations and laws
within the Township of Verona and/or his or her authorized representative
or designee.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, company, association or
any other legal entity.
RESTAURANT — Any place or business establishment in which the principal
business is the sale of food for consumption on the premises.
TAVERN — Any place or establishment, including any contiguous lounge
or common area, in which the principal business is the sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises of such place or establishment.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose of
smoking, chewing, inhaling or other personal use, including but not limited
to cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person that operates a store, stand, booth,
concession or place of business at which sales of tobacco are made to
purchasers for consumption or use. The term shall also include and shall
§ 61A-4 VERONA CODE § 61B-1
61B:130
mean any person that owns, operates or uses a tobacco vending machine
and/or tobacco vending machine location for the sale of tobacco.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses cigarettes or other tobacco products.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE LOCATION — The room, enclosure, space
or area where a tobacco vending machine is installed and is operated.
§ 61B-2. Restriction of tobacco vending machines and sales.
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to possess and operate a tobacco
vending machine and/or to offer for sale or to sell tobacco through a tobacco
vending machine in the Township of Verona, except that this section shall
not prohibit the installation and operation of a tobacco vending machine by
a tobacco retailer in the following circumstances:
A. In any premises or portion thereof to which access by minors is
expressly prohibited by law or by the written policy of the owner or
person in control of such premises, provided that:
(1) Such tobacco vending machine is located fully within the area of
such premises from which minors are prohibited.
(2) Said vending machine is not less than 20 feet in distance from all
entrances and exits of such premises. If, in the judgment of the
Health Officer, a distance of 20 feet is not practical or will not serve
the purpose of limiting access by minors to the tobacco vending
machine, said tobacco vending machine shall be placed in a
location to be approved by the Health Officer, or his or her
designee, so as to sufficiently restrict access to said tobacco
vending machine by minors.
(3) Said tobacco vending machine is in a location that is under the
direct visual supervision of the tobacco retailer or an adult
employee thereof during the hours that such tobacco vending
machine is accessible to the public.
B. In commercial buildings or industrial plants or portions thereof where
the public is expressly prohibited and where such tobacco vending
machines are strictly for the use of the employees therein; provided,
however, that the area in which the tobacco vending machine is located
is not open to the public and provided that no minor employees are
permitted in such area.
C. In a restaurant, tavern or bar, provided that:
(1) The tobacco vending machine is located fully within such premises.
(2) Said vending machine is not less than 20 feet in distance from all
entrances and exits of such premises. If, in the judgment of the
Health Officer, a distance of 20 feet is not practical or will not serve
§ 61B-1 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 61B-2
61B:131
§ 61B-3. Effective date for compliance.
All tobacco vending machines that are not in compliance with this chapter
shall be removed by the owner or operator thereof within 30 days from the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 61B-4. Enforcement.
§ 61B-5. Effect on other laws and regulations; severability.
the purpose of limiting access by minors to the tobacco vending
machine, said tobacco vending machine shall be placed in a
location to be approved by the Health Officer, or his or her
designee, so as to sufficiently restrict access to said tobacco
vending machine by minors.
(3) Said tobacco vending machine is in a location that is under the
direct visual supervision of the tobacco retailer or an adult
employee thereof during the hours that such tobacco vending
machine is accessible to the public.
A. The Township Health Officer, or his designee, may issue or cause to be
issued a summons alleging a violation of this chapter. Nothing herein
shall prevent any other person from filing a complaint in the Municipal
Court of Verona alleging a violation of this chapter.
B. The Health Officer, or his designee shall have the following powers of
right of entry and inspection:
(1) The Health Officer, or his designee, after giving proper
identification, shall have the right to inspect any matter, thing,
premises, place, person, record, vehicle, incident or event as may
be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose,
interfere with or obstruct the Health Officer, or his designee,
during the performance of his or her duties in furtherance of this
chapter.
(3) The Health Officer, or his designee, may request the assistance of
the Township of Verona Police Department or other police agency
or officer when necessary to execute his or her official duties in the
manner described by this chapter and otherwise by law.
A. This chapter is supplemental to the ordinances of the Township of
Verona and all other state statutes, laws, codes and regulations duly
enacted by the State of New Jersey relating to the public health and
safety. Where the provisions of any other state law, code or regulation
or local ordinance or regulation apply, the more restrictive of any or all
laws, ordinance, regulations or rules shall prevail.
§ 61B-2 VERONA CODE § 61B-5
61B:132
§ 61B-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 62
CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 20. Fire prevention — Ch. 74.
B. If any clause, section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter is
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in
part, by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such clause, section,
subsection or paragraph of this chapter be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and its invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500
for each offense. Complaints under this chapter shall be cognizable in
the Township of Verona Municipal Court or before such other judicial
officer having authority under the laws of the State of New Jersey. In
addition to the penalties hereunder, the Court shall have the power to
impose such other penalties as may be provided under N.J.S.A. 26:3-77
and N.J.S.A. 26:3-78.
B. Each day for which a person shall maintain a tobacco vending machine
in violation of this chapter and each sale of tobacco to a minor in
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation hereunder.
§ 61B-5 CLAIMS § 61B-6
62:133

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance
[Adopted 2-6-1984 as Ord. No. 2-84]
§ 62-1. Restriction of payment.
No insurance company which has issued or renewed any fire insurance
policy after the adoption of this chapter shall pay to a claimant under said
fire insurance policy any claim in excess of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.) for fire damages on any real property located within the
Township of the Borough of Verona until such time as all taxes, assessments
and municipal liens or charges due and payable appearing on the official
certificate of search have been paid either by the owner of said real
property or the insurance company pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
184 of the Laws of 1978.66
§ 62-2. Resolution allowing full payment.
In lieu of the requirements of § 62-1, the Mayor and Council may adopt
a resolution pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 184 of Laws of 1978,
Sections 3 and 4,67 allowing the full payment of the insurance proceeds to
the owner for restoration or improvement of the damaged property.
§ 62-3. Copy to be submitted to Fire Department.
A copy of this Article shall be submitted, upon final adoption, to the Fire
Department of the Township of the Borough of Verona.
§ 62-4. Notification of addresses of fires.
The Fire Department shall notify the Tax Collector's office with the address
of all fires occurring after the adoption of this Article.
§ 62-5. Copy to be submitted to State Commissioner of Insurance.
A copy of the Article shall be submitted to the State Commissioner of
Insurance in accordance with Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1978.68
66.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
67.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-10 and 36-11.
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 62-1 CLAIMS § 62-5
62:135
Chapter 64
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Automobile sales lots — See Ch. 60.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
Flood Control — See Ch. 77.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 88.
Site plan review — See Ch. 118.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 129.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ 64-1. Enforcing agency established.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Verona a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the Construction Code
Enforcement Bureau, consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official,
Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State
Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
§ 64-2. Qualifications.
Each official position created in § 64-1 hereof shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,69 as amended, and
N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an
on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same person,
provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and
N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
§ 64-3. Public access to agency.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at
one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
§ 64-4. Construction Board of Appeals.
A. There is hereby established a Construction Board of Appeals to hear
appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency. Such Board shall
consist of five members. At least one Board member shall be a
registered architect or licensed professional engineer of building
69.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 62-5 VERONA CODE § 64-4
64:136
§ 64-5. Fees. [Amended 10-4-1982 by Ord. No. 16-82; 12-5-1988 by
Ord. No. 28-88; 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 2-91; 4-15-1996 by Ord. No.
2-96; 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99]
Fees for permits, inspections, licenses and certificates of occupancy shall
be as set forth in Chapter A175 of the Verona Code as may hereafter be
supplemented or amended.
§ 64-6. Biannual report of Construction Official.
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council biannually a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency, and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.70
construction experience, and at least one Board member shall be
qualified as a Plumbing Subcode Official and one qualified as an
Electrical Subcode Official. No more than two Board members shall be
selected from the same business or profession. Each Board member
shall have had at least three years' experience in construction, design
or supervision as a licensed engineer or registered architect or, in the
alternative, five years' experience in construction, design or supervision
as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's degree in architecture
or engineering, respectively, from an accredited institution of higher
education or, as a further alternative, 10 years' experience in
construction, design or supervision as a journeyman in a construction
trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or inspector.
B. Appointment of members; terms; membership restriction.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint the Board members and any alternate
members. For the members first appointed, the Mayor shall
designate the appointees' terms so that one shall be appointed for a
term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three
years and two for a term of four years. At the expiration of such
terms and thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of four
years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
(2) The Mayor shall appoint such number of alternates, as may be
appropriate, for terms not to exceed four years or may, in the
alternative, appoint alternates on a case-by-case basis.
(3) No regular or alternate Board member may be a member of the
enforcing agency, the decisions of which are subject to the review
of the Board.
C. The Board members, regular or alternate, shall serve without
compensation.
70.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 64-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 64-7
64:137
§ 64-7. (Reserved)71
§ 64-8. Fire limits established; biannual fire limit report.72
A. The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23:
(1) West side of Depot Street to the railroad, between Pine Street and
Personette Avenue.
(2) South side of Durrell Street 605 feet east of the railroad, 225 feet
deep.
(3) On the north side of Bloomfield Avenue from the railroad property
east to Hillcrest Terrace, 250 feet deep.
(4) On the north side of Bloomfield Avenue 600 feet west of Pompton
Avenue through to Claremont Avenue.
(5) On the north side of Bloomfield Avenue from Pompton Avenue east
to the Montclair line to Claremont Avenue.
(6) On the south side of Bloomfield Avenue from West Lincoln Street
east to Lakeside Avenue, 125 feet deep.
(7) On the south side of Bloomfield Avenue from Lakeview Place east to
Park Avenue, 135 feet deep.
(8) On the south side of Bloomfield Avenue from Brookdale Avenue
east to Montclair line, 150 feet deep.
(9) On the east side of Pompton Avenue from Claridge Drive north to
the Cedar Grove line, 700 feet deep.
(10) Commerce Court; Ozone Avenue and Grove Avenue; all of the M-1
Zone.
B. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and
Council biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire
limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the
Construction Official, the Building Subcode Official and the Fire
Subcode Official regarding those areas which should be designated as
within fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
71.Editor's Note: Former § 64-7, Surcharge; annual surcharge report, as amended 4-15-1996
by Ord. No. 2-96, was repealed 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99.
72.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 74, Fire Prevention.
§ 64-7 VERONA CODE § 64-8
64:138
Chapter 65
CONVERSION OF RENTAL DWELLING UNITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rent control — See Ch. 112.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
Fees — See Ch. A175.
§ 65-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the definition of "convert" shall be as is set
forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.24f.
§ 65-2. Establishment of fees payable on conversion of rental
dwelling units. [Amended 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2-2001]
The owner of any building or structure who seeks to convert any premises
from residential rental use to condominium, cooperative, planned
residential development or separable fee-simple ownership of the dwelling
units shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.35, pay a fee to the Township
of Verona in the amount established by Chapter A175 of the Verona Code
for each dwelling unit in the building or structure being converted. Such
fee shall be payable at the time such owner files his notice of intention to
register for conversion as required by state law and shall accompany the
notice of intention filed with the Township Rent Control Board.
Chapter 66
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 34. Personnel policies — See Ch. 36.
§ 66-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL COMMITTEE — A committee consisting of the Township Manager,
Director of Recreation, and the Verona Police Chief. It shall be charged
with the review of all appeals filed by any employee or volunteer who is
disqualified from service in a program resulting from a criminal history
record background check.
CO-SPONSORED PROGRAM — Any program, including but not limited
to nonprofit youth-serving organizations as defined below, that receives
§ 64-8 CONVERSION OF RENTAL DWELLING UNITS § 66-1
65:139
benefits, either directly or indirectly, including but not limited to the
provision of funding and/or the provision of fields, facilities, and/or
equipment (and including the maintenance of same), from the Township of
Verona.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A review and
determination as to whether a person has any prior criminal record by
cross-referencing that person's name and/or fingerprints with those on file
with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, and the
Bureau of Identification of the New Jersey State Police.
EMPLOYEE — An individual who receives compensation from the Township,
from a private entity, or from a nonprofit entity, monetary or otherwise,
which compensation results from his or her employment with, or
employment in, a youth activity as defined below.
QUALIFIED PARTICIPANT — An employee or volunteer who has completed
a criminal history record background check revealing no disqualifying
convictions.
VERONA YOUTH PROGRAM — Any program offering recreational, cultural,
charitable, social and/or other activities or services for persons younger
than 18 years of age, including but not limited to sports leagues that are
funded and/or administered, in whole or in part, by the Township of Verona.
VOLUNTEER — Any individual who does not receive compensation from
the Township, from a private entity or from a nonprofit entity, monetary or
otherwise, which compensation results from his or her involvement with or
employment by a youth service organization or Verona youth program, but
who still involves himself or herself with such program and provides his or
her services without such compensation.
YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION or ORGANIZATION — A corporation,
association or other organization established pursuant to the laws of this
state, but excluding public and nonpublic schools, which provides
recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other activities or services for
persons younger than 18 years of age and is exempt from federal income
taxes.
§ 66-2. Request for criminal history record background check;
costs.
A. The Township requires that all youth-serving organizations involved in
cosponsored programs or Verona youth programs request through the
Director of Recreation that a criminal history record background check
be conducted on each prospective and current employee and/or
volunteer of the organization.
B. No prospective employee or volunteer will be permitted to commence
service prior to the completion of the criminal history record
background check process.
§ 66-1 VERONA CODE § 66-2
65:140
§ 66-3. Submission of information for background check.
§ 66-4. Continuing obligation.
Notwithstanding prior compliance with this chapter, no individual shall be
permitted to continue as an employee or volunteer in any capacity unless
the latest criminal history record background check on file with the Director
of Recreation was performed within a period of time designated by the
Township Manager.
§ 66-5. Disqualification from service.
C. An employee or volunteer required by this chapter to undergo a
criminal history record background check who refuses to consent to
this procedure shall not participate in any youth-serving organization or
Verona youth program.
D. The costs(s) incurred for the criminal history record background check
shall be the responsibility of the Township.
A. Any youth-serving organization or Verona youth program seeking to
employ or engage an employee or volunteer required to undergo a
criminal history record background check pursuant to this chapter shall
submit a list of such employees and volunteers currently serving the
organization and a list of all prospective employees and volunteers to
the Director of Recreation.
B. All employees and volunteers included on the aforementioned lists shall
submit their name, address, date of birth, written consent and any other
data deemed necessary by the Director of Recreation.
C. The Director of Recreation shall act as a clearinghouse for the
collection and dissemination of nonconfidential information obtained as
a result of conducting criminal history record background checks
pursuant to this section, while the Verona Police Chief will maintain all
confidential information.
A. The Township of Verona shall conduct a criminal history record
background check on each prospective and current volunteer/employee
participating in any Township-endorsed or -sponsored programs which
provide recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other activities or
services for persons younger than 18 years of age. Any prospective and/
or current volunteer/employee may be disqualified from serving in such
capacity and participating in any Township-endorsed or -sponsored
program(s) if that person's criminal history record background check
reveals a record of conviction of any of the following crimes and
offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
§ 66-2 CONVERSION OF RENTAL DWELLING UNITS § 66-5
65:141
§ 66-6. Results; determination of disqualification.
Homicide: all offenses; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq. Assault;
Endangering; Threats: all offenses; N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq.,
Kidnapping: all offenses; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq., Sexual
Offenses: all offenses; N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et. seq., Robbery: all
offenses.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:
24-1 et seq., Offenses Against the Family, Children and
Incompetents: all offenses.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of New
Jersey Statutes, Theft: all offenses.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except Paragraph (4) of Subsection a of
N.J.S.A. 2C: 35-10 (exceptions include possession of 50 grams
or less of marijuana or five grams or less of hashish).
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in the subsections above.
B. Verona Police Chief and Director of Recreation. The Verona Police Chief
and the Director of Recreation shall have authority to exercise
discretion when deliberating a disqualification determination.
A. If, following the completion of the criminal history record background
check and receipt of the results, a disqualifying conviction exists as set
forth in this chapter, then the Verona Police Chief, at his discretion,
shall notify the employee or volunteer in writing, via certified and
regular mail, of that person's disqualification to serve with the
organization in any capacity. The written notice shall not divulge any
information regarding the nature of the conviction(s); rather, the
written notice shall simply state that the employee or volunteer is
disqualified pursuant to this section. The written notice shall also state
that the individual may appeal the determination by filing a written
notice of appeal in accordance with the requirements of § 66-7 below. A
copy of said notice will in all circumstances be sent to the Director of
Recreation. The Director of Recreation shall also have the power to
exercise discretion when deliberating a disqualification termination.
B. The Verona Police Chief shall be authorized to conduct any additional
investigation that in his discretion he deems appropriate to obtain
accurate information. Further, the Verona Police Chief may rely upon
information other than the criminal history record background check
when making a disqualification determination.
§ 66-5 VERONA CODE § 66-7
65:142
§ 66-7. Disqualification appeals process.
§ 66-8. Disqualification from service.
A. Grounds for appeal. Any current or prospective employee or volunteer
who is disqualified in accordance with this chapter may appeal that
determination for good cause shown. Good cause shall include, but is
not limited to, the following:
(1) The background check produced inaccurate or incomplete
information.
(2) The age of the individual at the time of the offense or crime or
conviction.
(3) The nature and circumstances underlining the conviction indicate
that the individual does not presently pose a threat.
(4) The conviction arose out of an isolated incident.
(5) Since the conviction, the individual has taken significant steps
towards rehabilitation, including but not limited to counseling,
treatment, schooling, vocational training, and successful
completion of a court-ordered program.
B. Notice of appeal. Any current or prospective employee or volunteer may
file an appeal from an initial determination under this chapter by filing
a written notice of appeal with the Verona Police Chief within 10 days of
his or her filing of the written notice of disqualification received from
the Verona Police Chief.
C. Within seven days of the receipt filing of a written notice of appeal, the
Appeal Committee shall send a written notice to the applicant via
certified and regular mail providing a hearing date no later than 20
days from the receipt of the notice of appeal.
D. Hearing. The hearing before the Appeal Committee shall be closed to
the public unless an open hearing is requested by the appellant. It shall
be attended only by the members of the Appeal Committee, the
Township Attorney (if appropriate), the appealing individual and his or
her attorney if so retained. During the course of the hearing, the
appealing individual and his or her attorney shall be given the
opportunity to speak and/or read a prepared statement.
A. In the event an individual is notified of his/her disqualification and does
not appeal in accordance with the requirements of § 66-7, the Director
of Recreation shall notify the appropriate authority in which the
applicant serves or wishes to serve of that person's disqualification to
serve with that organization in any capacity.
B. In the event of a duly filed appeal in accordance with § 66-7 that results
in a reversal of the determination, no further action will be required.
§ 66-7 CONVERSION OF RENTAL DWELLING UNITS § 66-8
65:143
§ 66-9. Limitations on access and use of background check
information.
§ 66-10. Monitoring of compliance; penalties upon failure to
comply.
The youth-serving organization or Verona youth program, as applicable,
shall be required to monitor compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as it relates to the submission of its employees and volunteers to a
criminal history record background check. The youth-serving organization
or Verona youth program, as applicable, shall not permit any of its
employees or volunteers to have access to minors until such employees
and/or volunteers have first been cleared by the above process. Failure to
comply with this chapter may result in the Township of Verona withholding
C. In the event the appeal does not result in a reversal, then within five
days of the decision by the Appeal Committee, the Verona Police Chief
shall notify the individual of the decision in writing and shall notify the
appropriate authority for the organization.
D. Any appellate rights as afforded by statute shall not be limited by any
provision of this chapter.
A. The Verona Police Chief and other police personnel shall limit their use
of the criminal history record background check information obtained
as a result of the requested search to the making of the determination
pursuant to § 66-6.
B. Should an appeal follow, the Verona Police Chief is authorized to
provide the results of the search to the Appeal Committee. The Appeal
Committee shall limit its use of the information to the appeal process
pursuant to § 66-7. Following the appeal process, the subject records
shall be returned to the Verona Township Police Department, where
they shall be sealed, dated and destroyed one year after sealing, unless
the Verona Township Police Department is advised of judicial action
involving the information and/or determinations made under this
chapter.
C. If no appeal follows the Verona Police Chief's determination, the
records shall remain with the Verona Township Police Department,
where they shall be sealed, dated and destroyed one year after sealing,
unless the Verona Township Police Department is advised of judicial
action involving the information and/or determination made under this
chapter.
D. Information obtained as a result of the search shall not be disseminated
to any other individual or entity in any form, except as necessary for
litigation or proceeding resulting from the determinations made
pursuant to this chapter. Any person violating federal or state
regulations governing the access to criminal history record information
may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
§ 66-8 VERONA CODE § 66-10
65:144
funding, land, equipment or other services for the youth-serving
organization or Verona youth program, or any of their activities.
Chapter 68
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Park rules and regulations — See Ch. 100.
Animals — See Ch. 157.
§ 68-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
(7) months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall include every
person having a right to property in such dog and every person who has
such dog in his keeping.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
§ 68-2. Annual canvass by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police of the borough shall annually cause a canvass to be made
of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the borough and
shall report to the Borough Clerk, to the Health Officer and to the State
Department of Health the result thereof, setting forth in separate columns
the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring such
dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of the
persons, together with the registration numbers of each of the dogs, and the
number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of the persons,
together with a complete description of each of the unlicensed dogs.
§ 66-10 DOGS § 68-3
68:145
§ 68-3. License and registration required; fees. [Amended
8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall
annually in the month of January apply for and procure from the Clerk of
the borough or other official designated by the Borough Council thereof to
license dogs a license and official metal registration tag for each such dog
so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each such dog a collar
or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto. The fees for
the annual registration tag and the license shall be as provided in Chapter
A175, Fees.
§ 68-4. Application procedure; issuance.
§ 68-5. Exemption for Seeing Eye dogs.
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye"
dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove provided
for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay
any fee therefor.
§ 68-6. Time from acquisition to application.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for license and registration tag
for such dog within ten (10) days after such acquisition or age attainment.73
§ 68-7. Time from new residency to application.
A. The application for licenses and registration under this Article shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog for which
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a long- or shorthaired
variety; also, the name, street and post-office address of the
owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
B. The information on such application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years by the
Borough Clerk or other person designated to issue such licenses and, in
addition, such Clerk or other person shall forward to the State
Department of Health each month, on forms furnished by such
Department, an accurate account of registration numbers issued or
otherwise disposed of. Registration numbers shall be issued in the
order of the applications.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the borough any
dog licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the borough for a period of more than ninety (90) days shall
73.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 6.7 amended 3-3-1964 and 9-19-1972 by Ord. No. 10-72, which
immediately followed this section and which provided for license fees, was deleted during
codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 68-3 VERONA CODE § 68-7
68:146
§ 68-8. Tampering with tags prohibited.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 68-9. Kennels, pounds and pet shops: license required.
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a pet
shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Clerk of the borough for a
license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
§ 68-10. Kennels, pounds and pet shops: application procedure.
The application for a license required by the preceding section shall
describe the premises where the establishment is located or is proposed
to be located, the purpose for which it is to be maintained and shall
be accompanied by the written approval of the Board of Health of the
borough showing compliance with the local and state rules and regulations
governing location of and sanitation at such establishments.
§ 68-11. Kennels, pounds and pet shops: expiration, revocation and
compliance with state regulations.
immediately apply for a license, as herein provided, unless such dog is
licensed under § 68-5.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the borough any
unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the borough for a period of more than ten (10) days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog
unless such dog is licensed under § 68-5.
A. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such
licenses shall expire on the last day of January of each year and be
subject to revocation by the borough on recommendations of the State
Department of Health or the Board of Health of the borough for failure
to comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department or
Board of Health of the borough governing the same after the owner has
been afforded a hearing by either the State Department of Health or the
Board of Health of the borough.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the person who proposes to operate or
establish a kennel shall comply with the rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health as established by it.
§ 68-7 DOGS § 68-12
68:147
§ 68-12. Application of other ordinances.
The three (3) preceding sections shall be subject to the Zoning Ordinance,
Building Code and other ordinances of the borough.74
§ 68-13. Kennels, pounds and pet shops: license fees.75
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for ten (10)
or less dogs and for more than ten (10) dogs shall be as provided for
in Chapter A175, Fees. The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be as
provided for in Chapter A175, Fees.
§ 68-14. Off-premise control of dogs.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises except on a leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 68-15. Impoundment.
The Chief of Police or Dog Warden shall take into custody and impound or
cause to be taken into custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or
disposed of as provided in § 68-17:
§ 68-16. Notice of impoundment.
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog which such official or his agent or agents have
reason to believe is a stray dog.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring such dog.
A. If any dog seized as provided in the preceding section wears a collar or
harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and
address of any person or a registration tag or the owner or the person
keeping or harboring such dog is known, the Chief of Police or Dog
Warden shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on
the collar, or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring such dog,
if known, a notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and
will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven
(7) days after the service of the notice.
B. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning and Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform, as well as
the General References included at the beginning of this chapter.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 68-12 VERONA CODE § 68-16
68:148
§ 68-17. Redemption or destruction of impounded dogs.76
When any dog seized as provided in § 68-15 has been detained for seven (7)
days after notice, when notice can be given as set forth in the preceding
section, or has been detained for seven (7) days after seizure, when no
notice has been given as set forth in the preceding section and if the owner
or person keeping or harboring such dog has not claimed such dog and paid
all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including maintenance not
exceeding the fee provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, and if the dog be
unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping or
harboring the dog has not produced a license and registration tag for the
dog, the Chief of Police or Dog Warden may cause the dog to be destroyed
in a manner causing as little pain as possible.
§ 68-18. Excretion on public property restricted. [Added 11-1-1976
as Ord. No. 18-76]
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public
property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the permission
of the owner of said property. The restriction in this section shall not apply
to that portion of the street lying between the curblines, which shall be used
to curb such dog under the following conditions:
§ 68-19. Running at large. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 11-85]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
run at large upon the public streets or in any public park or in any public
building or at any other public place within the borough. No person shall
permit any dog in his care or under his control to go upon the lawn, yard or
entrance walk or driveway of any private residence without the permission
of the owner thereof. Except when confined to the property of the owner,
dogs will be on a leash at all times.
§ 68-20. Impoundment of dogs at large.
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
A. The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by the local
health authority.
B. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
any dog curbed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, in a
sanitary manner approved by the local health authority.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 68-16 DOGS § 68-20
68:149
§ 68-21. Barking, howling or whining restricted.
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks,
howls or whines.
§ 68-22. Destruction of vicious and rabid dogs; keeping of records.
Any dog which is vicious or appears to be suffering from rabies or affected
with hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous diseases and
found running at large may be forthwith destroyed by any police officer or
the Dog Warden. A report of the disposal of all dogs shall be promptly filed
with the Chief of Police, who shall keep a proper and complete record in a
substantially bound book.
§ 68-23. Property damage.
No owner or keeper shall allow any dog to injure or damage any vegetable
garden, flower garden, lawn, plant, tree, shrubbery, grounds or other
property of any other person other than the person owning, harboring or
keeping or having charge of such dog.
§ 68-24. Right to enter premises.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize and impound when such
officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog except upon the premises of the
owner of the dog if the owner is present and forbids the same.
§ 68-25. Noninterference with officers.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.77
A. It shall be the duty of every police officer or Dog Warden of the borough
to apprehend any dog found running at large contrary to the provisions
of § 68-19, and to impound such dog in the Borough Pound or other
suitable place.
B. After the impoundment of any dog, the Dog Warden or police officer
shall proceed in accordance with the terms of sections §§ 68-15, 68-16
and 68-17. Any redemption under the provisions of § 68-17 shall not
release or discharge the owner from any other penalty provided for in
this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 6.26, which immediately followed this section, and which
provided for nuisances on public property, was deleted during codification; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 68-20 VERONA CODE § 68-26
68:150
§ 68-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
Chapter 70
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Park rules and regulations — See Ch. 100.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 102.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 140.
§ 70-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The making or taking of still or motion pictures either on
film, videotape or other similar recording medium for commercial purposes
and intended for viewing on television or in theaters or for institutional
uses. The term shall not include filming at a studio or other similar facility
constructed for such purpose where such filming does not involve the use of
any public property. The term shall not include the filming of any news story
or news feature within the township or filming made by, on behalf of or for
the Township of Verona or other governmental agency.
PERSON — Any individual, organization, corporation or other business
entity.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All publicly owned streets, highways, sidewalks,
squares, parks, playgrounds, buildings or any other public places within the
Township which are within the jurisdiction and control of the Township of
Verona.
§ 70-2. Permit required.
No person shall engage in or permit filming on public property or on private
property where such filming involves the use of public property for the
operation, placement or temporary storage of vehicles or equipment utilized
in such filming, including but not limited to any temporary structure,
barricade or device intended to restrict or block off pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, unless such person has obtained a permit as provided in this chapter.
§ 68-26 FILMING § 70-3
70:151
§ 70-3. Permit requirements.
All applications for a permit required by this chapter shall be subject to the
following standards:
A. Application shall be made on a form to be provided by the Township
Clerk and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount
established under Chapter A175 of the Verona Code. If expedited
processing of the application is requested, the application shall be
accompanied by a fee for expedited processing as established under
Chapter A175 of the Verona Code.
B. The application shall be filed with the Township Clerk not less than five
days prior to the date on which filming is to commence. If expedited
processing is requested, the Township Manager shall have the right to
waive the five-day time period between filing and filming, provided that
the applicant can comply with all other requirements of this chapter.
C. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall provide the
following:
(1) Proof of general public liability insurance naming the Township of
Verona as additional insured and providing for coverage of not less
than $1,000,000 for bodily injury and for not less than $300,000 for
property damage.
(2) The applicant shall enter into a written agreement with the
Township of Verona, in a form to be approved by the Township
Manager, whereby the applicant shall agree to indemnify, save and
hold the Township of Verona harmless from any and all claims,
expenses, damages or liability whatsoever arising out of the
applicant's use of public property.
(3) The applicant shall post a cash bond in the amount of $500 or a
maintenance bond in the amount of $1,000 in favor of the township
to assure that the location utilized by the applicant will be left in a
satisfactory condition, free and clear of debris, rubbish and
equipment and to assure the applicant's compliance with all
township ordinances, laws, regulations and directives. Within
seven days of the completion of the filming, the township will
return the bond if there has been no damage to public property or
public expense caused by the filming.
(4) The applicant shall pay daily filming fees as provided under § 70-5
hereof and under Chapter A175 of the Verona Code.
D. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall authorize filming for a
period not to exceed two consecutive calendar days, and filming on any
one property shall not exceed a total of three calendar days in any oneyear
period.
§ 70-3 VERONA CODE § 70-3
70:152
E. Any days necessary for the purposes of preparing or setting up a site for
filming shall not be counted as a filming day for purposes of the permit
unless the Township Manager determines that preparation or setting up
of the site would have a substantial impact on the use and enjoyment of
neighboring properties or the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
at or near the site, in which case such days shall be counted as filming
days.
F. If, because of inclement weather or other good cause, filming cannot
take place on the dates specified in the permit, the Township Manager
may authorize the issuance of a new permit for filming on alternate
dates, provided that there is full compliance with all of the
requirements of this chapter. No additional fees shall be paid for a
permit for alternate dates.
G. The Township Manager may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements, provisions or restrictions of this chapter if the Manager
determines that a waiver thereof may be granted without endangering
the public health, safety and welfare. In determining whether to issue a
waiver, the Manager shall consider the following factors:
(1) Potential traffic congestion at the location.
(2) The applicant's ability to remove the applicant's vehicles and
equipment from the public streets or other public property.
(3) The extent to which the applicant is requesting restrictions on the
use of public streets or public parking facilities during filming.
(4) The nature of the filming, including whether filming will take place
indoors or outdoors, and the proposed hours for filming.
(5) The extent to which the filming may affect adjoining and nearby
property owners and occupants.
(6) The township's prior experience with the applicant, if any.
H. The Township Manager may refuse to issue a permit whenever an
applicant has not complied with all permit application requirements or
whenever the Manager determines that filming at the proposed location
or on the proposed dates or at the proposed times, as set forth in the
application, would violate any township ordinance or other law or
would unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining
or neighboring properties or would unreasonably impede the free flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or would otherwise endanger the
health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the Township of Verona.
I. Immediately upon issuance of a permit under this chapter, and prior to
the commencement of filming if practicable, the Township Clerk shall
transmit a copy of such permit to the New Jersey Film Commission.
§ 70-3 FILMING § 70-4
70:153
§ 70-4. Additional requirements for all permit holders.
All persons to whom a filming permit has been issued shall comply with the
following additional requirements:
§ 70-5. Fees.
A. The permit shall be prominently displayed at the site of the filming and
shall be readily available for inspection by township officials.
B. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and, shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Verona
Police Department with respect thereto. If, after consulting with the
Township Police Department, the Township Manager determines that it
is necessary for the applicant to provide qualified personnel for the
purpose of directing or controlling traffic at the site, then the applicant
shall provide such personnel at the applicant's expense. The
qualifications of such personnel shall be subject to of the Township
Manager.
C. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining and nearby
property owners and shall, to the extent practicable, abate noise or
other nuisances and shall park vehicles associated with such filming off
the public streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with
previously scheduled activities on public property and shall, to the
extent possible, limit any interference with normal public activity on
such public property. Where the filming will directly involve and/or
affect any businesses, merchants or residents, these parties shall be
given written notice of the filming at least three days prior to the
requested filming dates. Proof of notification shall be filed with the
Township Clerk.
D. Filming in residential zoning districts shall not be permitted except
Monday through Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Requests for filming during hours other than as permitted will require
the approval of the Township Manager.
E. The applicant shall permit the Verona Police Department and the
Verona Fire Department or other township agencies to inspect the site
and the equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all safety
instructions issued by the Police Department, Fire Department or other
township agencies.
A. The fee for a basic filming permit and for a basic filming permit
requiring expedited processing shall be as established under Chapter
A175 of the Verona Code as may be hereafter amended or
supplemented.
§ 70-4 VERONA CODE § 70-5
70:154
§ 70-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 72
FIREARMS
§ 72-1. Discharge restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any shotgun, rifle,
pistol or other firearm whereby any shot, bullet or other missile is shot or
scattered within the open confines of the borough except for the protection
of life, person or property or under the conditions hereinafter set forth:
§ 72-2. Enforcement; permanent seizure.
Upon the complaint of any resident of the borough that any person is
violating any of the provisions of this section, any member of the Police
Department is hereby authorized to forthwith take or cause to be taken
and retained in his custody the shotgun, rifle, pistol or other firearm, the
B. In addition to the basic filming permit, there shall be a daily filming fee
in the amount established under Chapter A175 of the Verona Code as
may be hereafter amended or supplemented.
C. The basic filming permit for nonprofit entities for educational purposes
shall be as established under Chapter A175 of the Verona Code as may
be hereafter amended or supplemented. There shall be no daily filming
fee for nonprofit entities for educational purposes.
A. During the regular hunting season, hunting for game will be permitted;
provided, however, that no person while hunting shall discharge any
firearm within five hundred (500) feet of any dwelling or within five
hundred (500) feet of any street which is open for public use.
B. Any person desiring to engage in target practice either with a pistol or a
rifle shall apply to the Chief of Police for a permit to do so. Such permits
as issued by the Chief of Police shall be good only for the day for which
they are issued and shall only be used on that property specified as a
practice range by the Police Department.
C. No person other than the person to whom the permit is issued shall use
the same, nor shall any permit be issued to a minor under the age of
fifteen (15) years unless such minor is accompanied by an adult over
the age of twenty-one (21) years who shall be responsible for the
activities of such minor person.
§ 70-5 FIREARMS § 72-2
72:155
carrying or using of which is complained of, and upon conviction for a
violation of any of the provisions hereof the same shall be forfeited to the
borough.
§ 72-3. Violations and penalties.78
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
Chapter 73
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 20.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 140.
§ 73-1. Establishment.
The Board of Fire Officers, consisting of all line officers of the Verona Fire
Department and the Fire Marshal, is hereby authorized to establish fire
lanes on private property upon which there is now, or in the future may be
located, a shopping center, bowling arena, theater, hospital, church, school
or similar establishment, apartment building, garden apartment complex or
building devoted to use by the general public or where the parking of motor
vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress and egress of
Fire Department vehicles and the evacuation of persons from buildings in
the event of fire or other emergency. Such fire lanes shall be of such width
and shall be so located as may reasonably be necessary or required for the
protection of persons and property in case of fire, explosion or other hazard.
§ 73-2. Appeals.
If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Board of Fire Officers
and the Fire Marshal pursuant hereto, an appeal in writing to the Borough
Council may be taken by filing a notice of appeal with the Borough Clerk.
A hearing thereon shall be had on notice to the appellant, who shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard, After such hearing, the Borough
Council may affirm, modify or reverse the action of the Board of Fire
Officers and the Fire Marshal.
78.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 72-2 VERONA CODE § 73-3
73:156
§ 73-3. Parking prohibited.
The parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be
prohibited at all times, and the fire lanes established pursuant hereto shall
be posted with signs and/or other markings to that effect.
§ 73-4. Marking of lanes.
§ 73-5. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Police
Department. The Fire Marshal shall provide the Police Department with a
list of all such fire lanes to be enforced under this chapter.
§ 73-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.).
§ 73-7. Designation of fire lanes.
When signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of the street,
accessway or driveway, no person shall park a vehicle in the designated
places at any time.
A. The marking of such fire lanes shall be by signs and/or other
appropriate markings which shall first be approved by the Fire
Prevention Bureau.
B. All such marking of fire lanes and maintenance of such markings shall
be the responsibility of the building owner.
A. Lanning Avenue School: driveway around the westerly side and
northerly side of the building, no parking any time.
B. Grove Avenue School: no parking any time on the northerly and easterly
sides of the driveway.
C. Civic Center: no parking any time in front of the Henry B. Whitehorne
Middle School from the easterly curbline of Gould Street to its extreme
easterly end.
D. Verona High School:
(1) No parking any time on the north and south side of Sampson Drive
from the easterly curbline of Fairview Avenue to a point five
hundred thirty (530) feet easterly.
(2) No parking any time on the east and west side of the driveway in
back of the high school from the southerly curbline of Sampson
Drive to a point two hundred seventy (270) feet southerly.
§ 73-3 FIRE LANES § 73-7
73:157
(3) No parking any time on the east side of the access road in front of
the Verona High School on Fairview Avenue.
(4) No parking any time on the west side of the access road of Verona
High School on Fairview Avenue, with the exception of seventy (70)
feet extending easterly from the east curbline of Fairview Avenue at
the northerly exit of said access road.
E. Forest Avenue School:
(1) No parking any time on either side of the north and south
driveways.
(2) No parking any time on the westerly side of the access road in front
of the school.
F. Linn Drive: no parking any time as follows:
(1) West side from Bloomfield Avenue to the extreme northerly end of
the road.
(2) East side from Bloomfield Avenue, north one hundred fifty (150)
feet.
(3) East from the curbline of Personette Avenue for a distance of
twenty-five (25) feet, both north and south.
(4) East side from the curbline of the first access street for a distance
of twenty-five (25) feet, both north and south.
(5) East from the curbline of the second access street for a distance of
twenty-five (25) feet, both north and south.
(6) Within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant.
G. Claridge Drive:
(1) No parking any time on the north and south side of Claridge Drive
from the easterly curbline east to the building frontage.
(2) Within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant.
H. A & P Store, Claremont Avenue: no parking any time, except for pickup
on the westerly side of the driveway extending from the northerly
curbline of Claremont Avenue to the end of the building.
I. Pilgrim Plaza:
(1) A prohibited parking zone is hereby created for the building
frontage of the Pilgrim Shopping Center located on the east side of
Pompton Avenue between Claridge Drive and the Cedar Grove line.
This frontage runs, north for approximately six hundred thirty-five
(635) feet, and it is approximately three hundred sixty (360) to four
hundred (400) feet in an easterly direction from and parallel to
Pompton Avenue. An exception to this zone that shall be designated
§ 73-7 VERONA CODE § 73-7
73:158
as a pickup area which shall run from the south wall or the
southern boundary of the frontage to a point one hundred (100)
feet north. The remainder of the frontage shall be listed as "no
parking anytime fire zone."
(2) No parking any time between buildings.
(3) No parking within ten (10) feet in all directions of any fire hydrant.
(4) No parking in front of Nos. 335, 339 and 341 Pompton Avenue, Map
2, Block A, Lot 23.
J. Wedgewood Drive:
(1) No parking on the north and south sides of Wedgewood Drive East
from the west curb of Hamilton Road to a point two hundred (200)
feet west on the north curb and two hundred thirty-nine (239) feet
west on the south curb.
(2) No parking on the north side in front of No. 37 Wedgewood Drive.
(3) No parking on the east and west sides of access road between
building Nos. 37 and 34 Wedgewood Drive.
(4) No parking on the north, east, south and west curbs of the inner
circle which is located in the center of the Wedgewood Drive
apartment complex.
(5) No parking from the northwest corner of building No. 23 to No. 19
Wedgewood Drive.
(6) No parking in front of Nos. 38 through 44 Wedgewood Drive (west
side). No parking in the driveway entrance and exit on the east and
west curbs located west of building No. 1. No parking in front of
building Nos. 3 to No. 7 (east side).
(7) No parking on the east curb in front of No. 9 Wedgewood Drive.
(8) No parking within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant located in the
Wedgewood Drive apartment complex.
(9) No parking on the south side of Wedgewood Drive West from
Cumberland Avenue to a point of one hundred forty-eight (148) feet
east.
(10)No parking for the entire length of the north curb of Wedgewood
Drive West.
(11)No parking on the east and west sides of the driveway running from
Wedgewood Drive West, south side, to the southwest rear corner of
building No. 2.
(12)No parking on the east and west sides of the driveway running
behind Nos. 12 through 26 Wedgewood Drive.
§ 73-7 FIRE LANES § 73-7
73:159
Chapter 74
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 20.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 53.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 62, Art. I.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 73.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 88.
Fees — See Ch. A175.
(13)No parking on the east and west curbline behind building Nos. 38
through 44, from Wedgewood Drive West to a point seventy (70)
feet south.
§ 73-7 VERONA CODE § 73-7
74:160
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards; General Provisions
[Adopted 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 5-81]
§ 74-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
There is hereby adopted by the Mayor and Council of the township for
the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire or explosion that certain code known as the
BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code, recommended by the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Chapter 23, Title 5, being particularly the 1978
Edition thereof and the whole thereof, of which code not less than three (3)
copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Township Clerk, and
the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of
the township.
§ 74-2. Establishment of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
The Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 74-1 above shall be enforced by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the township, which
is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of
the Chief of the Fire Department.
§ 74-3. Bureau of Fire Prevention: composition; terms; vacancies.
§ 74-4. Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
A. Said Bureau of Fire Prevention shall consist of the Chief of the Fire
Department and at least two (2) Inspectors from each of the two (2)
companies, nominated by the officers of each fire company, appointed
by the Chief of the Fire Department and confirmed by the Mayor and
Council. The Chief of the Fire Department will name one (1) Inspector a
Fire Marshal, subject to confirmation by the Mayor and Council, who
will be in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. He will also name
one (1) Inspector as Secretary who will keep all records.
B. The men appointed and confirmed will serve at the pleasure of the Chief
of the Fire Department, subject to the advice and consent of the Mayor
and Council.
C. In the event of a resignation or vacancy, said vacancy shall be filled in
the same way and manner as the original appointment.
A. It shall be the duty of the members of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
enforce all laws and ordinances covering the following:
(1) The prevention of fires.
(2) The storage and use of explosives and flammables.79
§ 74-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 74-4
74:161
§ 74-5. Annual report.
A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Police and Fire Committee of the Township Council. Such
report shall contain all proceedings under this chapter, with such statistics
as the Chief of the Fire Department or the Police and Fire Committee of
the Township Council may wish to include therein. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall also recommend any amendments to the Fire Prevention
Code adopted by § 74-1 which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
§ 74-6. Emergency procedure.
When any fire hazard is permitted to continue in existence by the owner
or occupant after having received the order provided for in section F-105.0
of the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code and the Director of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention or one (1) of the Inspectors shall find and determine from
the facts that the danger to human life has been materially increased by
defective electrical wiring or defective appliances or defective gas plumbing
or defective gas appliances, the Director or Inspector shall give notice of
such defects to the Plumbing Inspector or other appropriate township or
state official and they shall find and determine that the danger to human
life is materially increased, then such Inspector shall disconnect such gas
or electrical services immediately.
§ 74-7. Storage of flammable liquids in aboveground tanks.
(3) The diminution of hazards in existing buildings and structures,
including those under construction.
(4) The means and adequacy of exit, in case of fire, from factories,
schools, hotels, lodginghouses, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters
and all other places in which numbers of persons work, meet, live
or congregate from time to time for any purpose.
(5) The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
(6) The approval of all subdivisions.80 Such approval shall be granted
unless the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall determine that the
access to the proposed subdivision or any part thereof or the
number and location of fire hydrants in the proposed subdivision is
so inadequate as to create a serious safety hazard.
B. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have such other powers and
perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this
chapter and other provisions of this Code or other township ordinances
and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law.
79.Editor's Note: See in particular Ch. 88, Gasoline Stations.
80.Editor's Note: As to subdivision regulations, see Ch. 127, Subdivision of Land.
§ 74-4 VERONA CODE § 74-7
74:162
§ 74-8. Storage of liquefied petroleum gases.
The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 74-1, in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby
established as follows: not permitted within the limits of the township.
§ 74-9. Storage of explosives and blasting agents.
The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 74-1, in
which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby
established as follows: not permitted within the limits of the township.
§ 74-10. Bureau empowered to require additional permits;
conspicuous display.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall act as a committee to determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new
materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition
to these now enumerated in the Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 74-1.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall post such list in a conspicuous place
in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
§ 74-11. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors. [Added
11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 23-8581; amended 3-3-1997 by Ord. No.
3-97]
A. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 74-1, in
which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited, are hereby established as follows: not permitted within the
limits of the township.
B. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 74-1, in
which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, are hereby
established as follows: not permitted within the limits of the township.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR — A device which senses and detects
the presence of carbon monoxide (CO) in a dwelling and which, when
activated, provides an alarm sufficiently audible to warn occupants
in the dwelling. A carbon monoxide detector device shall bear a seal
evidencing that such device has been tested and listed by a product
certification agency which is recognized by the New Jersey Division of
Codes and Standards.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit which includes facilities
for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, bathing and toilet purposes.
81.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 74-11,
Violations and penalties, as § 74-12.
§ 74-7 FIRE PREVENTION § 74-11
74:163
SMOKE DETECTOR — A device which senses and detects visible or
invisible smoke particles or combustion and which, when activated,
provides an alarm sufficiently audible to warn occupants in the
dwelling. Any such smoke detector shall bear a seal evidencing that
such device has been tested and listed by an approved nationally
recognized fire testing laboratory and shall comply in design to all
applicable state, federal and local requirements. If such smoke detector
device is electrically operated (hard-wired), then such device shall be
installed in conformity with the National Electric Code Standards and
shall comply with all applicable Building Code requirements.
B. Required installation.
(1) Every dwelling unit in all residential premises within the township
shall be provided with a minimum of one carbon monoxide detector
device which shall be installed in a manner and location approved
by the Verona Fire Marshal and in conformity with all requirements
of the manufacturer of such device. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner of such dwelling unit to install carbon monoxide
detectors in accordance with this chapter.
(2) Every dwelling unit in a one- or two-family residence, whether or
not owner-occupied, shall be provided with a minimum of one
approved smoke detector on each story or level, including the
basement and attic levels. In addition, every two-family residence
shall be provided with a hard-wired-operated smoke detector in the
common hallway area of each story or level. Such smoke detectors,
whether battery-operated or hard-wired-operated, shall be
installed in a manner and location approved by the Verona Fire
Marshal and shall conform to all requirements of the manufacturer
of such smoke detector device. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of each dwelling unit to install smoke detectors in
accordance with this chapter.
C. Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each dwelling
unit to maintain carbon monoxide detectors and smoke detectors
required by this chapter in proper working order, except that it shall be
the responsibility of the tenant who occupies a dwelling unit to maintain
and replace batteries in battery-operated carbon monoxide detectors
and smoke detectors located in the tenant's dwelling unit.
D. Compliance and enforcement.
(1) Effective immediately, no structure or building containing a
dwelling unit, room or area subject to this chapter shall be sold or
transferred, and no dwelling unit, room or area subject to this
chapter shall be rented or leased unless the owner thereof has first
obtained a certificate from the Verona Fire Marshal certifying that
the dwelling unit or the building, as the case may be, complies with
the requirements of this chapter.
§ 74-11 VERONA CODE § 74-11
74:164
§ 74-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-18-1985 by Ord. No.
23-85]
(2) In the absence of a sale or rental of a dwelling unit, the owner of
such dwelling unit shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter not later than ninety (90) days from the effective date
hereof.
(3) After the effective date of this chapter and commencing with the
next property tax billing period, the Verona Tax Collector shall give
notice of this chapter to all owners of record of dwelling units
covered by this chapter. In addition, the Tax Collector shall give
notice of this chapter to all new owners of record.
E. Inspection and fees. Inspection of carbon monoxide detector and smoke
detector installations prior to the sale, conveyance or renting of a
dwelling unit covered by this chapter shall be made by the Verona Fire
Marshal or his designee and, where appropriate, by the Electrical
Subcode Official. A fee for such inspections shall be payable to the
Township of Verona in the amount set forth in Chapter A175 of the
Verona Code.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail
to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order or regulation made hereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or both.
B. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation of this chapter shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each day that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. The application of the above penalties shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 74-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 74-12
74:165

ARTICLE II
Enforcement of Fire Safety Standards
[Adopted 10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 10-0382]
§ 74-13. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383) the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the municipality
of the Township of Verona.
§ 74-14. Agency designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Verona Fire Department/Fire
Prevention Bureau.
§ 74-15. Duties of enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the code and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Township of Verona,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the
Uniform Fire Code.
§ 74-16. Life- and non-life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 74-14 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life- and non-life-hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 74-17. Supervisory control.
The local enforcing agency established by § 74-14 of this article shall be the
Fire Department of the Township of Verona and shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the Fire Official as the Chief Administrative
Officer of the Local Enforcing Agency.
§ 74-18. Assignment of Fire Official.
The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct supervision of a Fire
Official who shall be assigned by the Fire Chief, with the approval of the
Township Manager.
§ 74-19. Board of appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency (or agencies) shall
have the right to appeal to the Construction of Board of Appeals.
82.Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance was amended 3-20-2006 to provide for its
application to Chapter 74.
§ 74-13 FIRE PREVENTION § 74-20
74:167
§ 74-20. Permits.
Fee schedule: Permit fees shall be as indicated in Uniform Fire Code.83
§ 74-21. Effect on existing ordinances.
No ordinance hereto adopted by the Township of Verona shall be affected
by the within article except that, if any provision of the prior ordinance is in
conflict with the provisions of the within article, the provisions of the within
article shall control.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees.
§ 74-20 VERONA CODE § 74-21
74:168
Chapter 77
FLOOD CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Soil removal — See Ch. 121.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 123.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 127.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ 74-21 FLOOD CONTROL § 74-21
77:169

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 77-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry.
§ 77-2. Findings of fact.
§ 77-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of Verona are subject to periodic inundation
which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
§ 77-1 FLOOD CONTROL § 77-3
77:171
§ 77-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 77-3 VERONA CODE § 77-4
77:172
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 77-5. Definitions; word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building: a) built in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and b) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
§ 77-5 FLOOD CONTROL § 77-5
77:173
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 77-5 VERONA CODE § 77-5
77:174
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a buildings lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis;
b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light-duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act. (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 77-5 FLOOD CONTROL § 77-5
77:175
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 77-5 VERONA CODE § 77-5
77:176
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 77-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Verona, Essex County, New Jersey.
§ 77-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 77-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Verona
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 77-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 77-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Verona,
Community No. 340195, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study, Essex
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdiction)," dated June 4, 2007.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Essex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 0082, 0084,
0101, 0103, whose effective date is June 4, 2007.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 600
Bloomfield Avenue. Verona, New Jersey 07044 and at the Office of the
Township Engineer, 10 Commerce Court, Verona, New Jersey 07044.
§ 77-6 FLOOD CONTROL § 77-10
77:177
§ 77-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Verona, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 77-10 VERONA CODE § 77-11
77:178
ARTICLE IV
Development Permit
§ 77-12. Establishment of development permit.
§ 77-13. Designation of the local administrator.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 77-14. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 77-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the (local administrator) and may include, but not be
limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and
the location of the foregoing.
B. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 77-17B; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal; state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway; assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 77-17B are met.
§ 77-12 FLOOD CONTROL § 77-14
77:179
§ 77-15. Variance procedure.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 77-7,
Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the
Construction Code Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source, in order to administer § 77-17A, Specific
standards, residential construction, and § 77-17B, Specific standards,
nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 77-12B(3).
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of DFIRM/FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, in consultation with the Township Engineer as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 77-15.
A. Appeal board.
§ 77-14 VERONA CODE § 77-15
77:180
(1) The Board of Adjustment as established by the Township of Verona
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Code Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as
provided in the New Jersey statutes.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
§ 77-15 FLOOD CONTROL § 77-15
77:181
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a) through (k) in § 77-15A(4) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 77-15 A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 77-15 VERONA CODE § 77-15
77:182
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 77-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
§ 77-16 FLOOD CONTROL § 77-16
77:183
§ 77-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 17-7, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard, or in § 17-14B, Use of other base flood data, the
following standards are required:
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation;
(2) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM/FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified). And require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
§ 77-16 VERONA CODE § 77-17
77:184
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM/FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
And require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(3) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(4) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 77-14C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 77-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
D. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 77-7 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development, unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) If § 77-17D(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
§ 77-17 FLOOD CONTROL § 77-17
77:185
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 of a foot at any point.
§ 77-17 VERONA CODE § 77-17
77:186
Chapter 80
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 54.
Amusements — See Ch. 57.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
§ 80-1. Conduct of games on Sunday.
Games of chance, commonly known as bingo and raffles, as provided by
the Laws of the State of New Jersey, 1954, Chapters 5 and 6,84 may be
conducted in the Borough of Verona on the first day of the week commonly
known and designated as Sunday, provided that the applicant for the license
to conduct such game otherwise qualifies under the provisions of the
aforementioned Statutes of the State of New Jersey and the Rules and
Regulations of the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission and,
specifically, provided that the organization conducting the games is a
charitable, religious or other organization specifically qualifying under the
provisions of the aforementioned statutes.
Chapter 83
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertisements, pamphlets and
handbills — See Ch. 50.
Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 104.
§ 83-1. Definitions.
GARAGE SALES — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"attic sale," "rummage sale" or "flea market sale" or any similar casual sale
of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder and which is
owned by the licensee.
OCCUPANT — Owner or lessee of the premises.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
84.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and 5:8-50 et seq.
§ 77-17 GAMES OF CHANCE § 83-2
80:187
§ 83-2. Licenses: required; fee; limitations; display.
§ 83-3. Information to be filed with Building Inspector.
The information to be filed with the Building Inspector pursuant to this
chapter shall be as follows:
§ 83-4. General rules of conduct.
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum
on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such persons
shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit
vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area
of such premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any
member of the Police or Fire Department of the Borough of Verona in order
to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. All licensed premises shall
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the
Borough of Verona without first filing with the Building Inspector the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Building
Inspector a license so to do, to be known as a "garage sales license."
The fee for such license shall be as provided for in Chapter A175,
Fees.85
B. Only two (2) such licenses shall be issued to any one (1) person within a
twelve-month period, and said license is only valid for a period of thirty
(30) days after the date of issuance, and no such license shall be issued
for more than four (4) consecutive days; provided, however, that for the
purposes of this section, all persons occupying the premises to which a
license has been issued shall be considered recipients of this license as
if they had received the license personally.
C. The license shall be displayed in a prominent fashion on the premises
on which the sale is being held.
A. The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
B. The name or owner or lessee of the property on which said sale is to be
conducted.
C. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. The number of days of the sale.
E. The date, nature of any past sale.
F. A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 83-2 VERONA CODE § 83-4
83:188
at all times be subject to such reasonable rules as may be made from time to
time by the Borough Council of the Borough of Verona and shall be subject
to inspection at all times by the Building Inspector and Chief of Police or any
of their agents or any other duly authorized representative of the Borough
of Verona.
§ 83-5. Notification of Chief of Police by applicant.
It is the responsibility of the applicant to notify the Chief of Police of the
date(s) of the sale.
§ 83-6. Sign restrictions.
No signs for advertising or directing customers are to be posted on any
place other than premises of applicant. The sign is not to exceed two (2) feet
by three (3) feet in size and cannot be placed on the premises earlier than
one (1) week prior to the sale and must be removed within twenty-four (24)
hours after the sale has terminated.
§ 83-7. Hours.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. only.
§ 83-8. Compliance with statute concerning mattresses and sofas.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale mattresses, bedsprings,
cots, lounges and sofas in any garage sale authorized under this chapter
without first complying with the appropriate section of N.J.S.A. 26:10-1
through 26:10-18, with respect to the labeling, sterilizing and disinfecting
of said mattresses, bedsprings, cots, lounges and sofas.
§ 83-9. Exceptions from licensing.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement, and which separate items do not exceed five (5) in
number.
D. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the Borough of Verona,86 or
under the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof or any
§ 83-4 GARAGE SALES § 83-9
83:189
§ 83-10. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector. It shall be the
duty of the Building Inspector to investigate any violations of this chapter
coming to his attention, whether by complaint or arising from his own
personal knowledge, and if a violation is found to exist, he shall prosecute
a complaint before the local Municipal Court pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the Borough
of Verona to bring to the attention of the Building Inspector for further
investigation any violations of this chapter of which the Police Department
becomes aware during the course of its normal duties.
§ 83-11. Violations and penalties.87
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
Chapter 85
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling — See Ch. 111.
Soil removal — See Ch. 121.
Fees — See Ch. 136.
Shade trees and shrubs — See Ch. 171.
§ 85-1. Disposal area designated. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81]
There is hereby designated the following area owned and maintained by the
township to be known as a "disposal area": Tree Waste Terminal--Map 24,
Block A, Lot 23.
other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which
sale would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not
otherwise prohibited in this Code.
E. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the
burden of establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on
the organization or institution claiming such exemption.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 83-9 VERONA CODE § 85-2
85:190
§ 85-2. Types of refuse allowed. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81]
The area set forth in § 85-1, known as the "Tree Waste Terminal," may
be used for disposal of the following waste materials only: leaves, grass
clippings, hedge trimmings, tree branches, bushes and shrubs and general
garden refuse. No concrete, cinder block, boulders, fencing, tree trunks,
stumps, garbage or other materials not provided for shall be dumped at the
Tree Waste Terminal.
§ 85-3. Hours, days and seasons of use.
§ 85-4. Regulations for use.
The following regulations shall apply to disposal facilities:
§ 85-5. Persons permitted to use facilities.
§ 85-6. Garbage collection. [Added 2-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1-8889]
A. The days and hours of use shall be determined by the Public Works
Committee and may be changed from time to time by it.
B. The Terminal shall be closed during the months of January, February
and March.88
A. Residents shall be required to unload and leave areas promptly and
place all waste materials in the designated location indicated by sign or
as directed.
B. No waste material shall be removed from areas other than by persons
authorized by the Township Engineer.
C. The Township Engineer or his authorized representative shall be
authorized herein to reject any waste material which in his opinion may
create a hazardous condition effecting the health, safety and welfare of
the residents using areas and the general public.
D. The Township Engineer shall be authorized to post at the area notices
implementing the rules and regulations as set forth herein.
A. The areas set forth in § 85-1 shall be used or made available only for
persons residing within the limits of the Township of Verona. The
Township Engineer or his authorized representative may require
appropriate identification of all persons using the area.
B. No contractor or person operating any business or commercial
operation shall be permitted to use the area.
88.Editor's Note: Former Section III-1 which preceded this section and which provided for the
hours of use of the Tidy Town Terminal, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-2 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 85-6
85:191
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparing, cooking and consumption of food.
PREMISES — Any residence or place of business or commerce where
garbage, refuse, rubbish or recyclables are accumulated.
RECYCLABLES — Any designated recyclable as provided for in Chapter
111 of the Verona Code and/or by any resolution, rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except
body wastes, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, metal or wooden scraps, and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery and similar materials.
TOWNSHIP COLLECTION SYSTEM — Such system as may be
employed by the township, either through the use of township
personnel and equipment, or through such person, firm or entity as
may be contracted by the township to provide for the collection and
disposition of garbage, refuse, rubbish and recyclables.
B. Application. This section shall apply to all garbage, refuse, rubbish and
recyclables to be picked up by the township collection system.
C. No garbage, refuse, rubbish or recyclables shall be collected by the
township collection system except as may be from time to time provided
by ordinance or resolution of the Township Council. A true copy of any
resolution providing for the manner, terms and schedule of days for the
collection or garbage, refuse, rubbish or recyclables shall be
maintained on file in the office of the Township Engineer for inspection
by the public during municipal business hours.
D. No person shall place any garbage, refuse, rubbish or recyclables for
pickup at the curbside of the street in front of any premises except in
the manner and on the scheduled days as may be provided by this
section or by resolution of the Township Council or as may be provided
by Chapter 111 of the Verona Code or any resolution, rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder.
E. Hours of placement for collection. No person shall place or cause to be
placed any garbage, refuse, rubbish or recyclables at curbside for
pickup any sooner than 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the date
scheduled for the collection of such garbage, refuse, rubbish or
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 85-6,
Violations and penalties, as § 85-7.
§ 85-6 VERONA CODE § 85-6
85:192
§ 85-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 88
GASOLINE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Automobile sales lots — See Ch. 60.
Business establishments — See Ch. 61.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ 88-1. Definition.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SERVICE STATION — Any building, structure or premises, enclosure or
other place within the borough where a container or containers, tank or
tanks, whether portable or stationary, and containing either carbon
bisulphite gasoline, naphtha, benzole, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied
petroleum, gas, acetone, kerosene, turpentine, or other flammable liquids
having a flash point below one hundred sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit (165º
F.) are kept or located for the purpose of selling, offering for sale or
distributing any such liquids from such containers, tank or tanks; provided,
recyclables, and all garbage cans or containers placed at curbside for
collection shall be removed from curbside not later than 7:00 p.m. on
the date on which collection is made.
F. Maintenance of garbage cans or containers. All garbage cans or
containers used in connection with the placement of garbage, refuse,
rubbish or recyclables at curbside shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and no garbage can shall be used unless the lid remains in a
condition to provide a reasonably tight fit on the garbage can.
G. Tampering prohibited. No person shall tamper with any garbage can or
other container used in connection with the placement of garbage,
refuse, rubbish or recyclables at curbside so as to damage the same or
to cause any garbage, refuse, rubbish or recyclables to be removed
from such garbage cans or containers.
§ 85-6 GASOLINE STATIONS § 88-1
88:193
however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any place
where such flammable liquids are kept or sold for medical purposes only.
§ 88-2. License required.
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a
service station without first having obtained a license therefor, as provided
in this chapter.
§ 88-3. Application procedure.
All applications for licenses shall contain the following information:
§ 88-4. Duration; proration of fees.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall terminate on the 31st day of
December following the date of issuance. All licenses granted after the
second day of January of any year shall be for the unexpired portion of the
year, and the license fee shall be charged at a pro rata rate from the date
the application for license is granted.
§ 88-5. Nontransferability.
No license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned
or transferred to any other person, nor shall any such license authorize any
person other than the licensee named therein to do business or act under
such license.
A. The location and zone of the building and premises.
B. The written consent of the owner or owners of the land where such
station is built or operated.
C. A map showing the exact location of the station, its tanks and
appurtenances in relation to the property upon which the station is to
be maintained and in relation to adjoining property and public streets.
D. A statement of the size of the tank or tanks and the quantity of gasoline
or other flammable liquids to be stored therein.
E. The type and construction of the tanks and the material of which the
tanks are to be constructed.
F. The minimum depth of the top of the tanks below the ground where the
same is placed.
G. The method of extracting gasoline or other flammable liquids from the
tank.
H. A statement of the dimensions of the building and the material in
relation to fireproof qualities to be used.
§ 88-1 VERONA CODE § 88-6
88:194
§ 88-6. Specified location.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize the
maintenance of the business of a filling station at any but the location
specified therein.
§ 88-7. Application review; issuance.
The license application shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector and
the Chief of the Fire Department. The former official shall certify on the
application as to its compliance with borough regulations regarding zoning,
building and other ordinances90 and the latter official shall certify as to its
compliance with Chapter 74, Fire Prevention. An applicant whose petition
for a license has been rejected by one (1) or both of such officials may
appeal to the Borough Council, which may reverse the rejection by
approving the application if the facts disclosed at the appeal hearing reveal
compliance with the borough ordinances and regulations. Following
approval of the application, the license shall be issued by the Building
Inspector.
§ 88-8. Fees. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
Licenses shall be issued by the Building Inspector upon the payment of the
annual license fees as provided for in Chapter A175, Fees.
§ 88-9. Revocation.
Any license issued shall be revocable by the Borough Council after hearing
and good causes shown upon fifteen (15) days' notice in writing to be given
the licensee either by serving the same upon him personally or leaving the
same at the place of business of such licensee.91
§ 88-10. Hours of operation. [Added 4-17-1986 by Ord. No. 8-86]
All gasoline service stations located within the Township of the Borough
of Verona shall be closed and shall not engage in any business operations
involving the sale or dispensing of fuels, oils, goods or services of any nature
or description between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 am. of the
following morning.
§ 88-11. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-17-1986 by Ord. No.
8-86]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. A
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning; Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform; Ch. 30, Land Use
Procedures; and Ch. 118, Site Plan Review.
91.Editor's Note: Sections 19.10 and 19.11, which dealt with driveway restrictions, and
restrictions concerning the distance of gasoline storage tanks and gas stations from the
street, were omitted during codification.
§ 88-6 GASOLINE STATIONS § 88-11
88:195
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 88A
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
§ 88A-1. Statutory authorization.
The New Jersey Worker and Community Right to Know Act (N.J.S.A. 34:5A-1
et seq.) identifies the need for local health, fire, police, safety and other
government agencies to have detailed information about the identity,
characteristics and quantities of hazardous substances used and stored
within their jurisdictions in order to adequately plan for and respond to
emergencies and enforce compliance with applicable laws and regulations
concerning these substances.
§ 88A-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 88A-3. Automated emergency response information management
system.
There is hereby established the requirement for an automated emergency
response information management system. This is a computer-based data
bank of all information pertaining to hazardous materials and chemicals
within the township. This information is to be provided in various formats
for emergency response to the Police Department, Fire Department, Rescue
Squad, Public Works Department and other departments as considered
necessary by the Township Manager. Based on the more economical
alternative, this system may be operated with in-house resources or
privatized.
§ 88A-4. Registration requirements.
A. Establish a requirement for registration and identification with the
Township of Verona of all premises upon which are located hazardous
substances and chemicals that have the potential of causing serious
harm to the welfare and safety of residents of the township.
B. Implement a computerized information emergency response
management system to organize and immediately access the data
regarding hazardous substances and chemicals during emergencies.
A. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation required to file a SARA
Title III, Section 311-312, right-to-know information form as required
by Title III of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
Act of 1986, as well as any other location specified by the Fire Official of
the Township of Verona, shall file a copy of the SARA Title III, Section
311-312, information form with the township.
§ 88-11 VERONA CODE § 88A-4
88A:196
§ 88A-5. Fees.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation to whom the provisions of this
chapter apply shall pay to the township an annual registration fee of thirty
dollars ($30.) on or before July 1 of each year. In addition, a fee of five
dollars ($5.) per page of SARA Title III, Section 311-312, documentation
shall be paid to the township.
§ 88A-6. Enforcement official.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Official of the Township of Verona to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 88A-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.).
Chapter 89
(RESERVED)
Chapter 90
JUNK, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Automobile sales lots — See Ch. 60.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 85.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 107.
§ 90-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUISANCE — Any condition or use of building exteriors which is
detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause
B. No person, firm, partnership or cooperation shall store on their
property any hazardous substances and/or chemicals without having
registered the same with the automated emergency response
information management system. Said registration shall include the
type of hazardous substances and/or chemicals located on the property
and a floor plan of the facility where the hazardous substances and/or
chemicals are located. Registration shall be completed on specific
forms and approved by the Fire Official of the Township of Verona.
§ 88A-4 (RESERVED) § 90-1
89:197
substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood
in which such premises are located. This includes, but is not limited to, the
keeping or the depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of any of
the following:
§ 90-2. Maintenance of private property.
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises
shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep
or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in
the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises
are located.
§ 90-3. Nonoperating motor vehicles.
No person in charge of or in control of premises, whether as owner, lessee,
tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled,
wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicle to
remain on such property longer than 30 days; and no person shall leave
any vehicle on any property within the township for a longer time than 30
days, except that this section shall not apply with regard to any vehicle in
an enclosed building or so located upon the premises as not to be readily
visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. This
chapter shall further not apply with regard to any vehicle on the premises
of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when the keeping or
maintenance of such vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise.
§ 90-4. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the township in any
manner authorized by law, and in addition, any person who by reason of
another's violation of any provision of this chapter suffers special damages
to himself different from that suffered by other property owners throughout
the township generally may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an
existing violation.
§ 90-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days,
or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. Lumber, junk, trash or debris;
Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment, such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or
containers.
B.
§ 90-1 VERONA CODE § 90-5
90:198
Chapter 95
NEWS VENDING MACHINES
§ 95-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person, firm or corporation responsible for placing,
locating, installing or maintaining a news vending machine in a public place
in the Township of the Borough of Verona.
DRIVEWAY — That surface, whether improved or not, over and by which
ingress and egress are made onto private or public property by vehicles.
NEWSPAPER, NEWS PERIODICAL AND NEWS MAGAZINE — Any
newspaper, periodical or magazine of general circulation as defined by
general law; any newspaper, periodical or magazine duly entered with the
Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal
statute or regulation; and any newspaper, periodical or magazine filed and
recorded with any recording officer as required by general law.
NEWS VENDING MACHINE — Any machine, rack, self-service or coinoperated
box, container, storage unit or other dispenser utilized and
maintained for the sale and distribution of newspapers, news periodicals,
news magazines and any other similar publications.
ROADWAY — That portion of any street improved, designed or ordinarily
utilized for vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians,
including the area between the curb of any street and the property line
adjacent thereto, or, if there is no curb, the area between the edge of the
street and the property line adjacent thereto, and shall include the public
right-of-way along such street or sidewalk.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes,
and includes but is not limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
§ 95-2. Registration.
A. Any distributor having a news vending machine which is already
located or installed in whole or in part on any public sidewalk or public
right-of-way within the Township of the Borough of Verona on the
effective date of this chapter shall, within 30 days from the effective
date of this chapter, notify the Township Construction Code Official, in
writing, of the location and placement of such news vending machine.
Such notice shall include:
(1) The precise location of such news vending machine; and
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the distributor.
§ 90-5 NEWS VENDING MACHINES § 95-2
95:199
§ 95-3. Standards for installation, maintenance and operation.
B. From and after the effective date of this chapter, if any distributor shall
locate or install a news vending machine which rests in whole or in part
on any public sidewalk or public right-of-way within the Township of the
Borough of Verona, then within 10 days from the date of such
installation, such distributor shall notify the Township Construction
Code Official, in writing, of the location and placement of such news
vending machine. Such notice shall include:
(1) The precise location of such news vending machine; and
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the distributor.
A. Any news vending machine which, in whole or part, rests upon a public
sidewalk or public right-of-way within the Township of the Borough of
Verona shall comply with the following standards:
(1) No news vending machine shall exceed sixty (60) inches in height,
twenty-four (24) inches in width or twenty (20) inches in depth.
(2) No news vending machine shall be used for commercial advertising
or commercial publicity purposes other than to display, promote or
advertise the sale of the newspaper, news periodical or magazine
sold therein.
(3) Each news vending machine shall be equipped with a coin-return
mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an
immediate refund in the event that the news vending machine door
does not open. The coin return mechanism shall at all times be
maintained in good working order.
(4) Each news vending machine shall have affixed thereto a readily
visible notice setting forth the name, address and telephone
number of the distributor of the news vending machine to permit
users thereof to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in the
event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism.
(5) Each news vending machine shall be maintained so that:
(a) It is reasonably free of loose, chipped, peeling or cracked paint
on the exterior surfaces thereof.
(b) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion on the exterior
surfaces thereof.
(c) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, are not broken or
cracked so as to create danger to users thereof.
(d) Structural parts are not broken, cracked or otherwise
dangerous to users thereof.
§ 95-2 VERONA CODE § 95-4
95:200
§ 95-4. Location and placement.
Any news vending machines which rest in whole or in part upon any portion
of the public sidewalk or public right-of-way or which project onto, into or
over any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
A. No news vending machine shall project onto, into or over any part of the
roadway of any public street or rest, wholly or in part, upon, along or
over any portion of the roadway of any public street.
B. No news vending machine shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over
any public sidewalk if the location of such news vending machine:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property,
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians
along the public sidewalk or public right-of-way;
(3) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of vehicular
traffic along the public roadway,
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress to and from any
public or private property; or
(5) Unreasonably interferes with traffic signs, traffic signals, fire
hydrants, police or fire call boxes, utility poles, mailboxes or other
equipment located on or near the public roadway, public sidewalks
or the public right-of-way.
C. News vending machines shall be chained, bolted or otherwise secured
so as to prevent their unauthorized removal or their accidental
movement within the public sidewalk or public right-of-way.
D. News vending machines may be placed next to each other and grouped,
provided that no group of news vending machines shall extend for a
distance of more than four feet along a curb and provided that the
grouping of such machines shall not violate the provisions of Subsection
B of this section.
E. News vending machines shall not be placed, installed, located, used or
maintained:
(1) Within ten (10) feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within twelve (12) feet of a curb return of an unmarked crosswalk.
(3) Within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box
or other emergency facility or equipment.
(4) Within five (5) feet of any driveway.
(5) Within a designated bus stop marked by a yellow curb, except that
news vending machines may be located within the first five (5) feet
§ 95-4 NEWS VENDING MACHINES § 95-4
95:201
§ 95-5. Enforcement.
§ 95-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 95-7. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection of this chapter be
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
then such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining
along the yellow curb, measured from the nearside point of yellow
curb, and within the last five (5) feet along the yellow curb,
measured from the farside point of yellow curb; provided, however,
that such news vending machines do not unreasonably interfere
with the loading and unloading of passengers.
A. If the Construction Code Official determines that a news vending
machine does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, including
the requirement to register such news vending machine with the
Construction Code Official, then the Construction Code Official shall
mail a written notice to the distributor of such news vending machine,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the reasons why
such news vending machine does not comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. If a distributor fails to adjust, correct, register or otherwise cause such
news vending machine to comply with the provisions of this chapter
within seven (7) days from the date written notice of noncompliance is
mailed by the Construction Code Official, then such distributor shall be
in violation of this chapter.
A. Any distributor who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, be punishable by
a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.). Each day for which a
distributor fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a separate violation hereunder.
B. If a distributor is convicted of a violation of this chapter by the
Municipal Court and if such distributor thereafter refuses to remedy or
correct the violation within ten (10) days from the date of the
conviction, then the Construction Code Official of the Township of the
Borough of Verona shall be empowered to remove the news vending
machine which is the basis for such conviction from the public sidewalk
or public right-of-way or other place and return such news vending
machine to the distributor identified on the news vending machine.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, deface or vandalize
any news vending machine within the Township of the Borough of
Verona. Any person who shall violate this section shall, upon conviction
thereof in the Municipal Court, be punished by a fine not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.).
§ 95-4 VERONA CODE § 95-7
95:202
provisions hereof and shall be confined in its operation to such clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or subsection directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
Chapter 96
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 102. Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 104.
§ 96-1. Certain noises unlawful.92
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the limits of the borough.
§ 96-2. Enumeration.
The following acts among others are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of the preceding section, but such
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
A. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or
public place of the borough, except as a danger warning, the creation of
any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling
device and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one
operated by hand or electricity, the use of any horn, whistle or other
device operated by engine exhaust and the use of any such signaling
device when traffic is for any reason held up.
B. Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is
in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is
operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any
such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning, § 150-49, for noise control standards.
§ 95-7 NOISE § 96-2
96:203
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.
C. Loudspeakers, amplifiers, etc. The use of calliopes, mechanical
loudspeakers or amplifiers of any kind for any purpose upon the street
of the borough.
D. Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets, particularly between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., or at any time or place, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
E. Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any persons in the vicinity.
F. Steam whistles. The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to
begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of
proper borough authorities.
G. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor
vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
H. Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
I. Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of loud and excessive
noise in connection with loading or unloading of any commercial vehicle
or the opening and/or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and
containers, except on weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. and on Saturdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. [Amended 10-2-1995 by Ord. No. 10-95]
J. Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, alteration or repair
of any building at any time other than on weekdays (Monday through
Friday) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and on Saturdays
between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. [Amended 12-3-1984 by
Ord. No. 23-84]
K. Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same are in use or adjacent to any hospital
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same
is a school, hospital or court street.
§ 96-2 VERONA CODE § 96-2
96:204
§ 96-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of the two (2) preceding sections shall not be construed to
prohibit music being made upon streets or sidewalks by brass bands or
other bands nor to prohibit religious organizations from beating drums in
their religious worship.
L. Hawkers, peddlers, etc. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
M. Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale.
N. Transportation of metal rails, etc. The transportation of rails, pillars or
columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other
public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so
loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of
such streets or other public places.
O. Excavation, demolition, use of pile drivers, hammers, etc. The
excavation or demolition of any lands or buildings or the operation of
any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or
electric hoist or appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or
unusual noise, at any time other than on weekdays (Monday through
Friday) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. [Amended
12-3-1984 by Ord. No. 23-84]
P. Blowers. The operation of any leafblower or other blower or power fan
powered by an internal-combustion engine, except on weekdays
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and on Saturdays and
Sundays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Leafblowers or
other blowers or power fans powered by an internal-combustion engine
shall not be operated within the township on any of the following
holidays: Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day and
Thanksgiving Day. All leafblowers or other blowers or power fans which
are powered by an internal-combustion engine shall be equipped with a
properly functioning muffler to deaden noise. The above restrictions on
hours and days of operation shall not apply to snowblowers or lawn
mowers. [Amended 10-2-1995 by Ord. No. 10-95]
Q. Commercial sweepers. The use or operation of any commercial
sweeping machine or street sweeping machine or other similar machine
on any privately owned parking lot, driveway or roadway, except on
weekdays (Monday through Friday) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. and on Saturdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. This restriction shall not apply to the operation of such machines
by any department of local, county or state government on public
streets and public property. [Added 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 6-2003]
§ 96-2 NOISE § 96-4
96:205
§ 96-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
Chapter 100
PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 54.
Amusements — See Ch. 57.
Dogs — See Ch. 68.
Firearms — See Ch. 72.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 102.
Shade trees and shrubs — See Ch. 171.
§ 100-1. Rules and regulations enumerated.
A. No person in a public park and recreational area shall:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railing,
pavings or paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
(2) Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition. No person above the age of five (5)
years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex.
(3) Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants
or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands except on special
written permit issued hereunder.
(5) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick flowers or seed of any trees or plants, dig in
§ 96-4 VERONA CODE § 100-1
100:206
or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(6) Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(7) Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
(8) Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall he
remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal or
the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the
foregoing is made in that snakes, known to be deadly poisonous, or
deadly reptiles may be killed on sight.
(9) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into such water any substance, matter or thing, liquid
or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
(10) Have brought in or shall dump in, deposit or leave any bottles,
broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere
on the grounds thereof but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the
park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
(11) Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary areas.
(12) Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking
area, and such shall be in accordance with posted directions
thereat and with the instruction of any attendant who may be
present.
(13) Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park area.
(14) Leave a bicycle in a place other than bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
(15) Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
(16) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or pavement or set against
trees or in any place or position where other persons may trip over
or be injured by them.
§ 100-1 PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS § 100-1
100:207
(17) Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
any park except in such waters and at such places as are provided
therefor and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set
forth or may be hereinafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent
any waters or places customarily designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing or congregate thereat when such activities
are prohibited by the Department of Recreation upon a finding that
such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
(18) Frequent any waters or places designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing or congregate thereat except between such
hours of the day as shall be designated by the Department of
Recreation for such purposes for each individual site.
(19) Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area
any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an
unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure from at least
two (2) sides, nor shall any guide wire, rope or extension brace or
support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any
other structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof.
(20) Allow himself to be so covered with a bathing suit so as to
indecently expose his person.
(21) Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other
place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be
provided for that purpose.
(22) Bring into or operate any boat, raft, or other watercraft, whether
motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places
designated for boating. Such activity shall be in accordance with
applicable regulations as are now or hereafter may be adopted.
(23) Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the
occupant of any other boat.
(24) Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any water between
the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour of the
park the following morning, nor shall any person be on, remain on
or in any boat during said closed hours of the park.
(25) Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
(26)No person shall carry or possess firearms of any description or air
rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other form of
weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human
safety or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank
cartridges or any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas
from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.
§ 100-1 VERONA CODE § 100-1
100:208
(27) Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that
purpose.
(28) Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(29) Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then trash
shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be
properly disposed of elsewhere.
(30) Take part in or abet the playing or any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins,
horseshoes, quoits or model airplanes except in those areas set
apart for such forms of recreation.
B. While in a public park or recreational area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular no person
shall:
(1) Bring alcoholic beverages, drink same at any time nor shall any
person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor in a park.
(2) Have in his possession or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other
fireworks, firecrackers or explosives of flammable material or
discharge them or throw them into any such areas from lands or
highways adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any
substance, compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with
any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of
the foregoing standpoints. At the discretion of the Borough Council,
permits may be given for conducting properly supervised fireworks
in designated park areas.93
(3) Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
(4) Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or
private.
(5) Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated. No person shall drop, throw or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other flammable material within any park or on
any highways, roads or streets abutting or contiguous thereto.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 100-1 PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS § 100-1
100:209
§ 100-2. Hours of opening; closings.
§ 100-3. Permits; stipulations; appeals; liability for damages;
revocation.
Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to the
Department of Recreation in accordance with following procedure:
(6) Enter an area posted as CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC nor shall any
person use or abet in the use of any area in violation of posted
notices.
(7) Gamble, or participate in or abet any game of chance except in
such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Department of Recreation.
(8) Go onto the ice on any of the waters except such areas as are
designated as skating fields, and provided that a safety signal is
displayed.
(9) Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas
or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior
tending to breach the public peace.
(10) Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
(11) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be
erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads
adjacent to a park.
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during the designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted
therein for public information.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public at
any time and for any interval of time, either temporary or at regular and
stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely for
certain uses.
A. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Department of Recreation stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person, corporation or association
sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
§ 100-1 VERONA CODE § 100-3
100:210
(4) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(5) Any other information which the Department of Recreation shall
find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued hereunder.
B. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Department of Recreation
include the following findings:
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park.
(2) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the Borough of Verona.
(5) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
C. Appeal. Within five (5) days after the receipt of an application, the
Department of Recreation shall appraise an applicant in writing of its
reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the
right to appeal to the Borough Council by serving written notice thereof
on the Council within five (5) days of said refusal.
D. A copy of said notice shall also be served on the Department of
Recreation within the same time, and said department shall
immediately forward the application and the reasons for its refusal to
the Borough Council, who shall consider the application under the
standards set forth under Subsection B above, and sustain or overrule
the Department of Recreation's decision within ten (10) days from the
receipt of the appeal by him. The decision of the Borough Council shall
be final.
E. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
F. The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for
all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason
of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall
have been issued. The Department of Recreation shall have the right to
require any permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering
injuries to members of the general public arising out of such permitted
activities in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by
§ 100-3 PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS § 100-3
100:211
§ 100-4. Enforcement.
§ 100-5. Violations and penalties.94
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction, be subject
to the replacement, repair or restoration of any damaged park property and
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) and in
default of payment thereof may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county
jail in the discretion of the Judge for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days,
or both.
Chapter 102
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 54. Noise — See Ch. 96.
the Department of Recreation prior to the commencement of any
activity or issuance of any permit.
G. Revocation. The Department of Recreation shall have the authority to
revoke a permit upon finding or violation of any rule or ordinance or
upon good cause shown.
A. The Department of Recreation and park attendants shall in connection
with their duties imposed by law diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The Department of Recreation and any park attendant shall have the
authority to eject from the park area any person or persons acting in
violation of this chapter.
C. The Department of Recreation and any park attendant shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the
park, or used, in violation of this chapter.
D. This chapter shall also be enforced by the Police Department of the
Borough of Verona.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 100-3 VERONA CODE § 100-5
100:212
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 7-5-196795]
§ 102-1. Certain conduct prohibited. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord.
No. 12-81]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to: [Amended 11-7-1973 by Ord.
No. 11-73; 10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 11-2003]
(1) Provoke a breach of the peace on any public or private sidewalk or
public or private street or public or private parking lot in the
Township.
(2) Congregate with other persons on a public or private street or
sidewalk or on a public or private parking lot with an intent to
provoke a breach of the peace or whereby a breach of the peace
may be occasioned and refuse to move from said public or private
parking lot after being requested to do so by a police officer of the
Township.
(3) Congregate with other persons on a public or private sidewalk or
on a public or private street or on a public or private parking lot in
the Township so as to prevent the free and unhampered passage
along and over said sidewalk or streets by the public.
(4) While on a public or private sidewalk or public or private street or
public or private parking lot in the Township, use loud, abusive or
offensive remarks to persons passing along said public or private
sidewalk or street in the Township.
(5) Congregate on a public or private street or sidewalk or public or
private parking lot in the Township and molest or interfere in any
way with the free passage of any person or vehicle lawfully
thereon.
(6) For the purposes of this chapter, public sidewalks, streets and
parking lots shall include but are not limited to those sidewalks,
streets and parking lots under the control of the Board of Education
of the Township of Verona, the Recreation Department of the
Township of Verona and any other body of the municipal
government of the Township of Verona.
(7) Urinate in any street, highway, thoroughfare or public place within
the Township of Verona except in facilities designated for such
purpose.
B. Parental responsibility for minors.
95.Editor's Note: These provisions were intended as an amendment to Secs. 13.3 and 13.4 of
Chapter 13 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted 8-20-1963.
§ 102-1 PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS § 102-1
100:213
§ 102-2. Prohibitions concerning alcohol. [Added 10-16-1973 by
Ord. No. 10-73; 10-5-1976 by Ord. No. 19-76; 12-15-2008 by Ord.
No. 16-08]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having
legal custody of an infant under eighteen (18) years of age to assist,
aid, abet, allow, permit, suffer or encourage such infant to commit a
violation of the public peace and good order, as defined in this
chapter and including the commission of any willful, malicious or
unlawful injury to or destruction of the real or personal property of
another, either by overt act, by failure to act, or by failure or
neglect to exercise reasonable supervision and control of the
conduct of such infant.
(2) Whenever an infant under eighteen (18) years of age shall be taken
into custody by the police or detained by the police for the
commission of any such violation of the public peace and good
order within the Township of Verona, the parents, guardians or
other persons having legal custody of such infant shall be
immediately notified by the Police Department of such custody or
detention and the reasons therefor, and of their potential personal
responsibility as parents and legal guardians under this chapter.
When an infant is charged with a violation of the public peace and
good order within the Township of Verona, and the court makes an
adjudication of delinquency or determines that the infant is a
juvenile in need of supervision pursuant to appropriate statutory
provisions regarding juveniles, the Chief of Police, or his
designated agent, shall forthwith serve written notice of said
adjudication of delinquency or determination as to supervision
upon the parents, guardians, or other persons having legal custody
of such infant, together with a written warning, in a form approved
by the Township Attorney or Township Public Prosecutor, of the
penalties under this chapter and of the provisions of this chapter,
stated hereinbelow, with respect to the commission within two (2)
years of a second violation by said infant of the public peace and
good order. If at any time within two (2) years of the giving of such
notice such infant shall be charged with a violation of the public
peace and good order and shall again be adjudicated by the court to
be delinquent or determined by the court to be a juvenile in need of
supervision pursuant to appropriate statutory provisions, the
Public Prosecutor of the Borough of Verona shall charge and
prosecute the parents, guardians or other persons having legal
custody of such infant with having allowed, permitted or suffered
said infant to commit a violation of the public peace and good order,
contrary to this subsection and this chapter. Such charges shall be
proven upon a showing of a lack of reasonable supervision and
control on the part of said parents, guardians or other persons
having legal custody of said infant.
§ 102-1 VERONA CODE § 102-2
100:214
§ 102-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-5-1976 by Ord. No.
19-76]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished with a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.) or be in prison for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
A. At certain specific designated recreational areas, the Recreation
Department and the Board of Education or any other body of the
municipal government may issue a special permit for the consumption
of alcoholic beverages for consumption at a picnic or other activity
sponsored by a nonprofit corporation or organization.
B. No person shall discard any alcoholic beverage container upon any
public street, lane, sidewalk, public parking lot or any private property
not his own without the permission of the owner.
§ 102-2 PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS § 102-3
100:215

ARTICLE II
Drug Paraphernalia
[Adopted 3-19-1979 as Ord. No. 2-79]
§ 102-4. Sale, advertisement and display prohibited.
No person shall advertise, display, sell or offer to sell any type of syringe,
needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling papers or other
paraphernalia or appliance designed for or ordinarily used in smoking,
testing, weighing, measuring, injecting, cooking or sniffing marijuana,
cocaine, opium, hashish or other controlled dangerous substances as
defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.
§ 102-5. Maintenance of building harboring manufacture or use
declared nuisance.
It shall constitute a common nuisance to maintain any building, conveyance
or premises whatever which is resorted to by persons for the manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, administration or use of any type of syringe,
needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling papers or other
paraphernalia or appliances designed for or ordinarily used in smoking,
testing, weighing, measuring, injecting, cooking or sniffing marijuana,
cocaine, opium, hashish or other controlled dangerous substances as
defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.
§ 102-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
§ 102-4 PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS § 102-6
100:217

ARTICLE III
Obscene Material
[Adopted 7-18-1988 as Ord. No. 19-88]
§ 102-7. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of a specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity
contained in or consisting of a picture or other representation, publication,
sound recording, live performance or film, which, by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sensuality with
sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or activity.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under
eighteen (18) years old, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals
or other publications at retail containing pictures, drawings or photographs.
§ 102-8. Prohibited display.
It shall be unlawful for any retailer to display or permit to be displayed at
his business premises any obscene material as defined in this Article at a
height of less than five (5) feet or without a blinder or other covering placed
or printed on the front of the material displayed.
§ 102-9. Presumption.
Public display of obscene material shall constitute presumptive evidence
that the retailer knowingly made or permitted to display.
§ 102-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a petty disorderly persons offense and
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days,
or both.
§ 102-7 PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS § 102-10
100:219
Chapter 104
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertisements, pamphlets and
handbills — See Ch. 50.
Carnivals — See Ch. 57, Amusements, Art. I.
Games of chance — See Ch. 80.
Garage sales — See Ch. 83.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
§ 104-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Words defined. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words
and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
this section:
NEW MERCHANT — A person who engages in business in the borough,
irrespective of the permanent or temporary nature of such business, by
occupying premises for the sale of merchandise during and not longer
than one (1) year subsequent to the opening of such premises.
NONPROFITMAKING VENDOR — A person who sells goods, the
proceeds of which are devoted exclusively to the purposes of a
philanthropic, charitable or religious society on whose behalf he acts as
an agent without pay.
PEDDLER — A person commonly referred to either as a "peddler or
hawker" who goes from place to place by traveling on the streets
or from house to house and carries with him goods, wares and
merchandise for the purpose of selling and delivering them to
consumers. A "peddler" shall also include persons commonly known as
"rag dealers" and "junk men."
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association, incorporated association, and principal or agent thereof.
SOLICITOR — A person selling goods by sample or taking orders for
future delivery with or without accepting an advance payment for the
goods. A "solicitor" is further defined as such person who goes from
door to door of residents in the borough soliciting orders for business.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — A person commonly referred to either
as a "transient merchant" or "itinerant vendor" who engages in
merchandising business in this municipality with intent to close out
or discontinue such business within a period of one (1) year from the
date of commencement and occupies a room, building, tent, lot or other
premises for the purpose of selling goods, wares and merchandise.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT PEDDLER — A person who engages in
business in the manner defined by "transient merchant," above, and in
§ 102-10 VERONA CODE § 104-1
104:220
§ 104-2. Statement of purpose. [Amended 3-3-1964]
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent unfair competition and dishonest
business practices by the regulation of the conduct of the fourth, fifth and
sixth classes of vendors specified in § 104-5 and by the imposition of license
fees for revenue upon the first, second, third and fourth classes. Licenses
shall be issued without payment of fees to classes five and six.
§ 104-3. Persons exempt. [Amended 12-21-1978 by Ord. No. 17-78]
The requirements of this chapter shall be held not to include a
nonprofitmaking vendor who has obtained permission from the Mayor and
Council to sell or dispose of, or to offer to sell or dispose of, any goods.
§ 104-4. License required. [Amended 3-3-1964]
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, transient merchant, transient merchant
peddler, solicitor, nonprofitmaking vendor and new merchant to sell or
dispose of, or to offer to sell or dispose of, any goods, wares or merchandise
within the borough without first obtaining a license and having paid the
license fee hereinafter prescribed for the first, second, third or fourth class
of licenses.
§ 104-5. License classifications.
pursuance thereto becomes a peddler or hires a peddler as defined by
"peddler," above.
B. Word usage. The word "peddler" and the word "solicitor" do not include
a person who keeps a store or place of business in the borough, other
than at his home, for the bona fide sale of, or who at such store, has
offered for bona fide sale, for at least one (1) year continuously, the
same kind of goods, wares and merchandise sought to be peddled or
hawked or any person representing or acting for such a person, except,
however, where orders for business are solicited from door to door of
residents in the borough, merchants in the borough doing such
solicitation are required to take out a license for a solicitor.
A. For the purpose of this chapter the classes of the various trades and
activities listed below shall constitute a license classification.
Class I: Peddler.
Class II: Transient merchant.
Class III: Transient merchant peddler.
Class IV: Solicitor.
Class V: Nonprofitmaking vendor.
Class VI: New merchant.
B. A separate license shall be issued for each class.
§ 104-1 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS § 104-6
104:221
§ 104-6. Application procedures.
Any person desiring a license required by this chapter shall file with the
Borough Clerk an application blank, separate blanks being provided for
each of the six (6) classes of licenses. The blanks shall contain the following
information and must be under oath:
A. For all license classes:
(1) Name of applicant.
(2) Permanent home residence.
(3) Name and address of firm represented, the names and addresses of
the person from which goods making up the stock were or are to be
purchased.
(4) Three (3) business references.
(5) The place or places of residence of the applicant for the preceding
three (3) years.
(6) The length of time for which the license is desired.
(7) A description of the wares to be offered for sale.
(8) The number either of arrests or convictions for misdemeanors or
crimes and the nature of the offenses for which arrested or
convicted.
(9) To the application must be appended a letter from the firm for
which he purports to work, authorizing the applicant to act as its
representative. Such applicant shall also allow his fingerprints and
two (2) personal photographs to be taken if required by the
Borough Clerk in the latter's discretion.
B. For transient merchant licenses. In addition to the foregoing items, the
application shall show:
(1) A sworn statement of the true invoice of the amount, average
quality or kind and value of the goods to be offered for sale.
(2) A statement of the location of such goods by street or number and
whether on the premises from which it is sold or in warehouse.
(3) To the application must be appended, in the discretion of the
Borough,Clerk, the bills or invoices of purchase for such goods.
C. For transient merchant peddler license. In addition to the foregoing
information, the application must show:
(1) The names and addresses of each peddler acting for such
merchant.
(2) Three (3) personal references for each peddler.
§ 104-6 VERONA CODE § 104-6
104:222
§ 104-7. Declaration of intention; bond.
§ 104-8. Issuance of license by Borough Clerk.
Following the filing of the application, the Chief of Police shall verify the
information respecting the moral character of the applicant and shall signify
his approval or rejection on the reverse side of the form, and the Borough
Clerk shall verify the financial information, approving or rejecting the
application on its reverse side. Upon verification of the application and
payment of the prescribed fee and the filing of the bond and application, the
license shall be issued by the Borough Clerk.
§ 104-9. Nontransferability of license.
For all license classes, the license issued shall not authorize any person,
except the designated person named in the license, to engage in business
thereunder. Such license shall not be transferable from the person to whom
issued to any other person. A separate license must be obtained by a
(3) For each peddler, the number either of arrests or convictions for
misdemeanors or crimes and the nature of the offenses for which
arrested or convicted.
A. For classes II, III and VI licenses as specified by § 104-5, the Borough
Clerk is directed to establish the character of the business by:
(1) Eliciting a declaration of intention of all new business persons as to
whether they intend to remain within the borough temporarily or
longer than a period of one (1) year.
(2) Requiring the filing of a bond in the case of transient merchants
and transient merchant peddlers in an amount equal to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the value of the applicant's stock, and in case of
new merchants, in an amount equal to 10% of the value of the
applicant's stock, but in no event shall any such bond of any of the
three (3) respective classes be less than the amount provided under
N.J.S.A. 45:24-5.96
B. The bond shall be declared forfeited upon conclusive proof of:
(1) Falsification in application for a license.
(2) Willful violation of an ordinance, state or federal law; or
(3) Removal from the borough within a year after opening the business
premises without payment of the license fee or fees required of
transient merchants or merchant peddlers. The bond of every
merchant continuously conducting a vending business for more
than one (1) year shall be surrendered, and no further license shall
be required of him under this section.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 104-6 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS § 104-9
104:223
licensed peddler for every agent or employee working for him. A separate
license must be obtained by a licensed transient merchant for each branch
or separate place of business in which his business is conducted, and each
license shall authorize the person to conduct business only at the location
which is indicated therein.
§ 104-10. Records; monthly report.
§ 104-11. Possession by licensee; display.
§ 104-12. Issuance of metal plates and buttons by Borough Clerk.
To every peddler granted a license the Borough Clerk shall issue a metal
plate bearing the words "LICENSED PEDDLER, BOROUGH OF VERONA,"
together with the number of the license and the year for which it is issued.
All automobiles, wagons, carts or other vehicles used for peddling shall
have affixed thereon the metal plate. To the vendors of all other classes shall
be issued a license button which must be affixed in the lapel of his coat or
garment while engaged in business.
A. All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued on forms drawn in
accordance with this chapter. They shall be printed in book form with
corresponding stubs and shall be consecutively numbered. The license
shall contain suitable blank spaces for writing in the name, the class of
license granted, the location of the business and the amount of fee paid.
B. There shall be kept in the office of the Borough Clerk the necessary
books for recording the time the application for license is received
showing its class, whether new or renewal, name of licensee, regular
number of blank form when the application was approved by the Chief
of Police and the Borough Clerk, the amount of fee received therefor
and the date when the license was issued.
C. The Borough Clerk shall monthly file a report with the Council showing
the number of licenses granted by classes and the amount of fees
received therefor. Each report shall state the number and class of
licenses suspended or revoked. The monthly report shall be cumulative
during the course of the year so that each report summarizes the action
of all preceding months of the current year.
A. Every person holding a license under this chapter shall be required to
carry the license with him or at his business premises while engaged in
the business licensed. He must produce the license at the request of
any official of the borough and of any person of the borough with whom
he wishes to conduct his business.
B. A transient merchant, a transient merchant peddler and new merchant
must post a license certificate in a prominent place in his business
premises.
§ 104-9 VERONA CODE § 104-13
104:224
§ 104-13. Offensive noises prohibited.
No person licensed under this chapter shall call attention to his business or
to his merchandise by crying out, by blowing a horn, by ringing a bell, other
than the doorbell at a house, or by any loud or unusual noise.
§ 104-14. Fees. [Amended 3-3-196497]
§ 104-15. Suspension or revocation.
A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Council by
reason of the violation of the terms of the license, the violation of any
borough ordinance, state or federal statute, or falsification in applying for a
license. The licensed person must be granted a hearing by the Council upon
his request before his license is revoked. A license may be suspended for
not more than two (2) weeks by the Borough Clerk without a hearing.
§ 104-16. Violations and penalties.98
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
A. Fees for licenses issued under this chapter shall be as provided for in
Chapter A175, Fees, for the following time periods:
(1) Peddlers: one (1) day; one (1) week; one (1) month; over one (1)
month and any further period of time not exceeding six (6) months;
one (1) year.
(2) Every peddler's license shall terminate at the close of December 31
of the year in which it is issued.
B. Transient merchants. The sum provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, shall
be for a license which shall continue in favor of the person to whom it is
issued for the period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the
same is issued.
C. Transient merchant peddlers. The amount prescribed by Subsection B
of this section and in addition thereto the amount prescribed by
Subsection A shall be the license fee for each peddler in his
employment. The license shall continue in effect one hundred eighty
(180) days.
D. Solicitor. A fee for the license required under this section shall be as
provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, and said license shall run for one
(1) year from the date of its issuance and no longer and same shall not
be assigned or transferred.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
98.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 104-13 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS § 104-16
104:225
Chapter 105
PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
§ 104-16 VERONA CODE § 104-16
105:226
ARTICLE I
Domestic Violence Crisis Intervention Team
[Adopted 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 3-2001]
§ 105-1. Establishment; qualification for membership; appointment;
Coordinator.
There is hereby created the West Essex Domestic Violence Crisis
Intervention Team. The Team shall consist of an unlimited number of
volunteers who shall be at least 21 years of age and bona fide residents
of New Jersey. All Team members shall serve without compensation.
Interested persons shall complete an application form supplied by the
township, be fingerprinted by the Police Department and subject to a
background check. Members of the Team shall be appointed by resolution
of the Township Council upon recommendations of the Mayor. The Township
Council shall also, by resolution and upon recommendation of the Mayor,
appoint certain Team members as Coordinators. All Coordinators and other
Team members shall be supervised by the Police Department and shall serve
at the discretion of the Township Council.
§ 105-2. Training program.
No person may serve as a Team member unless he/she shall have first
completed a forty-hour specialized training program as developed by the
New Jersey Division of Criminal Justice.
§ 105-3. Functions and duties.
The functions and duties of the Team shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 105-4. Annual report.
The Police Department shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and the
Township Council an annual report summarizing the activities of the Team
and any recommendations it sees fit to make.
A. Meeting with victims of domestic violence to provide support,
compassion and advice.
B. Providing information on available resources, appropriate agencies,
hotlines and the like and serving as a liaison with police and other
agencies as appropriate.
C. Such other functions and duties as may be established by the Police
Department.
§ 105-1 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 105-4
105:227
Chapter 107
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 20.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 85.
Rent control — See Ch. 112.
Sewers — Ch. 115.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 125.
Private swimming pools — Ch. 129.
Trees — See Ch. 136.
Shade trees and shrubs — See Ch. 171.
§ 105-4 VERONA CODE § 105-4
105:228
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 107-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and
nonresidential premises; to establish minimum standards governing
utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential
to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and
use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators
and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to
authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential and
nonresidential premises; to fix penalties for the violations of this chapter; to
provide for the right of access across adjoining premises to permit repairs;
and to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use. This chapter is hereby declared to
be remedial and essential for the public interest.
§ 107-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in
this chapter, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — As applied to a use or structure,
customarily subordinate or incidental to and on the premises of such
use and structure. As applied to accessory uses and structures, the
words "on the premises of" mean on the same lot or on a contiguous lot
in the same ownership.
BASEMENT — The portion of the building that is partly underground,
which has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from clear floor to
ceiling, above the average adjoining ground level. Where the natural
contour of the ground level immediately adjacent to the building is
interrupted by ditching, pits or trenching, then the average adjoining
ground level shall be the nearest natural contour line parallel to the
walls of the building without regard to the levels created by the
ditching, pits or trenching.
BATHROOM — Enclosed space or room containing one or more
fixtures, such as bathtubs, showers, water closets, lavatories or urinals.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a structure adapted
to permanent or continuous occupancy or use for public, institutional,
residence, business or storage purposes.
BUILDING CODE — The Building Code of the Township of Verona. 99
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 107-1 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-2
105:229
CELLAR — The lowermost portion of the building, partly or totally
underground, having 1/2 or more of its height, measured from clear
floor to ceiling, below the average adjoining ground level. Where the
natural contour of the ground level immediately adjacent to the
building is interrupted by ditching, pits or trenching, then the average
adjoining ground level shall be the nearest natural contour line parallel
to the walls of the building without regard to the levels created by the
ditching, pits or trenching.
CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM — A heating system in a fire-resistant
enclosed space or spaces, separate and apart from the area to be
heated, which system is permanently affixed on a fireproof base and
connected by breaching to a stack in accordance with the Building Code
and/or Plumbing Code. 100
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building or part
thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
DWELLING — Any structure designed for use by a human occupant for
sleeping and living purposes, whether occupied or vacant.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling, forming a single habitable unit which includes facilities for
living, sleeping, cooking, eating, bathing and toilet purposes.
EMANCIPATED MINOR — Any person under the age of 21 who is
gainfully employed and self-supporting or who is married to a spouse
who is gainfully employed and who supports said minor or who is
a student living away from home and in regular attendance at an
institution of higher learning.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises, or any part thereof, or
any building, or any part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed by the
public, or any member thereof, from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, openair
parking lot or from any adjoining or neighboring premises.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Those portions of a building which
are exposed to public view, and the open space of any premises outside
of any building erected thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
and vermin by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible material that may serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping or by other approved means of pest
elimination.
FAMILY — See "immediate family."
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief of the Township of Verona. 101
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform.
101. Editor's Note: As to provisions relating to the Fire Chief, see Ch. 20, Fire Department.
§ 107-2 VERONA CODE § 107-2
105:230
FIRE HAZARD — Any thing or any act which increases or may cause
an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than
that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service
of preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire or which may obstruct,
delay or hinder or may become the cause of an obstruction, a delay, a
hazard or a hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment
of fire.102 (See also "nuisance.")
FLOOR AREA, SUPERFICIAL — The net floor area within the enclosing
walls of the room, excluding built-in equipment, such as wardrobes,
cabinets, closets, kitchen units or fixtures which are not readily
removable, and excluding the floor area where the floor-to-ceiling
height is less than 7 1/3 feet.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. (See also
"refuse" and "rubbish.")
HABITABLE ROOMS — Rooms used or designed for use by one or more
persons for living or sleeping or cooking and eating, but not including
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, serving and storage
pantries, corridors, foyers, vestibules, cellars, heater rooms, boiler
rooms and utility rooms; and other rooms or spaces that are not used
frequently or for an extended period of time or that have less than
50 square feet of superficial floor area shall not be considered as
"habitable rooms."
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a single
dwelling unit, provided that all members are related by blood or
marriage, living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit.
INCIDENTAL COOKING — Cooking facilities containing no more than
two plates or burners not exceeding six inches in diameter or electrical
cooking facilities.
INDEPENDENT ROOMING UNIT — A rooming unit in other than a
single-family dwelling, which unit opens directly to the exterior of the
premises by way of a common hallway, common areaway or common
stairway or door to the exterior of the premises without passing
through any other rooming unit or dwelling unit.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other
pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard.
KITCHEN — Any room or part of a room used for cooking or the
preparation of food.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Any building containing one or more dwelling
units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to
nondwelling uses or as a hotel.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Fire Prevention.
§ 107-2 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-2
105:231
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping or having actual possession
of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling
or premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge
and consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall have charge, care or
control of any dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner or as
fiduciary, including but not limited to executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate, or as a
mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession was
obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part
or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed a co-owner with
the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the
premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the State of New
Jersey or the ordinances of the Township of Verona.
(1)
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health
or safety of children, whether in a building, on the premises of a
building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited
to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned
iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound
fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation,
such as poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove a hazard for
inquisitive minors.
(2)
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions
exist.
(3)
(4) Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of this chapter.
(5) Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this chapter.
Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation
of this chapter.
(6)
Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health, in violation of this chapter.
(7)
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings.
(8)
(9) Fire hazards.
§ 107-2 VERONA CODE § 107-2
105:232
OWNER OCCUPIED — Any person living, sleeping or having actual
possession of a dwelling who, alone, jointly or severally with others, has
legal or equitable title to said premises.
PERSON REQUIRING SPECIAL CARE — Any person who does not
suffer from such physical or mental incapacity as to be classified as
a disabled person but, by reason of physical or mental limitations or
advanced years, does require a limited degree of care and attention to
assure personal safety at all times.
PLUMBING — All of the following supplies, facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch
basins, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines, and water pipes and lines
utilized in conjunction with air-conditioning equipment.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the building or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Chief Building Inspector of the Township of
Verona, or such other person as the Township Council may specifically
designate, and such other officials as the "Public Officer" may designate
to act in his behalf.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except
body wastes, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid
market and industrial wastes. (See also "garbage" and "rubbish.")
REGISTERED MAIL — Registered mail or certified mail.
ROOM — Space in an enclosed building, or space set apart by a
partition or partitions, and any space in a building used or intended to
be used as a bedroom, dining room, living room, kitchen, sewing room,
library, den, music room, dressing room, enclosed sleeping porch, sun
room, party room, recreation room, breakfast room, study, storage
room and similar uses.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit other than a dwelling unit, which is rented or available
for rent for sleeping purposes, with or without cooking facilities.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery and similar materials. (Also see "garbage" and "refuse.")
SANITARY SEWER — Any sanitary sewer owned, operated and
maintained by the Township of Verona and available for public use for
the disposal of sewage.
§ 107-2 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-2
105:233
§ 107-3. Applicability; prevalence of higher standards; compliance.
SEWAGE — Waste from a flush toilet, bathtub, sink, lavatory,
dishwashing or laundry machine, or the watercarried waste from any
other fixture or equipment or machine.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached residential dwelling
designed for and occupied by one family only.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that
the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between
the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
If the finished ceiling level directly above a basement or cellar is more
than six feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered
a "story."
STRUCTURE — Combination of any materials, whether fixed or
portable, forming a construction, including buildings.
SUPERFICIAL FLOOR AREA — See "floor area, superficial."
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from any space by
natural or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer airr
through windows, skylights, door, louvers or stacks, with or without
wind-driven devices.
WASHROOMS — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs,
showers or both, which shall also include toilets, lavatories or fixtures
serving similar purposes.
WATER CLOSET COMPARTMENT — Enclosed space containing one or
more toilets, which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and
other plumbing fixtures.
WEATHERING — Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure
to the elements.
B. Word usage. Whenever the words "accessory structure," "building,"
"dwelling," "dwelling unit," "establishment subject to licensing,"
"habitable room," "independent rooming unit," "nursing home," "room,"
"rooming unit," "premises" or "structure" are used in this chapter, they
shall be construed, unless expressly stated to the contrary, to include
the plurals of these words and as if they were followed by the words "or
any part thereof." The word "shall" shall be applied retroactively as well
as prospectively.
A. Applicable to all buildings. Every residential and nonresidential
building and the premises on which it is situated in the township, used
or intended to be used for dwelling, commercial, business or industrial
occupancy, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, whether or
§ 107-2 VERONA CODE § 107-3
105:234
not such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired
before or after the enactment of this chapter and irrespective of any
permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or
occupancy of the building or for the installation or repair of equipment
or facilities prior to the effective date of this chapter. This chapter
establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy
and use of all such buildings and does not replace or modify standards
otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use
of the building, equipment or facilities contained therein, except as
provided in Subsection B hereinafter. Where there is a mixed
occupancy, any residential or nonresidential use therein shall be
nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Higher standard to prevail in case of conflict with other law or
ordinances. In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a
higher standard than set forth in any ordinances of the township or
under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set
forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this chapter impose a
lower standard than any ordinances of the township or of the laws of
the State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in any such
ordinance or law shall prevail.
C. Issuance and renewal of other permits and licenses. After the date of
enactment hereof, all licenses and permits shall be issued upon
compliance with this chapter as well as compliance with the ordinances
under which such licenses and permits are granted.
D. Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances. No license or
permit or other certification of compliance with this chapter shall
constitute a defense against any violation of any ordinance of the
township applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any
provision herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from
complying with any such other provision nor any official of the township
from enforcing any such other provision.
E. Applicability to one-family residences. The provisions of Article IV of
this chapter regulating standards for the maintenance of interior
premises shall not apply to one-family residences. [Amended
3-7-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88]
§ 107-3 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-3
105:235

ARTICLE II
General Operation and Occupancy Responsibilities
§ 107-4. General responsibilities.
A. Owner and operator. Owners and operators shall have all the duties and
responsibilities as prescribed in this chapter, and no owner or operator
shall be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled
to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact
that the occupant is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
B. Occupant. Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in § 107-13, and the occupant shall not be relieved from any
such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any
charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the owner or
operator is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
C. Contract not to alter responsibilities. Unless expressly provided to the
contrary in this chapter, the respective obligations and responsibilities
of the owner and operator on one hand and the occupant on the other
shall not be altered or affected by any agreement or contract by and
between any of the aforesaid or between them and other parties.
D. Owner's obligation to maintain same standard of service to tenants. The
owner of residential premises shall be obligated to maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, fixtures, equipment,
appliances and conveniences in or on the premises as were provided or
required by law or lease at the date the lease was originally entered
into or during the term of the tenancy. [Added 5-7-1984 by Ord. No.
11-84]
§ 107-4 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-4
105:237

ARTICLE III
Standards for the Maintenance of Exterior Premises
§ 107-5. General maintenance.
The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of
all nuisances, and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and
other persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions, and
any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or
operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises
free of hazards which include but are not limited to the following:
A. Refuse. Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
B. Natural growth. Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural
growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm
damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof.
C. Overhangings. Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice
and snow which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a
danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
D. Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions. Holes, excavations,
breaks, projections, obstructions, ice conditions, uncleared snow and
excretion of pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking
lots and parking areas and other parts of the premises which are
accessible to and used by persons on the premises. All such holes and
excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced and
other conditions removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or
unsanitary conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery;
provided, however, that the portion of this section dealing with
uncleared snow or ice does not apply to owner-occupied one-family
residences.
E. Recurring accumulations of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains shall
be provided and maintained to eliminate any such recurrent or
excessive accumulation of stormwater.
F. Sources of infestation. Premises shall be kept free of sources of
infestation.
G. Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound,
free from defects and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads
safely.
H. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto. Chimneys and all
flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally
sound, free from defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all
times the functions for which they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas
vents or other draft-producing equipment shall provide sufficient draft
to develop the rated output, of the connected equipment, shall be
§ 107-5 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-5
105:239
§ 107-6. Appearance.
structurally safe, durable, smoke-tight and capable of withstanding the
action of flue gases.
I. Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes. Exterior
porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be provided
with banisters or railings where needed properly designed and
maintained to minimize the hazard of fallings, and the same shall be
kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defects.
J. Sand or salt container accessible to tenants. Every owner shall be
required to provide and make accessible to tenants a container of or
salt or sand for use on steps and walkways leading to dwelling units
during snow or ice conditions. Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to relieve any owner or operator of any responsibility under
Subsection D of this section. [Added 5-7-1984 by Ord. No. 11-84]
K. Adequate containers for garbage and refuse. On all residential
premises, the owner shall provide and maintain adequate containers for
garbage and refuse. On nonresidential premises, the owner, operator or
tenant shall be required to maintain adequate containers for garbage
and refuse. "Adequate containers" shall mean containers of sufficient
size and number so as to contain the garbage and refuse accumulated
by all occupants or tenants in the premises, pending collection on a
regular basis, so that the premises will at all times be maintained in
accordance with this chapter. Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to relieve any owner or operator of any duty imposed by
§ 107-5. [Added 5-7-1984 by Ord. No. 11-84]
A. Residential. The exterior of the premises, the exterior of dwelling
structures and the condition of accessory structures shall be
maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings
thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the
residential standards of the neighborhood and such that the
appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a
blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading
to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood
with the accompanying diminution of property values, including the
following:
(1) Storage of commercial and industrial material. There shall not be
stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or
other public areas, equipment and materials relating to commercial
or industrial uses.
(2) Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns,
hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and kept from becoming
overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view and where
the same constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining
property and impairing the good residential character of the
§ 107-5 VERONA CODE § 107-6
105:240
neighborhood. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of
all dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which,
by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage,
constitutes a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall
be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
(3) Signs. All signs permitted by reason of other regulations or as a
lawful nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair, and
printed matter, pictures or illustrations contained thereon shall be
completely maintained or, when no longer in use, completely
removed.
(4) General maintenance. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, including fences, shall be maintained in good repair, and
all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or whitewashed where
necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance. The same
shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling
stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other condition reflective
of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the
property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated
and adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from
blighting influences.
(5) Front yard parking. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor
vehicle, boat or trailer, or permit or suffer the same to be done, in
any front yard area of premises occupied by a dwelling, except on
driveways and parking areas constructed and installed in
compliance with applicable Township ordinances.
B. Nonresidential. The exterior of the premises and the condition of
accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance
in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood or such higher
standards as may be adopted by the Township of Verona and such that
the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a
blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading
to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood
with the accompanying diminution of property values, including the
following:
(1) Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns,
hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and from becoming
overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view and where
the same constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining
property and impairing the good residential character of the
neighborhood. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of all
dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by
reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage,
constitutes a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall
be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
§ 107-6 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-6
105:241
(2) Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view permitted by reason of other regulations as a lawful
nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs
which have excessively weathered or faded or those upon which
the paint has excessively peeled or cracked shall, with their
supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a good state
of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be
repaired or shall, with their supporting members, be removed
forthwith.
(3) Windows. All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean
and free of marks or foreign substances except when necessary in
the course of changing displays. No storage of materials, stock or
inventory shall be permitted in window display areas or other areas
ordinarily exposed to public view unless said areas are first
screened from the public view by drapes, venetian blinds or other
permanent rendering of the windows opaque to the public view. All
screening of interiors shall be maintained in clean and attractive
manner and in a good state of repair.
(4) Storefronts. All storefronts shall be kept in good repair and painted
where required and shall not constitute a safety hazard or
nuisance. In the event repairs to a storefront become necessary,
such repairs shall be made with the same or similar materials used
in the construction of the storefront in such a manner as to
permanently repair the damaged area or areas. Any cornice visible
above a storefront shall be kept painted, where required, and in
good repair.
(5) Removal of signs or advertising.
(a) Except for "for rent" signs, any temporary sign or other paper
advertising material glued or otherwise attached to a window
or windows or otherwise exposed to public view shall be
removed at the expiration of the event or sale for which it is
erected or within six months after erection, whichever shall
occur sooner.
(b) Except during the course of repairs or alterations, no more
than 50% of the square footage of any single window or single
window display area shall be devoted to signs or other
temporary advertising material attached to said window or
windows or otherwise exposed to public view.
(6) Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its
accompanying structural members which extend over any street,
sidewalk or other portion of the premises shall be maintained in
good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard.
In the event that such awnings or marquees are not properly
maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together
with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event
§ 107-6 VERONA CODE § 107-6
105:242
§ 107-7. Structural soundness.
that said awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic, or of
similar materials, said cloth or plastic where exposed to public
view shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show
evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing,
or other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public
domain.
A. Residential. Every dwelling and accessory structure and every part
thereof shall be kept structurally sound and in a state of good repair to
avoid safety, health or fire hazards, including:
(1) Exterior walls, sidings and roofs. Exterior walls, sidings and roofs
shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from
defects.
(2) Painting and other protective coating. All exposed surfaces
susceptible to decay shall be kept at all times painted or otherwise
provided with a protective coating sufficient to prevent
deterioration.
(3) Weather- and watertightness. Every dwelling shall be so
maintained as to be weather- and watertight.
(4) Exterior walls, roofs, etc. Exterior walls, roofs, windows, window
frames, doors, door frames and foundations shall be so maintained
as to keep water from entering the structure and to prevent
excessive drafts. Damaged materials must be repaired or replaced
promptly. Places showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or
corrosion are to be restored and protected against weathering or
seepage.
B. Nonresidential. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure,
including fences, signs and storefronts, shall be maintained in good
repair, and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or whitewashed
where necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance. All
surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles,
crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other condition
reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that
the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated
and adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from
blighting influences.
(1) Exterior walls, sidings and roofs. Exterior walls, sidings and roofs
shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from
defects.
(2) Painting and other protective coating. All exposed surfaces
susceptible to decay shall be kept at all times painted or otherwise
§ 107-6 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-7
105:243
provided with a protective coating sufficient to prevent
deterioration.
(3) Exterior walls, roofs, etc. Exterior walls, roofs, windows, window
frames, doors, door frames and foundations shall be so maintained
as to keep water from entering the structure and to prevent
excessive drafts. Damaged materials must be repaired or replaced
promptly. Places showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or
corrosion are to be restored and protected against weathering or
seepage.
§ 107-7 VERONA CODE § 107-7
105:244
ARTICLE IV
Standards for the Maintenance of Interior Premises
§ 107-8. General maintenance.
A. Residential and nonresidential.
(1) Basement and cellars. Basements, cellar and crawl spaces are to be
free of moisture resulting from seepage, and cross ventilation shall
be required where necessary to prevent accumulations of visible
moisture and seepage.
(2) Freedom from infestation. All parts of the premises shall be
maintained so as to prevent infestation.
(3) General sanitation and safety. All parts of the dwelling shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition, free of nuisances and free from
health, safety and fire hazards.
(4) Freedom from accumulations and obstructions. No accumulation or
obstruction from garbage, refuse or rubbish shall be permitted on
common stairways, areaways, balconies, porches, hallways,
basements or cellars, except that garbage stored in proper
containers may be set out for removal within three hours of the
time set for pickup of the garbage.
(5) Floors, interior walls and ceilings. Floors, interior walls and
ceilings of every structure shall be structurally sound and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(6) Floors generally. Floors shall be considered to be structurally
sound when capable of safely bearing imposed loads and shall be
maintained at all times in a condition so as to be smooth, clean and
free from cracks, breaks and other hazards.
(7) Supplying of screens. Properly fitting screens in good repair shall
be supplied for each exterior door and window of each dwelling
unit or rooming unit. Such screens shall have a mesh of not less
than No. 16. Screens shall not be required in rooms deemed by the
Public Officer, pursuant to regulation, to be located sufficiently
high to be free of mosquitos, flies and other undesirable insects or
otherwise protected from serving as a means of access for
infestation. In establishments subject to licensing and in all
buildings where janitor service is required, screens shall be
installed and maintained by the owner or operator on all doors and
windows from May 1 to October 1 of each year.
(8) Painting of apartments and halls. It shall be the obligation of the
owner to maintain interior walls, ceilings and other exposed
surfaces of all apartment dwelling units and hallways used in
common by tenants and to keep such surfaces smooth, clean, free
from flaking, loose or peeling paint, plaster or paper and capable of
§ 107-8 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-8
105:245
§ 107-9. Garbage, rubbish and refuse.103
being maintained free from visible foreign matter and vermin and
in a sanitary condition. If and when necessary to accomplish the
foregoing or any part thereof, the owner shall spackel, paint, paper
or otherwise provide such interior surfaces with a protective
coating appropriate for the surface material, and this shall be done
at least once every three years unless it is clearly unnecessary.
Painting or other provision of a protective coating shall be the
responsibility of the tenant or occupant, and not the owner, when
required more frequently than once every three years as a result
of the acts or omissions of the occupant or tenant, a member of his
family or household or his guest. [Added 9-7-1976 by Ord. No.
13-76; amended 5-7-1984 by Ord. No. 11-84]
B. Nonresidential.
(1) Bathrooms and washroom and water closet compartments.
Washroom and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced
with water-resistant material and shall be kept in a dry, clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
(2) Cellar and basement floors. Floors of basements and cellars shall
be paved with stone or concrete not less than four inches thick and
shall be maintained at all times in a condition so as to be smooth,
clean, free from breaks and other hazards.
(3) Supporting structural members. Supporting structural members
are to be kept structurally sound, free from deterioration and
capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
(4) Walls and ceilings generally. Walls and ceilings shall be considered
to be in good repair when clean, free from breaks, loose plaster and
similar conditions. Walls shall be provided with paint, paper,
sealing material or other protective covering so that said walls and
ceilings shall be kept clean, free of visible foreign matter, sanitary
and well maintained at all times.
(5) Stairs and railings. Interior stairs of every structure shall be
structurally sound and free from defects. Handrailings or banisters
shall be provided for all stairs, balconies, fire escapes and
stairwells, and the handrails or banisters shall be securely
attached, maintained free from defects and shall be of sufficient
height to guard against accidents and to be appropriate for use by
persons of normal height utilizing the stairway. Stairs shall be
adequately lighted in all places with control switches operable from
each story to permit safe use at night for persons ascending or
descending, except in establishments subject to licensing or where
janitorial service is provided and artificial lighting for hallways and
common areaways is supplied in accordance with state law from a
master control switch.
§ 107-8 VERONA CODE § 107-9
105:246
A. Residential.
(1) Garbage container to be supplied for each occupant. Each dwelling
unit containing cooking facilities shall be provided with a
watertight noncombustible container with a tight-fitting lid for the
temporary storage of rubbish, garbage and other refuse.
(2) Responsibility for removal. The owner or operator shall have the
duty and responsibility of removing garbage, wherever a janitor is
required for the premises, to the area designated for the collection
of same.
(3) Accumulating refuse and nonfireproof storage prohibited. Storage
bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for accumulated garbage or
refuse; provided, however, that enclosed spaces or rooms in the
interior of the dwellings which are used exclusively as garbage
collection points, equipped with garbage containers complying
with Subsection A(1) above, from which room or space containers
are removed by the janitor at least once daily, shall not be
prohibited. Flammable or combustible liquids or other materials
may not be stored on the premises unless they are of a type
approved for storage by the regulations of the Fire Department,104
and then only in such quantities and in such fireproof storage
containers as may be prescribed by the regulations.
(4) Storage areas. In dwellings containing four or more dwelling units,
storage areas or storage bins shall be of fireproof construction and
contain fireproof walls and partitions of at least two hours' rating
and, in addition thereto, shall have self-closing fireproof doors.
Excessive accumulations of combustible materials are prohibited,
and the responsibility for removal thereof shall be with the owner
and operator of the premises as well as the occupant to whom said
materials may belong. Where storage areas or storage bins are
available to more than one tenant, the area shall be numbered or
otherwise identified, and a list of the names of the tenants utilizing
each such area or bin shall be kept at all times available for
examination by the Public Officer in the office of the person in
charge of the premises. The provisions governing this section shall
be supplemented by regulations to be prepared jointly by the Public
Officer and Fire Chief, as well as appropriate enforcement
procedures which will include notification to the superintendents
and tenants of apartment buildings which may be affected thereby.
(5) Janitorial service. In every dwelling containing six or more dwelling
units or rooming units, or combination thereof, the owner shall
provide or designate a superintendent, janitor, caretaker or
housekeeper who shall, at all times, maintain the premises in
103. Editor's Note: For information on disposal within the Township, see Ch. 85, Garbage,
Rubbish and Refuse.
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Fire Prevention, and Ch. 88, Gasoline Stations.
§ 107-9 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-9
105:247
compliance with this chapter and keep the premises free from filth,
garbage, refuse and rubbish and who shall be responsible for the
daily collection of garbage and other refuse from the occupants on
a regular schedule and at a reasonable time and place same out for
collection in accordance with current provisions of the Township of
Verona. Said person shall be regularly available on the premises to
perform the foregoing duties. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81]
(6) In the event said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper
shall not reside in said premises, the owner or operator shall make
his name, address and telephone number known to all tenants and
shall register same with the Public Officer and shall also make
available and known to all tenants and the Public Officer the name
of an alternative individual who shall be responsible during the
absence of said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper.
(7) In any premises containing 35 or more dwelling units, rooming
units or combination thereof, said superintendent, janitor,
caretaker or housekeeper shall reside on the premises. In any
premises containing 70 or more dwelling units, rooming units or
combination thereof, said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or
housekeeper shall be a full-time employee. Where more than one
building on adjoining premises or premises in near proximity to
each other are in common ownership or under common
management or maintenance supervision, the requirements
contained herein shall apply separately to each building unless the
owner or manager thereof can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Public Officer that proper operation of the premises and
provision of all essential services and facilities as required under
Township legislation can be provided by a resident superintendent,
janitor, caretaker or housekeeper of one building who shall assume
responsibility for the other building or buildings adjoining or in
near proximity to his place of residence.
(8) Said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper shall have
sufficient knowledge, competence and responsibility and shall have
authority from the owner or operator to attend to or arrange for
continual operation of all essential services and facilities required
under this chapter. Where violations arise under this chapter and,
by reason of same, the Public Officer is doubtful of the
qualifications, competence and sense of responsibility of any
superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper, he shall provide
notice to the owner or operator and to the superintendent, janitor,
caretaker or housekeeper and thereafter shall provide an oral and
written examination or hearing to determine the qualifications,
competence and sense of responsibility of said superintendent,
janitor, caretaker or housekeeper. In the event the Public Officer
shall find such person is not capable or competent to regularly
perform the duties required by this chapter, said Public Officer
§ 107-9 VERONA CODE § 107-9
105:248
§ 107-10. Utilities, water and plumbing.106
shall order the owner or operator to provide that a suitable person
be placed in charge and be responsible for said premises.
(9) The failure of any superintendent, janitor, caretaker or
housekeeper to comply with the provisions of this chapter, even in
disobedience of instructions, shall not relieve the owner or
operator from the duties and responsibilities imposed by this
chapter.
B. Nonresidential.
(1) The owner or operator shall have the duty and responsibility of
removing garbage.
(2) Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for accumulated
garbage or refuse, and flammable or combustible liquids or other
materials may not be stored on the premises unless they are of a
type approved for storage by the regulations of the Fire
Department,105 and then only in such quantities and in such
fireproof storage containers as may be prescribed by the
regulations.
A. Residential.
(1) Adequate supply of Township water. Every facility using running
water for domestic purposes within any building shall be connected
to the public water supply system of the Township. The water
system shall be maintained in good and operable condition at all
times so that sufficient and positive pressure shall be available at
all installed hot- and cold-water faucets.
(2) Hot and cold water. Every kitchen sink, lavatory or basin, tub or
shower, as required under this chapter, shall be connected to both
the hot- and cold-water lines. There shall be sufficient and
adequate equipment maintained in good working condition to
supply water at a minimum temperature of 110º F. at all times to
each hotwater outlet.
(3) Facilities required in bathroom. Every bathroom required
hereunder shall be provided with a flush toilet, connected to the
cold-water line, and a shower or tub and a washbasin connected to
running water as set forth in Subsection A(1) above. Bathrooms
shall also be provided with adequate light and ventilation as more
particularly set forth in Subsection A(19) of this section.
(4) Maintenance of plumbing facilities. Every facility required under
Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) above shall be maintained in a sanitary
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Fire Prevention, and Ch. 88, Gasoline Stations.
106. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 115, Sewers, and Ch. 146, Water.
§ 107-9 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-10
105:249
condition, free from defects and in operating condition at all times.
Where said facility or plumbing fixtures shall be clogged, shall
overflow or shall otherwise necessitate repair, such repairs shall be
performed forthwith.
(5) Connection to sanitary sewer. All plumbing fixtures shall be
connected to the sanitary sewer through lines which are free of
leaks, corrosion or deterioration and which provide unobstructed
passage from the plumbing facilities within the dwelling to the
sanitary sewer.
(6) Bathroom requirements for dwelling units. Every dwelling unit
shall contain a bathroom which shall be located entirely within that
unit and which shall be completely enclosed, containing the
facilities as set forth in § 107-12B(2)(a) in a room which affords
privacy to the occupants thereof.
(7) Bathroom requirements for independent rooming units. There shall
be a bathroom meeting the same requirements as set forth in
Subsection A(6) above, which bathroom shall be directly accessible
to a common hallway or areaway which is either on the same floor
as, or is one floor above or below, all rooming units it is designed to
serve and which hallway is directly accessible to the occupants of
all such rooming units without passing through any other dwelling
unit or rooming unit. The number of bathrooms required for
persons who do or may occupy the rooming units shall be as
follows:
Number Bathrooms
Occupants to be
Accommodated
1 1 to 8
2 9 to 16
3 17 to 24
4 25 to 30
(8) Heating facilities and duty to supply heat. Every dwelling unit shall
contain heating facilities of sufficient capacity to maintain a
minimum inside temperature of 68º F. in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments, measurable 36 inches
above the floor at the center of any such room or compartment
when the outside temperature is 0º F. Where the facilities are found
to be of inadequate size or capacity to accomplish the foregoing,
then the owner or operator shall, at the direction of the Public
Officer, either increase the capacity of the heating system or close
off habitable space so that the standard, as established herein,
shall be met, provided that such space can be removed as habitable
space without creating a violation of the standards established by
this chapter.
§ 107-10 VERONA CODE § 107-10
105:250
(9) Storage of fuels. Fuel for operation of the heating equipment shall
be stored outside the premises, unless stored in the interior
pursuant to regulations of the Fire Department.
(10) Conversions prohibited during winter. No heating units shall be
converted in any dwelling or part thereof between October 1 and
May 1 where there are occupants other than the owner or operator
dependent on heat from the unit, without written consent of all
such occupants, but nothing herein shall be construed as
preventing emergency alterations or repairs.
(11) Side-arm gas water heaters. On and after the effective date of this
chapter, no new or used side-arm gas water heaters shall be
installed. Existing side-arm gas water heaters shall only be
permitted where they are installed in separate, enclosed and
ventilated spaces which are not part of the normal living area of a
dwelling unit or rooming unit.
(12) Installation and maintenance of heating facilities. Heating
equipment shall be installed in a manner which will avoid
dangerous concentration of fumes and gases. Heating equipment
shall not be forced to operate beyond the safe capacity for which it
is designed. Where necessary, exposed heating risers, heating
ducts and hot-water lines shall be covered with an insulating
material or guard. The heating facilities and all parts thereof shall
be kept in good operating condition, free from defects, corrosion
and deterioration at all times.
(13) Requirements for providing heat from September 15 to June 1.
From September 15 of each year to June 1 of the next succeeding
year, every unit of dwelling space and every habitable room therein
shall be maintained at a temperature of at least 68°F. during the
hours of between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and at least 65°F.
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. These provisions are
enforceable by and through the Public Officer with penalties as set
forth within the Property Maintenance Code of the Township of
Verona. [Amended 5-7-1984 by Ord. No. 11-84; 9-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 10-09]
(14) 107Multifamily dwellings. [Added 9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 10-09]
(a) From October 1 of each year to the next succeeding May 1,
every multifamily dwelling unit of nine stories or more therein
shall be maintained at a temperature of at least 68°F. between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and at least 65°F.
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The heating
system shall be capable of maintaining the minimum required
temperature in all habitable rooms without the necessity of
heating adjoining rooms more than 5° higher than said
107. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(14), During the entire day, was repealed 5-7-1984 by
Ord. No. 11-84.
§ 107-10 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-10
105:251
minimum required temperature. The design of the heating
system shall conform to the ASHRAE Guide and Data Book.
The heating standard herein set forth may be modified by
the Commissioner by emergency rule. These provisions are
enforceable by and through the Public Officer with penalties
as set forth within the Property Maintenance Code of the
Township of Verona.
(b) In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner shall not be
responsible for heat loss and the consequent drop in the
interior temperature arising out of action by the occupants in
leaving windows or doors open to the exterior of the building.
(c) The owner shall be obligated to supply required fuel or energy
and maintain the heating system in good operating condition
so that it can supply heat as required herein, notwithstanding
any contractual provision seeking to delegate or shift
responsibility to the occupant or third person, except that the
owner shall not be required to supply fuel or energy for heating
purposes to any unit where the occupant hereof agrees in
writing to supply heat to his own unit of dwelling space and the
said unit is served by its own exclusive heating equipment for
which the source of heat can be separately computed and
billed.
(15) Where owner not required to supply heat. Any owner or operator
who has an express contractural arrangement with an occupant
under which the occupant undertakes to supply his own heat
through facilities under the occupant's exclusive control shall be
excepted for the requirements to supply heat hereunder.
(16) Duty to maintain equipment. Notwithstanding a contract by the
occupant to supply his own heat as provided herein, where the
heating unit is installed by or owned by the owner or operator, then
the duty to maintain same in operable and functioning condition as
provided herein shall remain the duty of the owner or operator.
(17) Presumption against contract by occupant to supply own heat. The
presence of heating outlets, radiators, risers and returns in any hall
or dwelling unit or rooming unit shall constitute a presumption that
the owner is to supply heat as required hereunder, and, in the
absence of clear and convincing proof to the contrary, this
presumption shall control.
(18) Where occupant required to supply heat as owner. As set forth in
Subsection A(16) above, occupants who undertake to supply heat
to dwelling units or rooming units other than their own shall be
responsible as owners hereunder to the occupants of such dwelling
units or rooming units.
(19) Bathrooms and water closet compartments. Every bathroom and
water closet compartment shall be adequately ventilated with
§ 107-10 VERONA CODE § 107-10
105:252
openable window area totaling 1 1/2 square feet or by comparable
mechanical ventilation.
B. Nonresidential.
(1) Adequate supply of running water. Every facility using running
water for purposes within any building shall be connected to the
public water supply system of the Township. The water system shall
be maintained in good and operable condition at all times so that
sufficient and positive pressure shall be available at all installed
hot- and cold-water faucets.
(2) Hot and cold water. Every kitchen sink, lavatory or basin, tub or
shower, as required under this chapter, shall be connected to both
the hot- and cold-water lines. There shall be sufficient and
adequate equipment maintained in good working condition to
supply water at a minimum temperature of 110º F. at all times to
each hot water outlet; provided, however, that in those
establishments, such as restaurants, where sterilization may be
necessary, the minimum temperature should be 180º F. at all times
to each hot-water outlet used for sterilization purposes.
(3) Facilities required in bathroom. Every bathroom required
hereunder shall be provided with a flush toilet connected to the
cold-water line, a washbasin connected to running water as set
forth in Subsection A(1) of this section and such other reasonable
facilities necessary for the proper utilization of the bathroom.
Bathrooms shall also be provided with adequate light and
ventilation as more particularly set forth in Subsection A(19)
above.
(4) Maintenance of plumbing facilities. Every facility required under
Subsections A(1), (2) and (3) of this section shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition, free from defects and in operating condition at
all times. Where said facility or plumbing fixtures shall be clogged,
overflow or otherwise necessitate repair, such repairs shall be
performed forthwith.
(5) Connection to sanitary sewer. All plumbing fixtures shall be
connected to the sanitary sewer through lines which are free of
leaks, corrosion or deterioration and shall provide unobstructed
passage from the plumbing facilities within the dwelling to the
sanitary sewer.
(6) Storage of fuels. Fuel for operation of the heating equipment shall
be stored outside the premises, unless stored in the interior
pursuant to regulations of the Fire Department.108
(7) Installation and maintenance of heating facilities. Heating
equipment shall be installed in a manner which will avoid
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Fire Prevention, and Ch. 88, Gasoline Stations.
§ 107-10 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-10
105:253
§ 107-11. Lighting and electrical facilities.109
dangerous concentration of fumes and gases. Heating equipment
shall not be forced to operate beyond the safe capacity for which
it is designed. Where necessary, exposed heating risers, heating
ducts and hot-water lines shall be covered with 1/2 inch of
insulating material or guard. The heating facilities and all parts
thereof shall be kept in good operating condition and free from
defects, corrosion and deterioration at all times.
A. Residential.
(1) Electrical service generally. Electrical power through safely
insulated cables conforming to the National Electrical Code and
National Electrical Safety Code shall be supplied to all dwelling
units and rooming units used or available for human habitation.
(2) Electrical outlets in habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall be
equipped with a permanently installed electrical outlet or outlets
sufficient to provide lighting and power and permit the installation
of or use of electric lights sufficient to meet the reasonable lighting
requirements for normal use of the room and other electrical
equipment normally expected to be used in said room.
(3) Lighting of bathrooms, washrooms and water closet compartments.
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be provided
with permanently installed artificial lighting fixtures with a switch
and wall plate so located and maintained that there is no danger of
short circuiting from water from other bathroom facilities or from
the splashing of water.
(4) Lighting of common spaces other than habitable rooms, bathrooms
and water closet compartments. [Amended 5-7-1984 by Ord. No.
11-84]
(a) Lighting of hallways, stairways, landings and other spaces
used by occupants in common as a normal means of passage
shall be sufficient to provide at least five footcandles,
measured in the darkest portion.
(b) Every cellar, basement, work space and other part of the
structure used occasionally and incidentally by the occupants
shall be provided with artificial lighting available at all times so
that there shall be at least three footcandles, measured in the
darkest portion trafficked by occupants. The means of ingress
and egress used by the occupants shall be provided with
adequate lighting so that there shall be at least five
footcandles, measured in the darkest portion trafficked by the
occupants.
109. Editor's Note: For electrical standards, see Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 107-10 VERONA CODE § 107-11
105:254
(c) Every garage or other accessory structure utilized by
occupants after dark shall be equipped with artificial lighting.
Lighting may be operated manually, in lieu of continual night
lighting. Manually operated lighting shall be operable from a
switch located near the point of ingress of the space to be
lighted.
(d) Exterior parking areas, pedestrian walkways or other portions
of the premises subject to regular and recurrent use by
occupants at night shall be illuminated continually from 1/2
hour before sunset to 1/2 hour after sunrise, unless the lighting
is connected to a dusk-to-dawn photoelectric device to enable
safe passage of persons of normal vision.
(5) Loose or exposed wiring. Except as hereinafter stated, all wiring or
cables shall be properly affixed or attached to the structure.
Insulation shall be provided for all wiring and cables and kept in
good repair, and no ceiling or wall fixtures shall be used for
supplying power to equipment other than that for which they are
designed. Exposed nonmetallic extensions shall conform to the
National Electrical Code.
(6) Replacement of light bulbs. All required lighting fixtures shall be
supplied at all times with functioning light bulbs of sufficient
wattage to supply the footcandle requirements of this chapter.
(7) Fuses and protective devices, Maximum fuse sizes consistent with
safety shall be posted conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse
boxes, and no fuse shall be installed therein in excess of the stated
maximum, except that owners shall not be responsible for violation
in fuse installations without their knowledge where the correct
maximum is stated and the fuse box is located within a dwelling
unit or rooming unit in the exclusive possession of occupants other
than the owner. All circuit breakers or other devices installed in
lighting or power panels shall conform to requirements of the
National Electrical Code.
(8) Overloading of circuits. Overloading of circuits is prohibited.
Where the Public Officer finds after notice and hearing that, by
reason the appliances and fixtures, there is continuing overloading
of an electrical line creating a hazard, the owner shall be required
to install a line of sufficient capacity to absorb the load to which the
line is subjected or otherwise eliminate the conditions causing the
overload. For purposes of this section, the Public Officer may
consider the peak seasonal load to which the line is subjected.
(9) Suspension of services and utilities. No owner, operator or
occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility
which is required to be supplied by the provisions of this chapter to
be removed from or discontinued for an occupied dwelling unit or
rooming unit, except for necessary repairs, alterations or
§ 107-11 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-11
105:255
emergencies or for such other reason as may be permitted
pursuant to those sections of Township ordinances applicable to
such service, facility, equipment or utility.
B. Nonresidential.
(1) Electric power generally. Electric power through safely insulated
conduits conforming to the National Electrical Code shall be
supplied to nonresidential buildings regularly utilized for business,
industrial, commercial or institutional work and all garages.
(2) Lighting of bathrooms, washrooms and water closet compartments.
Every washroom and water closet compartment shall be provided
with permanently installed artificial lighting fixtures with a switch
and wall plate so located and maintained that there is no danger of
short circuiting from water from other washroom facilities or from
the splashing of water.
(3) Nonresidential buildings. All nonresidential buildings required to
have electric service under Subsection A(1) of this section shall
also be provided with artificial lighting installations and fixtures
conforming to the requirements contained in Subsection B(1)
above. All such fixtures shall be operable from a switch located
near the point of ingress to the interior of the space lighted. All
portions of the premises which are regularly utilized for work and
activities shall be illuminated by at least five footcandles measured
in the darkest portions thereof, and all other portions regularly
traversed by occupants of the premises shall be illuminated by at
least three footcandles measured in the darkest portions thereof.
(4) Maintenance of electrical and lighting facilities; loose or exposed
wiring. Except as hereinafter stated, all wiring or cables shall be
properly affixed or attached to the structure. Insulation shall be
provided for all wiring and cables and kept in good repair. No loose
cords or loose extension lines in excess of six feet in length shall be
permitted, and no ceiling or wall fixtures shall be used for
supplying power to equipment other than that for which they are
designed.
(5) Replacement of light bulbs. All required lighting fixtures shall be
supplied at all times with functioning light bulbs of sufficient
wattage to supply the footcandle requirements of this chapter.
(6) Fuse requirements; prohibition against overloading circuits; fuses
and protective devices. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety
shall be posted conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse boxes,
and no fuse shall be installed therein in excess of the stated
maximum, except that owners shall not be responsible for violation
in fuse installation without their knowledge where the correct
maximum is stated and the fuse box is located within any part of
the premises which is in the exclusive possession of occupants
other than the owner. All circuit breakers or other protective
§ 107-11 VERONA CODE § 107-11
105:256
§ 107-12. Occupancy standards and basic facilities.
devices installed in lighting or power panels shall conform to
requirements of the National Electrical Code.
(7) Overloading of circuits. Overloading of circuits is prohibited.
Where the Public Officer finds, after notice and hearing, that by
reason of the appliances and fixtures there is continuing
overloading of an electrical line creating a hazard, the owner shall
be required to install a line of sufficient capacity to absorb the load
to which the line is subjected or otherwise eliminate the conditions
causing the overload. For purposes of this section, the Public
Officer may consider the peak seasonal load to which the line is
subjected.
(8) Suspension of services and utilities. No owner, operator or
occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility
which is required to be supplied by the provisions of this chapter to
be removed from or discontinued, except for necessary repairs,
alterations or emergencies or for such other reason as may be
permitted pursuant to those sections of Township ordinances
applicable to such service, facility, equipment or utility.
C. Residential and nonresidential. [Added 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
13-81]
(1) The New Jersey Statutes pertaining to smoke detectors and smoke
alarms, P.L. 1979, c. 419, adopted November 12, 1980,110 together
with all regulations adopted thereto is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any tenant, occupant, owner or any other
person to remove, tamper with, damage, destroy, steal or paint over
any smoke detectors, or to do anything to cause such smoke
detectors or any of their parts to malfunction or fail to operate.
(3) The Township officials charged with the duty of enforcing this
article shall be the Fire Marshal, the Construction Code Official,
personnel of the Fire Prevention Bureau, personnel of the
Construction Code Enforcement Department, and members of the
Police Department.
(4) In addition to the enforcement of this article by Township officials,
any person may institute and file a complaint in the Municipal
Court of the Borough of Verona against any person who is found
violating any provisions of the article.
A. Occupancy standards.
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-7.1 and 13A-7.2.
§ 107-11 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-12
105:257
(1) Required space in sleeping rooms. Every room utilized for sleeping
purposes shall have a minimum superficial floor area of 70 square
feet for the initial occupant and fifty (50) square feet of additional
superficial floor area for each additional occupant, except that
children under one year of age shall not be counted as occupants
for the purposes of this section.
(2) Occupancy of basements.
(a) Basements may be used for human habitation, provided that
there is sufficient natural light and ventilation, as more
particularly required by § 107-11A, and that natural light and
ventilation are not restricted by reason of walls or other
obstructions located within six feet of any window required,
pursuant to this section.
(b) There shall be a second means of egress conforming to the
requirements of Subsection B(6) of this section.
(c) All furnaces or other heating facilities shall be so located,
insulated and separated from living areas by fireproof
partitions or walls necessary pursuant to regulations of the
Fire Chief so that same does not constitute an undue hazard to
the safety and health of the occupants.
(d) The dwelling units and all walls and floors thereof shall be free
of visible moisture and seepage at all times.
B. Basic facilities.
(1) Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall have a bathroom,
containing a toilet, washbasin, bathtub or shower, shall be
equipped with private kitchen facilities and shall comply with such
other requirements as are set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
Where there are more than eight occupants, said unit shall have
two bathrooms.
(2) Independent rooming units.
(a) Bathrooms. Bathrooms containing all facilities required under
§ 107-10B(3) shall be provided for occupants of independent
rooming units in accordance with § 107-10A(7).
(b) Incidental cooking permitted. No cooking shall be permitted in
independent rooming units except incidental cooking where
there are minimum sanitary facilities as required under
Subsection B(4) hereinafter.
(c) Registration for incidental cooking facilities. All such
incidental cooking units shall, prior to installation (if installed
after the effective date of this chapter), be registered with the
Public Officer on forms showing the location of each unit, the
nature of the cooking facilities and such other information as
§ 107-12 VERONA CODE § 107-12
105:258
the Public Officer may require. Where located as part of an
establishment subject to licensing, then said registration shall
not be required.
(3) Single-family dwellings; incidental cooking. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained herein, incidental cooking shall
be permitted in one room of a single-family dwelling, provided that
if, after inspection, the Public Officer shall determine that, by
reason of the remoteness of the location of said room or any
limitations as to accessibility to the existing means of egress,
additional means of egress are necessary for the safety of the
occupants of the premises, then the owner shall provide said
additional means of egress or remove the incidental cooking
facilities,
(4) Minimum sanitary facilities for all cooking. No cooking, including
incidental cooking, shall be permitted in any independent rooming
unit or dwelling unit unless there are minimum sanitary facilities,
which facilities shall include:
(a) A kitchen sink of nonabsorbent impervious material and a
drainboard of appropriate materials, said sink to be connected
to the hot- and cold-water lines.
(b) A waterproof washable container for garbage disposal
equipped with a lid or cover to prevent infestation.
(c) Appropriate facilities for storage of food and either gas or
electric refrigeration.
(d) Means of ventilation sufficient to remove cooking odors to the
exterior of the premise.
(e) Flooring in compliance with § 107-8A(5) and (6).
(5) Community cooking facilities. Cooking facilities serving more than
one dwelling unit or independent rooming unit or combination
thereof shall not be permitted, except that nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the operation of establishments subject to
licensing.
(6) Where second means of egress is required.
(a) Dwelling units. There shall be a second means of egress for all
dwelling units (except in single-family dwellings), which
dwelling units are located in basements or above the first-story
level of any structure.
(b) Basement dwelling units. The second means of egress from any
basement dwelling unit may be by a second door located
independently from the first means of egress and leading
directly to the outside of the premises or, in the alternative, a
§ 107-12 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-12
105:259
§ 107-13. Personal responsibilities of occupants.
window which shall serve as a means of egress in accordance
with Subsection B(6)(c).
(c) Window in part of egress. Where a window forms a part of
egress from a dwelling unit or from a common hallway or area
to be a fire escape, said window shall be located no more than
three feet above the floor area and shall provide a minimum
opening of two feet by six feet six inches for casement windows
or two feet six inches by three feet for double-hung windows.
Said windows shall be easy to open for all occupants and shall
lead directly to the fire escape or to the immediately adjacent
opening outside ground area with a maximum drop of three
feet thereto. Screens, storm windows and other barriers to the
outside shall be readily opened or removed so as not to form
any obstruction to occupants seeking egress in case of
emergency.
(d) Door in path of egress. Any door in the path of egress shall be
at least 30 inches in width with a minimum height of four feet,
shall open in the direction of exit travel and shall be accessible
and free from obstructions from common hallways or
areaways.
(e) Location and number of exits. Where two or more exits are
required, each exit shall be as remote as practicable from the
other exit or exits. All the exits shall be of such number and so
located that the distance of travel from the door of each
rooming unit or dwelling unit on each floor shall not exceed 50
feet, except in buildings of fireproof construction or buildings
equipped with automatic sprinkler systems throughout, in
which buildings the maximum distance of travel from the door
of any unit to the nearest exit shall not exceed 100 feet,
provided that two of the exits shall be at least 30 feet apart.
A. Residential. Occupants shall not occupy or continue to occupy premises
which are substandard by reason of the failure of the dwelling unit or
rooming unit occupied by them, or of the dwelling or premises, to
conform to and comply with the requirements of this chapter.
[Amended 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
(1) Cleanliness and sanitation. All parts of the premises under the
control of the occupant or operator shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, and the occupant shall refrain from performing
any acts which would render other parts of the premises unclean or
unsanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from
performing any duty required hereunder or from maintaining the
premises in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 107-12 VERONA CODE § 107-13
105:260
(2) Garbage disposal and personal accumulations. Occupants shall
place all garbage in the receptacles provided for garbage disposal
and shall, where janitor service is not supplied, place for disposal
all garbage and other refuse in garbage cans located in the exterior
of the premises in an area designated and set forth for the same.
Where janitorial service for the removal of garbage and other
refuse to the exterior of the premises is provided by the owner or
operator, then the occupant shall dispose of garbage and other
refuse in containers provided therefor by the owner or operator in
designated and enclosed areas in the interior of the premises.
Garbage and other refuse shall not be thrown out of windows or
down dumbwaiters, nor shall garbage and refuse be set out on
stairways or fire escapes or in common hallways. All fire escapes,
stairways, common areas and common hallways shall be kept free
of accumulations of personal belongings.
(3) Dumbwaiters. All dumbwaiters shall be operable at all times where
in existence and used as a regular part of the garbage disposal
system.
(4) Eliminating infestation. Every occupant of a single-family dwelling
shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation in the
dwelling on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit in a dwelling other than a single-family dwelling shall
be responsible for eliminating all conditions causing infestation
which are caused by the occupant and also those conditions which
are subject to and under his exclusive control.
(5) Malicious damage. Every occupant or operator shall be held
responsible for willfully or maliciously causing damage to any part
of the premises.
(6) Use of fuel. No occupant shall cause excessive discoloration of the
sidewalls or ceilings of any part of the premises by improper use of
heating or cooking equipment.
(7) Supplying of heat to other occupants. Where any occupant
undertakes, by contract or as a condition of his letting, to supply his
own heat through a furnace or boiler which also heats a dwelling
unit or rooming unit occupied by other persons, said occupant shall
be responsible for supplying heat in accordance with the provisions
of § 107-10A(14) through (19).
(8) Installation and maintenance of heating equipment. Where any
occupant undertakes to install heating equipment, same shall
conform to the requirement of § 107-10A(8) through (14). The
occupant shall thereafter be responsible for maintaining such
equipment installed by him in good repair and operating condition
during all times that the heating equipment shall remain under his
control.
§ 107-13 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-13
105:261
(9) Maintenance of plumbing. Every occupant or operator shall
maintain all plumbing fixtures used by him in a clean and sanitary
condition, and he shall not deposit any material in any fixture or
sewer system which would result in stoppage of or damage to the
fixture or sewer system.
(10) Providing notice of defect to owner. Where the owner or operator
would not otherwise know of a defect of any facility, utility or
equipment required to be furnished hereunder and same is
defective or inoperable, each occupant or operator affected thereby
shall, upon learning of said defect, provide notice to the owner,
operator or other person in charge of the premises. Nothing herein
shall be construed to provide a defense to any owner or operator
violating this chapter.
(11) Occupancy of rooming unit or dwelling unit. No occupant shall
occupy or permit the occupancy of any rooming unit in violation of
the occupancy standards established in § 107-12.
(12) Cooking only where sanitary facilities exist. No occupant shall cook
in any dwelling unit or independent rooming unit except where all
required sanitary facilities are installed as required under
§ 107-12B(4).
(13) Occupancy of dwelling unit or rooming unit without required
facilities. No occupant shall occupy or continue to occupy a
dwelling unit or rooming unit that does not have provision for
bathroom facilities, as required under § 107-12B(1) through (3).
(14) Violations by minors. Any adult member of the family shall be
responsible and liable for any violation of this subsection caused by
minors under their care or custody occupying the same dwelling
unit if the violations were created or permitted to continue with the
knowledge or acquiescence or consent of said adult member.
(15) Access to owner on reasonable notice to tenant. Every occupant of
a dwelling space shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or
employee, access to any part of the unit of dwelling space, upon
reasonable notification, which under normal circumstances will be
24 hours, for the purpose of making such inspection and such
repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
this chapter. In case of safety or structural emergencies, immediate
access shall be given to the owner. [Added 5-7-1984 by Ord. No.
11-84]
B. Nonresidential.
(1) Cleanliness and sanitation. All parts of the premises under the
control of the occupant or operator shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, and the occupant shall refrain from performing
any acts which would render other parts of the premises unclean or
unsanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from
§ 107-13 VERONA CODE § 107-13
105:262
performing any duty required hereunder or maintaining the
premises in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Garbage disposal and personal accumulations. Occupants shall
place all garbage in the receptacles provided for garbage disposal
and shall, where janitor service is not supplied, place for disposal
all garbage and other refuse in garbage cans located in the exterior
of the premises in an area designated and set forth for the same.
Where janitorial service for the removal of garbage and other
refuse to the exterior of the premises is provided by the owner or
operator, then the occupant shall dispose of garbage and other
refuse in containers provided therefor by the owner or operator in
designated and enclosed areas in the interior of the premises.
Garbage and other refuse shall not be thrown out of windows or
down dumbwaiters, nor shall garbage and refuse be set out on
stairways or fire escapes or in common hallways. All fire escapes,
stairways, common areaways and common hallways shall be kept
free of accumulations of personal belongings. All dumbwaiters shall
be operable at all times where in existence and used as a regular
part of the garbage disposal system.
(3) Eliminating infestation. Every operator shall be responsible for the
elimination of infestation in and on the premises subject to his
control.
(4) Use of fuel. No occupant shall cause excessive discoloration of the
sidewalls or ceilings of any part of the premises by improper use of
heating or cooking equipment.
(5) Installation and maintenance of heating equipment. Where any
occupant undertakes to install heating equipment, the same shall
conform to the requirements of § 107-10A(8) through (14). The
occupant shall thereafter be responsible for maintaining such
equipment installed by him in good repair and operating condition
during all times that the heating equipment shall remain under his
control.
(6) Maintenance of plumbing. Every occupant or operator shall
maintain all plumbing fixtures used by him in a clean and sanitary
condition, and he shall not deposit any material in any fixture or
sewer system which would result in stoppage of or damage to the
fixture or sewer system.
(7) Providing notice of defect to owner. Where the owner or operator
would not otherwise know of a defect of any facility, utility or
equipment required to be furnished hereunder and the same is
defective or inoperable, each occupant or operator affected thereby
shall, upon learning of said defect, provide notice to the owner,
operator or other person in charge of the premises. Nothing herein
shall be construed to provide a defense to any owner or operator
violating this chapter.
§ 107-13 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-13
105:263
(8) Violations by minors. Any adult member of the family shall be
responsible and liable for any violation of this subsection caused by
minors under their care or custody occupying the same dwelling
unit if the violations were created or permitted to continue with the
knowledge or acquiescence or consent of said adult member.
§ 107-13 VERONA CODE § 107-13
105:264
ARTICLE V
Unfit Buildings111
§ 107-14. Inspection for unfitness.
The Public Officer, on his own or upon the filing of a petition by at least
five residents of the Township of Verona charging that a building is unfit for
human habitation or use, shall make an inspection of any building believed
to be unfit for human habitation or use and shall make a preliminary finding,
in accordance with the standards provided herein as to whether or not the
premises are unfit for human habitation or use, and, if so, he shall, except
where § 107-19 applies, thereupon serve a notice upon the owner, operator
or occupant, advising all such parties of the results of his inspection and the
basis for his determination.
§ 107-15. Basis for determination of unfitness.
In making a determination of whether a building is unfit for human
habitation or use, the Public Officer shall determine whether, by reason
of violations of this chapter existing in the building or on the premises,
continued occupancy of the building will not endanger and jeopardize the
health and safety of the occupants or persons in the vicinity of the premises,
and to that end he may consider, among other factors:
A. Whether the premises are so structurally defective that there is a risk of
collapse or of loose materials falling and injuring persons in and around
the building.
B. Whether, by reason of inadequate ventilation, there is a danger of
communicable diseases being contracted and spread in and among the
occupants or persons in the vicinity of the premises.
C. Whether, by reason of infestation or defective condition of plumbing or
the lack of maintenance of halls, floors, walls or other parts of the
premises, conditions exist which are conducive to the contracting and
spreading of diseases.
D. Whether, by reason of electrical wiring, conduits or equipment, heating
or cooking facilities or lack of proper means of egress, there is a danger
of fire or, in the case of fire, inadequate means of egress.
E. Whether premises are deficient in one or more essential utilities,
including public sewer, water supply or electricity.
F. Where premises were not designed or constructed for human
habitation, whether by reason of the same, occupancy constitutes an
unnecessary hazard to safety or health.
111. Editor's Note: For provisions relating to unfit buildings, see Ch. 64, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 107-14 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-16
105:265
§ 107-16. Action by Public Officer.
After the making of an inspection as prescribed in § 107-14, the Public
Officer shall make a determination as to whether the building is unfit for
human habitation or use, and thereupon he shall make an order based on an
evaluation of health and safety factors in the use of the premises, as follows:
§ 107-17. Correction of violations; reinspection. [Amended
8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
Where premises are ordered vacated, all doors to the exterior shall be
locked and first-story or basement and cellar windows barred or boarded to
prevent entry. Where an order is issued under § 107-18, it shall be served on
all persons affected thereby pursuant § 107-21E(1). When the conditions of
the violations complained of are corrected, the owner or occupant affected
A. That occupancy of all or part of the building shall be permitted for a
limited period of time not to exceed 30 days, upon the condition that all
violations recited in the order are corrected or abated within that time,
and, if not corrected or abated, the premises shall be vacated within 10
days thereafter;
B. That the building or any part thereof shall be ordered vacated within a
specified period not to exceed 30 days, be boarded up and signs or
notices that occupancy is prohibited shall be posted prominently at all
entrances of the building and that the order continue in effect until the
conditions are abated and the order revoked as provided herein. The
order may prohibit occupants from paying, and the owner and operator
from receiving, rent or other compensation for use and occupancy while
it remains in effect; or
C. That by reason of the complete state of disrepair and the
disproportionate investment required to restore the building to
habitable condition and the danger that the premises constitute, even
while vacant, a threat to the health and safety of persons on or near the
premises, the improvement of the building is impracticable, and
continuance of the building vacant constitutes a danger to the health,
safety and well-being of the neighborhood, whereupon the building is to
be ordered vacated and demolished within a period of time not to
exceed 60 days, unless the owner, after having the premises vacated,
consents, where no emergency exists, in writing to rehabilitate the
building so that it complies in all respects with this chapter within six
months and provides, if required by the Public Officer, a performance
bond guaranteeing that the work be done, or unless the owner, if the
Public Officer deems it feasible without jeopardizing public health and
safety, agrees with the Public Officer to put the premises up for sale on
terms, conditions and limitations which would provide a reasonable
expectancy of securing the rehabilitation of the building thereon within
a reasonable period of time and further that if such sale does not occur
within the time specified, the Public Officer may thereafter demolish
the building without further notice or proceedings.
§ 107-16 VERONA CODE § 107-17
105:266
thereby may request a reinspection which shall be provided upon the
payment of the reinspection fee provided for in Ch. A175, Fees. Based on
the reinspection, the Public Officer shall issue a further order which shall
either revoke the previous order and permit occupancy or state such further
conditions or time limits during which additional repairs or improvements
are to be made before occupancy is again permitted or order vacation and
demolition as in § 107-16. Upon compliance with the conditions contained
in any order, the Public Officer shall permit the signs to be removed and the
premises made available again for occupancy.
§ 107-18. Noncorrection of violations; premises declared nuisance;
court action.
Where the owner, operator or occupant fails to comply with any order
hereunder or to perform in accordance with any written commitment as
provided herein, or removes any notice posted pursuant hereto or any lock
or bar without the permission of the Public Officer, he shall be deemed
in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided herein.
In addition thereto, the Public Officer may take such steps as may be
necessary to compel vacation and boarding up of any premises and may
post signs prohibiting occupancy. Upon failure to comply with any such
order, the premises shall constitute a public nuisance, and the Public Officer
may take such further action under the criminal and civil laws of this state
through any court of competent jurisdiction as may be necessary to remove
or abate the nuisance.
§ 107-19. Emergency vacation of premises.
Where the Public Officer makes a preliminary finding that conditions on
the premises constitute an immediate and substantial threat to the safety
or health of occupants or persons in proximity to the premises, he may
order and direct that the premises be vacated immediately and that signs or
notices be posted prohibiting occupancy thereof and that the premises be
locked and boarded up as provided in § 107-17.
§ 107-17 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-19
105:267

ARTICLE VI
Enforcement and Administration; Violations and Penalties; Status
Reports
§ 107-20. Enforcement procedure. [Amended 5-4-1987 by Ord. No.
8-87]
§ 107-21. Administrative provisions.
A. Procedure where violation discovered. Except as may otherwise be
provided in this chapter, upon determining that premises are in
violation of this chapter, regulations or ordinances of the Board of
Health112 or any other ordinances of the Township of the Township of
Verona or the laws of the State of New Jersey, the Public Officer shall
cause a complaint to be filed in the Municipal Court, and a summons
shall be issued thereon.
B. Service of summons and complaint. Service of a summons and
complaint under this chapter may be made personally upon the person
named therein or may be made by certified or regular mail with postage
prepaid thereon, addressed to the last known address of the person to
be served, or in any other manner consistent with laws applicable to the
issuance of a summons and complaint by the Municipal Court. Where it
is ascertained that the owner does not reside on the premises, the last
known address shall be the address of the owner as shown in the office
of the Tax Collector. Where the premises are required to be registered
with the township or with the State of New Jersey or other
governmental authority and have been so registered, service may be
made upon the agent designated in such registration, and such service
shall constitute service upon the owner, operator or lessor of the
premises. Where the owner, operator or lessor has failed to register or
if the premises have been registered and the agent designated therein
cannot be found at the address given in the registration, the owner,
operator or lessor affected thereby may be served by posting a copy of
the summons and complaint upon the premises in a conspicuous place
which is as near as possible to the front entrance of such premises.
C. Service of notices. Any notice which may be required under this chapter
may be served in the same manner as provided in this chapter for the
service of a summons and complaint. In the case of an occupant, notice
may be posted on the door of the dwelling unit or rooming unit of such
occupant. The effective date of such notice shall be the date such notice
is delivered, in the case of personal service, or the date of mailing, in
the case of service by certified or regular mail.
A. Construction Code Official to be Public Officer. The Construction Code
Official is hereby designated to serve as the Public Officer hereunder,
and all inspections, regulations and enforcement on violations of the
provisions of this chapter, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall
112. Editor's Note: Board of Health legislation is included as Part III of this Code.
§ 107-20 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-21
105:269
be under his direction and supervision. He may appoint or designate
such other public officials or employees of the Township to perform
duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of this chapter,
including the making of inspections. [Amended 11-7-1979 by Ord.
No. 26-79]
B. Inspections: when inspections are to be made.
(1) Residential. All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are
subject to inspections from time to time by the enforcing officer of
the Township as permitted by law. At the time of such inspections,
all rooms in the building and all parts of the premises, except those
heretofore excluded, must be available and accessible for such
inspections, and the owner, operator and occupant are required to
provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such inspections.
Such inspections shall be made between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
unless one of the following conditions exists:
(a) The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspections.
(b) There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the
premises which can only be apprehended and proven by
inspections during other than the prescribed hours or which
require immediate inspection after being reported, such as
failure to supply heat.
(c) There is reason to believe that a violation exists of a character
which is an immediate threat to health or safety requiring
inspection and abatement without delay.
(d) All inspections as provided for herein shall be with the
permission of the owner of said premises or by a person duly
authorized by said owner to give such permission. In the event
that such permission is denied to the Public Officer upon
request, the provisions as hereinafter provided for shall be
complied with.
(2) Nonresidential. All buildings and premises subject to this chapter
are subject to inspection from time to time by the enforcing officer.
At the time of such inspections, all rooms and parts of the premises
must be available and accessible for such inspections, and the
owner and operator are required to provide the necessary
arrangements to facilitate such inspections. Such inspections shall
be made during regular open hours of the business occupying said
premises unless there is reason to believe a violation exists of a
character which is an immediate threat to health or safety
requiring inspection and abatement without delay.
C. Identification and conduct of inspectors. Inspectors shall be supplied
with official identification and shall exhibit such identification when
entering any dwelling unit, rooming unit or any part of any premises
§ 107-21 VERONA CODE § 107-21
105:270
subject to this chapter. Inspectors shall conduct themselves so as to
avoid intentional embarrassment or inconvenience to occupants.
D. Where entry by inspectors is refused.
(1) Penalties. Where the Public Officer or his agent is refused entry or
access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner,
occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the
premises, said Public Officer shall comply with and follow the
provisions as hereinafter provided for in such cases.
(2) Search warrant or access warrant. In addition to the provisions of
Subsection D(1) above, the Public Officer may, upon affidavit, apply
to the Judge of the Township of Verona for a search warrant setting
forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide
a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this
chapter exists on the premises, and if the Judge is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in said affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of
a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of
the premises on which the nuisance or violation exists. Warrant for
access may be issued by the Judge upon affidavit of the Public
Officer establishing grounds therefor pursuant to § 107-27C.
E. Stay where dispossess action undertaken. Where a summons and
complaint have been issued under this chapter against an owner or
operator, the Municipal Judge may stay proceedings in Municipal Court
for such reasonable time as the owner or operator is unable to eliminate
the violation by reason of an inability to dispossess, evict or eject an
occupant who is the cause of the violation, provided that the owner or
operator is in good faith prosecuting an action to dispossess, evict or
eject such occupant in a court of competent jurisdiction. [Amended
8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81; 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
F. Summary abatement in emergency. Where the violation or condition
existing on the premises is of such a nature as to constitute an
immediate threat to life and limb unless abated without delay, the
Public Officer may either abate the violation or condition immediately
or order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the violation or
condition within a period of time not to exceed three days, and upon
failure to do so, the Public Officer may abate the condition immediately
thereafter. [Amended 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
G. Cost of abatement to be a lien against premises. Where abatement of
any nuisance, as defined in this chapter, correction of a defect in any
premises or the maintenance of any premises in a proper condition so
as to conform to municipal ordinances or state law applicable thereto
requires the expenditure of any township moneys therefor, the Public
Officer shall present a report to the township governing body setting
forth the work proposed to be performed to abate or correct the
violation or condition, together with an estimate of the cost for such
work and a summary of the proceeding undertaken by the Public
§ 107-21 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-21
105:271
§ 107-22. Violations and penalties.
Officer. The governing body may thereupon, by resolution, authorize
the abatement of the nuisance, correction of the defect or work
necessary to place the premises in compliance with township
ordinances and laws of the state. The Public Officer may thereafter
proceed to have work performed in accordance with said resolution at
the expense of the township but not to exceed that amount specified in
the resolution. Upon completion of necessary work, the Public Officer
shall submit a report of moneys expended and the cost to the township.
After a review of said report, the governing body shall approve said
expenses and costs, whereupon same shall become a lien against said
premises, collectible as provided by law. A copy of the resolution
approving said expenses and costs shall be certified by the governing
body and filed with the Township Tax Collector, who shall be
responsible for the collection thereon, and a copy of the resolution shall
be sent by certified mail to the owner at the address as shown on the
records of the Tax Collector. [Amended 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
H. Referral of violations. Any violation of any township ordinance or state
law discovered by a township employee in the course of performing his
duties shall be reported to the Public Officer, who shall refer the alleged
violation to the official or agency responsible for the enforcement of
such ordinance or state law. [Amended 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
I. Effect of notice on owner. For the purposes of enforcement of this
chapter, the service of a notice on an owner, whether or not the owner is
also the operator, shall constitute notice of violations set forth therein
until said violations are abated in conformity with this chapter and the
other applicable ordinances of the Township of Verona.
A. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not
less than $100 and not more than $1,000, not to exceed $1,000, or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
both. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended
8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81; 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
B. Meaning of "each violation." Each violation of a section or subsection of
this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
independent of any other section or subsection or any order issued
pursuant to this chapter. Each day's failure to comply with any such
section or subsection shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Application to officers or agents. Where the defendant is other than a
natural person or persons, Subsections A and B above shall also apply
to any agent, superintendent, officer, member or partner who shall
alone or with others have charge, care or control of the premises.
§ 107-21 VERONA CODE § 107-23
105:272
§ 107-23. Existing violations not discharged.
The repeal of any provisions of any other ordinances by this chapter shall
not affect any action for prosecution or abatement under any such
ordinance or any notice, complaint or order issued by any officer or agency
of the Township prior to the effective date hereof or concerning which any
prosecution or other steps of enforcement have been taken or are being
taking within any administrative agency or in the Municipal Court113 for
enforcement thereof.
§ 107-24. Powers and duties of Public Officer.
A. Power to vary or modify provisions of this chapter. The Public Officer
shall have the power to withhold strict enforcement of the requirements
of this chapter upon written application therefor by an owner, operator
or occupant, after making determination that:
(1) Any variation or modification of structure or use approved by the
Public Officer will not in any material way alter the standards of
this chapter and cannot affect detrimentally the health or safety of
occupants of the premises or the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or owners of adjacent premises or of the neighborhood;
and
(2) Strict enforcement would constitute an undue and unnecessary
hardship on the owner, operator or occupant because it would
compel expenditures on the premises which would be substantially
disproportionate to any benefit to health, safety or welfare that
might be derived therefrom.
(3) The strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would
require the installation of repairs and improvements estimated to
exceed $300 in cost, and the premises subject to this chapter are
contemplated by a public agency having the power of eminent
domain and there is a reasonable likelihood that said premises will
be acquired within a period of two years; provided, however, that
any waiver of the provisions of this chapter shall be canceled and
the Public Officer shall strictly enforce the chapter if it shall be
ascertained subsequent to the granting of the waiver that the
premises are in fact not to be acquired for any public use or
purpose; or
(4) Strict compliance with this chapter require substantial structural
changes to the premises, and the nonconformity is of a technical
and insubstantial character or there is an alternative means
satisfactory to the Public Officer to be used, which will eliminate
violations of this chapter constituting hazards to the health, safety
113. Editor's Note: For provisions relating to the Municipal Court, see Ch. 13, Court,
Municipal.
§ 107-23 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-24
105:273
§ 107-25. Requested inspections and status reports.
and welfare of the occupants of the premises and persons in the
immediate vicinity thereof.
B. Record of variations or modifications granted. Where variations or
modifications are approved of any section of this chapter by the Public
Officer or by action of any court, a written record thereof stating the
name of the applicant, the address of the premises, the variation or
modification approved, date of approval and the reasons therefor,
satisfying the provisions contained herein, shall be prepared by the
Public Officer and filed both under the section or sections of this
chapter to which the variation of modification applies and under the
address of the premises, and such files shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the Public Officer during regular business
hours.
C. Annual review of chapter provisions and operations. The Public Officer
shall, in the month of December of each year, review with the Fire
Chief, Health Officer, Township Engineer and Township Counsel the
procedure and operation of this chapter, and report to the Mayor and
Township Council on or before January 1:
(1) Any recommended amendment, addition or modification or
provisions of this chapter consonant with the field experience of the
personnel charged with enforcement.
(2) A summary of the enforcement experience indicating the number of
violations abated, number of cases processed in the Municipal
Court, number of inspections made and such other and further
pertinent information as will provide the Mayor and Township
Council with an annual account of progress in securing the
standards required by this chapter.
(3) Any further recommendation as to how the chapter and the
procedure and operations thereunder can be improved.
A. Application for inspection. Whenever an owner, operator, occupant,
prospective purchaser, mortgagee or prospective occupant shall apply
to the Public Officer for an inspection in order to ascertain if any section
of this chapter has been violated, the Public Officer shall, upon payment
of the fee hereunder stated, cause an inspection to be made of the
premises and issue an informal certificate or report of the inspection to
the applicant, indicating therein any violations of this chapter on the
premises. The applicant for such inspection shall state in writing his full
name, residence and the reasons and basis for which the inspection is
requested. The Public Officer may deny the application for failure to
comply with this requirement.
B. Application for status report. Where, in lieu of an inspection, an owner,
operator, occupant, lessee, prospective purchaser, mortgagee or
§ 107-24 VERONA CODE § 107-25
105:274
§ 107-26. Citizen complaints. [Amended 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
Any citizen may file a complaint in the Municipal Court alleging a violation
under this chapter.
§ 107-27. Certificate of necessity.
prospective occupant requests a status report as to whether or not
there are any known violations presently pending on said premises,
upon payment of the fee prescribed herein, a copy of any notice or
order on any violation then pending shall be sent to the applicant.
C. Significance and scope of inspection or status report. No inspection
report issued under Subsection A above or status report under
Subsection B shall be construed as providing a defense against any
violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Township which
may be discovered thereafter, whether or not the condition or violation
existed at the time of any such inspection or status report. The
inspection or status report is provided as a convenience to the public
and shall not constitute a limitation on the full enforcement of this
chapter. The inspection or status report shall include only such matters
as are embraced in this chapter.
D. Inspection and status report fees. Fees shall be as provided for in
Chapter A175, Fees, for the following classifications: [Amended
8-17-1987 by Ord. No. 6-81]
(1) Inspections made under Subsection A above for dwellings of three
or fewer dwelling units or rooming units.
(2) Each additional unit over three.
(3) The status report discussed under Subsection B above.
A. Who may apply. Where any owner, operator or occupant is required to
make repairs or otherwise improve property and is unable to comply
with this chapter without having right of access to the building or
premises through or across adjoining premises not owned by him or
under his control, and where right of access has been refused the
owner, operator or occupant, or where the owner or person responsible
for granting permission cannot be found or located, then, upon filing of
an affidavit setting forth the facts with the Public Officer, the Public
Officer shall serve a five-day written notice in accordance with the
provisions for service contained in § 107-21E(1) upon the owner,
operator or occupant of any adjoining premises affected by the
application.
B. Issuance of certificate; conditions. If the Public Officer determines that
access is necessary to accomplish or complete repairs or improvements
necessary for compliance with this chapter, then the Public Officer shall
issue a certificate of necessity setting forth therein the person or
persons to whom the certificate shall apply, such conditions as shall be
§ 107-25 PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE § 107-27
105:275
§ 107-28. Conflicts.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of any department of this municipality or any agency of the State of New
Jersey to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances, codes,
regulations or statutory provisions or to prevent or punish violations
thereof.
necessary to protect the adjoining property, reasonable time limits
during which such certificate shall operate, precautions to be taken to
avoid damage and, where the Public Officer deems proper, that a bond
be procured at the expense of any persons seeking access to secure the
adjoining property against damage to persons or property arising out
of such rights of access. The bond shall not exceed in amount $10,000,
and the amount set shall take into consideration the extent, nature
and duration of the repairs, the proximity of the improvement on the
premises affected and potential risk of damage thereto. The bond shall
be filed with the Public Officer.
C. Procedure where access refused. Any refusal to comply with this
section or any interference with access to premises pursuant to a
certificate issued hereunder shall be a violation of this chapter, and, in
addition to penalties provided hereunder, the Public Officer may, upon
affidavit, apply to the Judge for a warrant under the procedure set forth
in § 107-21D(2) authorizing access to the premises under appropriate
conditions and circumstances as provided under Subsection B above.
§ 107-27 VERONA CODE § 107-28
105:276
Chapter 109
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 85.
Storage of junk — See Ch. 90.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 107.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 125.
Board of Health legislation — See Part III.
§ 109-1. Establishment; prohibited acts.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
Enforcing Official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188 of the Laws of
1950.114 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 109-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 109-3. Availability of code.
Three (3) copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk upon
introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 109-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or the code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for each violation.
Chapter 111
114. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 107-28 PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES § 109-4
109:277
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 85.
Storage of junk — See Ch. 90.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 107.
§ 111-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials, including but
not limited to metal, glass, paper or plastic containers, which are
designated pursuant to regulations promulgated hereunder to be source
separated for recycling.
PAPER — Includes all newspaper, high-grade office paper, fine paper, bond
paper, offset paper, xerographic paper, mimeo paper, duplicator paper,
paper napkins, towels, corrugated cardboard and other cardboard.
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials which would otherwise
become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING DEPOT — Such location as may be designated by the Township
of Verona to store, separate, receive and transfer source separated
nonputrescible recyclable materials as designated in the regulations
promulgated hereunder.
SOURCE SEPARATION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — The
separation and separate bundling of designated recyclable materials to be
kept apart from residential, commercial and institutional solid waste by the
generator thereof for the purposes of collection, disposition and recycling.
§ 111-2. Recycling Coordinator. [Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No.
5-89]
There is hereby established in the Township of Verona the office of
Recycling Coordinator whose responsibilities shall include but not be
limited to membership in the Recycling Committee for the purpose of
developing and implementing regulations hereunder. The Recycling
Coordinator shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:69A-95 and shall serve without compensation for a one-year term.
§ 111-3. Recycling Committee. [Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No.
5-89]
There is hereby established a Recycling Committee in the Township of
Verona. Membership on the Committee shall consist of the Township
Manager, the Township Engineer and the Recycling Coordinator. The
§ 109-4 VERONA CODE § 111-3
111:278
Recycling Committee is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to
establish and promulgate reasonable regulations as to the selection and
designation of recyclable materials to be source-separated in accordance
with this chapter; to establish the manner, methods and programs for the
collection and disposition, including sale, of designated recyclable materials
in accordance with the provisions hereof; and to establish and regulate the
operation of the township recycling depot. Such regulations shall become
effective upon approval by the township governing body in the form of a
resolution adopted after publication and a public hearing thereon.
§ 111-4. Mandatory separation.
From and after the effective date of regulations to be promulgated by
the Recycling Committee in accordance with the provisions hereof, it shall
be mandatory for all persons who are owners, tenants or occupants of
residential and nonresidential premises located within the Township of
Verona to separate designated recyclable material from all other solid waste
produced by the residential or nonresidential premises occupied by such
persons and to separately bundle such designated recyclable materials
for pickup, collection and recycling. Such designated recyclable materials
shall be kept separate and apart from other solid waste generated by the
premises occupied by such persons and shall be placed separately at the
curb in a manner and on such days and at such times as may be hereinafter
established by regulations promulgated by the Recycling Committee.
§ 111-5. Unauthorized collection.
At such time as an owner, tenant or occupant of any residential or
nonresidential premises shall place at the curb of such premises any
designated recyclable materials for collection by the Township of Verona
in accordance with the provisions hereof, such designated recyclable
materials shall be and become the property of the Township of Verona
or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any
such designated recyclable materials, except as may be authorized by the
Recycling Committee. Each such collection in violation of this chapter, from
one (1) or more residential or nonresidential premises, shall constitute
a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit an owner, tenant or occupant of any residential or
nonresidential premises from donating or selling recyclables to any person
or entity, whether operating for profit or not for profit, except that such
person or entity shall not, under any circumstances, pick up or collect said
recyclables from curbside anywhere in the Township of Verona.
§ 111-6. Phase-in schedule.
The Recycling Committee is hereby authorized and directed to:
§ 111-3 RECYCLING § 111-6
111:279
§ 111-7. Authorization to collect.
The township's governing body may, in accordance with the procedures
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1 et seq., enter into agreements to grant a
franchise or license to qualified persons, partnerships or corporations to
authorize them to collect all designated recyclable materials at curbside.
The governing body may, in accordance with the procedures set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., enter into agreements to have all designated
recyclable materials collected at curbside, provided that the governing
body shall sell said designated recyclable materials for an amount greater
than the cost of collection. The governing body may, in its discretion, use
township personnel to collect designated recyclable materials at curbside
and sell the same pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1 et seq.
§ 111-8. Wrapping of solid waste in used newspapers.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit an owner, tenant or occupant
from wrapping solid waste in used newspapers or other papers and
discarding the same with regular solid waste.
§ 111-9. Exemptions.
The following persons or entities shall be exempt from the mandatory
source separation requirements of this chapter.
A. Select and designate a first designated recyclable material to be subject
to mandatory source separation regulations by not later than six (6)
months from the effective date of this chapter.
B. Select and designate a second designated recyclable material to be
subject to mandatory source separation regulations by not later than
nine (9) months from the effective date of this chapter.
C. Select and designate a third designated recyclable material to be
subject to mandatory source separation regulations by not later than
twelve (12) months from the effective date of this chapter.
D. Select and designate such other designated recyclable materials as the
Recycling Committee may, from time to time, deem to be in the best
interests of the municipality and the municipal recycling program or
plan.
A. Persons who are physically disabled and who have notified the
Recycling Committee, in writing, of such disability.
B. Commercial and institutional generators of solid waste, provided that
such generators have otherwise provided for the source separation and
recycling of designated recyclable materials covered by this chapter so
as to remove the same from the solid waste generated at the premises
occupied by the commercial or institutional generator, and provided,
further, that such commercial or institutional generator annually
provides the Recycling Committee with written documentation as to
§ 111-6 VERONA CODE § 111-9
111:280
§ 111-10. Severability.
If any section, sentence or any other part of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by any court, such judgment shall not affect,
impair or invalidate the remaining provisions of this chapter, and such
judgment shall be confined in its effect to the section, sentence or other part
of this chapter directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 111-11. Violations and penalties.
This chapter shall be enforceable in the Municipal Court of the Township
of the Borough of Verona. Any person, corporation or entity who violates
or neglects to comply with any provision of this chapter or any regulation
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.) except that no person or entity shall
be convicted and fined hereunder for failure to comply with § 111-4 hereof
unless such person or entity has received three (3) written warnings of such
failure to comply. No enforcement shall be made until such time as the
regulations to be promulgated hereunder shall be published and approved
by resolution of the township's governing body.
Chapter 112
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64. Property maintenance — See Ch. 107.
§ 112-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASE RENT — The rental amount exclusive of any surcharges,
supplemental or ancillary charges or fees.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (Referred to in this chapter as CPI) — The
"CPI/W" for urban wage earners and clerical workers for New York and
Northeastern New Jersey, of which Verona, New Jersey, is a part, as
published monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States
Department of Labor.[Added 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 16-85]
DWELLING — Includes any building or structure or trailer or land used as
a trailer park, including garage space, rented or offered for rent, exempting
such existing source separation and recycling program and the total
number of tons recycled annually, in a form and at such time as the
Recycling Committee may require by regulation.
§ 111-9 RENT CONTROL § 112-1
112:281
one- or two-family homes. Also exempt from this chapter are motels, hotels
and similar type buildings. Housing units rented for the first time are
exempt, and the initial rental may be determined by the landlord. All
subsequent rentals shall be subject to the provisions and conditions of
this chapter. New owners or landlords shall be bound by the rentals in
existence at the time of transfer of title. Also included in this definition
are housing units previously rented and bound by the terms of this chapter
and thereafter converted to condominium units for so long as the tenant in
possession at the time of the conversion to a condominium remains a tenant
pursuant to and as a result of the notice requirements of the New Jersey
Condominium Act. 115
HOUSING SPACE — That portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent
for living and dwelling purposes, together with all privileges, services,
furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected
with the occupancy or enjoyment of the property to be used by the tenant.
QUALIFIED SENIOR CITIZEN AND DISABLED[Repealed 10-7-1985 by
Ord. No. 16-85] —
§ 112-2. Rental increase.
A. Permissible rental increase. The establishment of rents between a
landlord and a tenant to whom this chapter is applicable shall hereafter
be determined by the following provisions: [Amended 10-7-1985 by
Ord. No. 16-85]
(1) Frequency. No landlord shall request or receive any increase in
rental payments from any tenant more often than once in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
(2) Calculation of rent increases. At the expiration of a lease or at the
expiration of a periodic tenancy, such as a month-to-month tenancy,
no landlord may request or receive a percentage increase in rent
which is greater than the consumer price index published for the
twelve (12) month period ending on October 31, of the year
preceding the calendar year in which such increase shall be
effective.
(3) Maximum rent increase. In no event shall any rent increase exceed
five percent (5%) of the previous base rent in any twelve (12) month
period.
B. Excessive or unauthorized rental increases. Any rental increase other
than the appropriate allowable increase in accordance with § 112-2
herein shall be null and void and constitute a violation of this chapter
subject to the enforcement provisions of § 112-13.
C. Notification of rental increase.
115. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
§ 112-1 VERONA CODE § 112-2
112:282
(1) Any landlord seeking an increase in rent shall notify the tenant in
accordance with § 112-11. Said notice shall include a copy of
calculations involved in computing the increase, including the
monthly base rental amount (exclusive of any and all surcharges,
service fees, etc.), the allowable percentage increase and the
allowable rent increase amount. This notification shall be given not
less than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such rental
increase.
(2) Any landlord seeking an increase in rent from a tenant shall include
within the notice to tenants required under Subsection (1) of this
subsection a statement that the landlord has obtained an annual
certification that the exterior building of each dwelling leased is in
substantial compliance with the Property Maintenance Code of the
Township of the Borough of Verona.116 Prior to the implementation
of any rental increase under this section, the landlord shall obtain
such certification from the Property Maintenance Department or
Construction Code Official of the Township of the Borough of
Verona. "Substantial compliance" means that the exterior of the
dwelling is free from all health, safety and fire hazards as well as
ninety percent (90%) qualitatively free from all other violations of
the Township of the Borough of Verona Property Maintenance
Code.
D. In the event that an individual unit, housing space or dwelling is not
properly maintained by the landlord in accordance with any and all
provisions of the Township of the Borough of Verona Property
Maintenance Code, the tenant may appeal any rental increase sought
by the landlord so long as such appeal is made to the Rent Control
Board within thirty (30) days after notice is given by the landlord to the
tenants, as required under Subsection C(1) of this section. The Rent
Control Board, upon receiving notice of such appeal by any tenant, shall
request the Property Maintenance Department or Construction Code
Official to conduct an inspection of the individual unit, housing space or
dwelling to determine whether such individual unit, housing space or
dwelling is in substantial compliance with the Property Maintenance
Code of the Township of the Borough of Verona. "Substantial
compliance" means that the individual unit, housing space or dwelling
which is the subject of the tenant's appeal under this subsection is free
from all heat, hot water, elevator and all health, safety and fire hazards
as well as ninety percent (90%) qualitatively free from all other
violations of the Township of the Borough of Verona Property
Maintenance Code. If the Property Maintenance Department or
Construction Code Official determines that the individual unit, housing
space or dwelling which is the subject of the tenant's appeal under this
subsection is not in substantial compliance, as that term is defined
hereunder, the rental increase sought by the landlord shall be
prohibited until such time as the required maintenance and/or
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Property Maintenance.
§ 112-2 RENT CONTROL § 112-2
112:283
§ 112-3. Vacancy increase. [Amended 10-7-1985 by Ord. No.]
renovation is completed by the landlord in the manner and to the extent
prescribed and approved by the Property Maintenance Department
or the Construction Code Official. If the Property Maintenance
Department or Construction Code Official determines that the
individual unit, housing space or dwelling which is the subject of the
tenant's appeal under this subsection is in substantial compliance, as
that term is defined hereunder, the increase sought by the landlord
shall be due and payable by the tenant to the landlord as of the date
when such increase was to have taken effect as stated in the notice from
the landlord pursuant to § 112-2C(1) of this chapter. In the event that a
tenant appeals a rental increase on the grounds that his housing space
fails to comply with the Property Maintenance Code of the Township of
the Borough of Verona, then at the time said appeal is filed, the tenant
shall specify three (3) days which shall be between Monday and Friday,
10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., when his housing space will be available for
inspection. The aforesaid dates shall be within ten (10) days of the date
that the appeal is filed. In the event that the tenant fails to specify said
dates or, if having specified said dates, fails to make his housing space
available for inspection, the housing space shall be considered to be in
compliance with the Property Maintenance Code.
A. Notwithstanding any limitations upon permissible rent increases under
any other provisions of this chapter, upon the voluntary, uncoerced
vacation of any apartment, rent increases for which are controlled in
this chapter, the landlord shall have the right to fix the rent for such
vacated apartment at such sum as he deems appropriate, except that
the maximum rent which the landlord may fix for such vacated
apartment shall be equal to the previous rent for such vacated
apartment increased by fifteen percent (15%) or the highest rent
received by the landlord for a comparable apartment in the same
building complex at the time such rent is fixed, whichever sum is
higher.
B. Qualification for increase; hearing.
(1) In order for a landlord to qualify for the vacancy decontrol rent
increase, the landlord shall first be required to file with the Rent
Leveling Board a written statement, signed by the vacating tenant,
certifying to the Board that the landlord has not, in any way,
harassed or pressured the tenant into vacating the housing space
unit and that the vacation of such unit was a voluntary act on the
part of the tenant. Such noncoercion certification shall not be
required in order for the landlord to qualify for the vacancy
decontrol increase, if:
(a) The increase does not exceed the total of all permissible
increases authorized by any other provisions of this chapter;
§ 112-2 VERONA CODE § 112-3
112:284
(b) The tenant has moved from the unit without notice to the
landlord;
(c) The unit has been vacated pursuant to a judicially mandated
eviction; or
(d) The tenant has refused to sign such certification and, upon
appeal by the landlord, the Rent Leveling Board has found that
such refusal was unwarranted and that there was in fact no
coercion exerted by the landlord upon the vacating tenant.
(2) A hearing pursuant to Subsection B(1)(d) above shall be held
before the Rent Leveling Board upon at least seven (7) days notice
to the public and the vacating tenant. The decontrol provision of
this section shall only apply to dwelling units which are physically
vacated subsequent to the effective date of this section.
C. Upon vacation of any apartment hereafter, the landlord shall file a
statement with the Rent Leveling Board, certifying to the Board:
(1) The apartment and building numbers of such dwelling unit.
(2) The rent paid by the vacating tenant.
(3) The maximum rent increase which would be permissible under the
other provisions of this chapter.
(4) The number of days such apartment remains vacant.
(5) The rent agreed to by the new tenant for such apartment.
(6) That the vacation of such apartment was the voluntary act of the
vacating tenant and that such vacation was not the result of
landlord harassment or pressure upon such vacating tenant.
(7) That the vacant apartment has been inspected by the Code
Enforcement Official for compliance with the Property
Maintenance Code117 and found to be in substantial compliance.
[The fee for such inspection is twenty-five dollars ($25.).]
D. Anti-harassment; complaint procedure. In the event that a tenant
believes that he or she is being harassed by actions or omissions of his
or her landlord in any way which might be calculated to induce the
tenant to vacate his or her apartment, such tenant may make complaint
to the Verona Construction Code Official. If the Code Official is not able
within his lawful powers to take action to cause the landlord to cease
the harassment complained of, or if the Code Official concludes that the
landlord's action or omission complained of does not constitute
harassment, the tenant shall have the right to appeal directly to the
Rent Control Board within thirty (30) days after the Code Official has
communicated such findings to the complaining tenant. If the Code
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Property Maintenance.
§ 112-3 RENT CONTROL § 112-3
112:285
§ 112-4. Hardship appeal. [Amended 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 16-85]
Enforcement Official concludes that the complaint does constitute
harassment, the landlord shall have the right to appeal to the Rent
Board within thirty (30) days after the Code Official has communicated
such findings to the landlord. Notice of the complaint of the tenant
should be given to the landlord in question and a hearing date should
be set when both the tenant and landlord or proper representatives
of each appear before the Board about the complaint. If the Board
determines that the tenant's complaint has merit, the landlord will be
immediately notified in writing that until the harassment complained
of is eliminated, said landlord shall be prohibited from increasing the
rent for that apartment and that the amount of time during which the
harassment continues after the date of the landlord's receipt of notice
from the Board shall be the amount of time which is pro rata deducted
from any rent increase that the landlord may next request. The Board
will assume that the landlord will comply with its directives and will
not prohibit rent increases unless a tenant complains and proves to the
Board's satisfaction that the landlord has not complied with the Board's
directive about harassment.
E. The Rent Leveling Board shall submit monthly reports to the governing
body summarizing the number of apartments vacated during each such
month and the differences, if any, between the permissible rent
increases under the other provisions of this chapter as compared to the
increases in rent due to the application of this section. Such monthly
reports shall also include the statement of the number of complaints
received by the Board with respect to alleged coercion by landlords for
the purpose of forcing tenants to vacate apartments.
A. In the event that a landlord is not earning a just and reasonable return
on his investment, he may appeal to the Board for increased rental. The
landlord must furnish the Board with a full and complete statement of
all income, names of tenants, details of the apartments rented, the
amount of rent, together with an operating schedule of the costs of
operating and maintaining the premises, as well as all other supporting
documentation which the Board may reasonably request in connection
with the appeal. The Board shall make a determination as to whether a
hardship exists and whether such hardship warrants an increase in
rent. In any hardship application, the Board may grant a hardship rent
increase if the landlord has not received rent increases which equal his
increases in operating expenses in order to maintain a fair net
operating income as defined in this chapter. "Net operating income"
means the amount by which the annual income exceeds annual
operating expenses. "Annual income" means the legal monthly, weekly
or other period rent for all units in the building, both residential and
commercial, on the date that the landlord's appeal is filed, together
with any other income earned from the operation of the building during
the period of twelve (12) consecutive months immediately preceding
the date of the landlord's appeal. In any case where a rental unit is
§ 112-3 VERONA CODE § 112-4
112:286
§ 112-5. Surcharge for improvements; notification.
occupied in whole or in part rent free, the full rental value shall be
considered the legal rent. "Annual operating expenses" means all real
estate taxes and operating costs necessary to the operation and
maintenance of the building but excluding depreciation, mortgage
interest and amortization properly allocated to the twelve-month period
immediately preceding the date on which the appeal is filed.
B. In any hardship application, the Board shall determine the
reasonableness of the landlord's figures and make adjustments
accordingly. Prior to any such appeal to the Board, a landlord shall post
in the lobby of each building, or if no lobby is present, in a conspicuous
place in and about the premises, a notice of such appeal, setting forth
the basis for such appeal. Said notice shall be posted for at least ten
(10) days prior to the date fixed for hearing and appeal; and also, the
landlord shall serve or cause to be served upon the tenants a notice of
the appeal as provided in § 112-11 below at least ten (10) days prior to
the date fixed for hearing and appeal. The Board shall hear the appeal
and, if a determination is made that a hardship does exist which
warrants a rent increase, the Board shall fix the amount of said
increase, which sum shall be charged to the tenants in monthly
installments pro rata, based upon square footage of dwelling space
occupied.
A. Surcharge. The landlord may seek a surcharge for a capital or service
improvement. He must first secure the approval of the Board before
commencing the capital or service improvement project so that the
Board may make a determination of said improvement or service to
distinguish it from a repair or replacement to the premises. In making
such a determination, the Board shall consider a capital or service
improvement as that which enhances the value of the dwelling or
housing space but shall not be bound by the Internal Revenue Service
definition. In any event, the tenant shall not be liable for a capital or
service improvement surcharge exceeding the cost of the capital or
service improvement to the landlord per square feet occupied by the
tenant. The surcharge shall be paid in equal monthly installments for a
period no shorter than the Internal Revenue Service depreciation
period claimed for said capital or service improvement and shall not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the tenant's base monthly rental.
B. Notification of surcharge assessment to tenant. Prior to any appeal to
the Board for surcharge for a capital or service improvement, the
landlord must post in the lobby of each building, or if no lobby is
present, in a conspicuous place in and about the premises, a notice of
said appeal. Said notice must be posted for at least ten (10) days prior
to the date fixed for hearing the appeal, and, also, the landlord must
serve or cause to be served upon the tenants a notice of the appeal as
provided in § 112-11 below at least ten (10) days prior to the date fixed
for hearing the appeal. The notice to the tenant must include the total
§ 112-4 RENT CONTROL § 112-5
112:287
§ 112-6. Rent Control Board.
§ 112-7. Powers and duties of Rent Control Board.
The Rent Control Board is hereby granted, and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all the powers necessary and
appropriate to carry out and execute this chapter, including but not limited
to the following:
cost of the improvement, the total number of square feet of the dwelling
or housing space, the total number of square feet thereof occupied by
the tenant and the capital improvement surcharge he is seeking from
each tenant.
A. Creation. There is hereby created a Rent Control Board within the
Township of Verona, County of Essex and State of New Jersey.
B. Membership. The Rent Control Board shall consist of seven (7)
members, all of whom shall be residents of the Township of Verona.
Members shall be appointed by the Council and shall serve without
compensation. [Amended 2-1-1988 by Ord. No. 22-87]
C. Term of office. All members appointed to a four-year term by resolution
of the Council adopted July 1, 1987, shall serve through June 30, 1991.
All members appointed to a two-year term by resolution of the Council
adopted July 1, 1987, shall serve through June 30, 1989. Thereafter, as
each term of office expires, each new appointee shall serve for a term of
four (4) years. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of a
term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment as provided above for
the unexpired term. [Amended 2-1-1988 by Ord. No. 22-87118]
A. To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement this chapter, which rules and regulations shall
be incorporated herein by reference and shall have the force and effect
of law until revised, repealed or superseded by state or federal law or
amended from time to time by the Board, in the exercise of its
discretion, provided that such rules are filed with the Township Clerk.
B. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help
them comply with the provisions of this chapter.
C. To hold regularly scheduled meetings for the purpose of deciding
matters brought before the Board. After the termination of the
proceedings of the matters brought before it, the Board shall render its
decisions within thirty-five (35) days or at the next scheduled meeting,
whichever shall come first. All parties shall receive a written copy of the
Board's decision signed by the Chairman or by the Secretary.
118. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection D, Council
liaison member, as amended.
§ 112-5 VERONA CODE § 112-7
112:288
§ 112-8. Appeal of Rent Control Board decisions to Township
Council. [Amended 11-2-1987 by Ord. No. 18-87]
Any landlord or tenant may appeal the findings of the Board to the Township
Council, except that there shall be no appeal from administrative
determinations made by the Rent Control Board pursuant to § 112-7D of
this chapter. Appeal hearings shall be de novo on the record of proceedings
established before the Board. An appeal shall be in writing and shall state
the decision of the Board being appealed from and the reasons for the
appeal. It shall be served upon the Township Council not later than twentyfive
(25) calendar days from the decision of the Board. The hearing will be
at a date and time to be fixed by the Township Council. The appellant shall
order and pay for an original and seven (7) copies of a transcript of the
proceedings before the Board from the certified shorthand reporting service
which was designated to transcribe the record before the Board and serve
the transcripts upon the Township Council at least two (2) weeks prior to
the date set for the hearing.
§ 112-9. Property maintenance.
D. To act as the administrative agency for the purpose of administering the
provisions of the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act,
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq., and to promulgate such reasonable rules
and regulations, consistent with state law, as may be necessary for this
purpose, including the power to establish reasonable fees payable to
the township in connection with such administrative hearings as may be
conducted by the Board at the request of a landlord or tenant. Fees
established under this subsection shall be in addition to any fees
payable under Chapter 65 of the Verona Code and shall not exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.) per hearing. [Amended 11-2-1987 by Ord.
No. 18-87]
A. The provisions of the Property Maintenance Code119 will be applied
strictly to all rental units. Landlords will comply with all requirements
for maintenance of both interiors and exteriors. The Code Enforcement
Official will make inspections of rentals to ensure compliance.
B. The landlord shall be obligated to maintain the same standards of
service, maintenance, furniture, fixtures, equipment, appliances and
conveniences in or on the premises as were provided or required by law
or lease, at the date the lease was originally entered into or during the
term of the tenancy.
C. Prior to making application for hardship relief under § 112-4 or for a
surcharge for a capital or service improvement under § 112-5 and prior
to the reletting of a housing space or dwelling unit upon vacancy, the
landlord shall obtain a certification that said housing space or dwelling
unit is in substantial compliance with the Verona Property Maintenance
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Property Maintenance.
§ 112-7 RENT CONTROL § 112-9
112:289
§ 112-10. Required filing. [Added 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 16-85120]
Code. Such certification shall be obtained from the Property
Maintenance Department or Construction Code Official of the Township
of the Borough of Verona and, in the case of an application for hardship
relief or for a surcharge for capital or service improvement, shall be
provided to the Board at the time the application is filed. "Substantial
compliance" means that the housing space or dwelling unit are free
from all heat, hot water, elevator and all health, safety and fire hazards
as well as ninety percent (90%) qualitatively free from all other
violations of the Township of the Borough of Verona Property
Maintenance Code. The landlord shall notify the Property Maintenance
Department or Construction Code Official of the Township of the
Borough of Verona at least thirty (30) days prior to making application
for hardship relief or for a surcharge for a capital service improvement.
The Property Maintenance Department or Construction Code Official
shall make the necessary inspections and issue the necessary
certifications to the Board within said period of time. Failure of the
Property Maintenance Department or Construction Code Official to
make necessary inspections of at least fifty percent (50%) of the
dwelling units and housing space within sixty (60) days after the
landlord has given such notice shall be deemed to be compliance by
the landlord. Failure of the Property Maintenance Department or
Construction Code Official to make the necessary inspection of at least
seventy percent (70%) of the dwelling units and housing space within
seventy-five (75) days after the landlord has given such notice shall
be deemed to be compliance by the landlord. Failure of the Property
Maintenance Department or Construction Code Official to make the
necessary inspections of at least ninety percent (90%) of the dwelling
units and housing space within ninety (90) days after the landlord has
given such notice shall be deemed to be compliance by the landlord.
A. The landlord of a multiple dwelling subject to the provisions of this
chapter shall file with the Rent Control Board not later than thirty (30)
days from the effective date of this chapter, a statement, in the form
prescribed and adopted pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Rent Control Board, which statement shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the landlord.
(2) The street address of the multiple dwelling.
(3) The apartment number, floor designation or other designation or
other information adequate to identify the housing space for which
the report is submitted.
(4) The rent in effect as of thirty (30) days from effective date of this
chapter.
120. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 112-10, Records.
§ 112-9 VERONA CODE § 112-10
112:290
§ 112-11. Method of notification.
Whenever notice is required under any section of this chapter, it shall be
accomplished by posting to the person to be served a copy of said notice
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by handing a copy of said
notice to said person or his duly authorized agent. "Person" as used in
this section shall also include corporations, partnerships and their duly
authorized agents or representatives.
§ 112-12. Interpretation.
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the Township of the
Borough of Verona and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to
effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 112-13. Violations and penalties.
(5) The commencement date and expiration date of any written lease
covering the housing space in effect thirty (30) days from the
effective date of this chapter.
B. The landlord of a multiple dwelling subject to the provisions of this
chapter shall file with the Rent Control Board not later than thirty (30)
days after an increase in rent which becomes effective after thirty (30)
days from the effective date of this chapter, a statement, in the form
prescribed and adopted pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Rent Control Board, which shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the landlord.
(2) The street address of the multiple dwelling.
(3) The apartment number, floor designation or other designation or
other information adequate to identify the housing space as to
which the report is submitted.
(4) The rental charge prior to the increase in rent.
(5) The new rental charge.
(6) The effective date of the rental increase.
(7) The expiration date of any written lease covering the housing space
as of the effective date of the increase.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter, a willful filing of any
material misstatement of fact with the Board, a willful misstatement of
testimony given to the Board or to the Mayor and Council on an appeal
from the Board, or a failure to comply with any order of the Board shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.)
or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, and in
addition a forfeiture of all allowable increases for all rentals in the
property concerned for a one-year period commencing upon the
§ 112-10 RENT CONTROL § 112-13
112:291
§ 112-14. Real estate tax rebates or reductions. [Added 10-7-1985
by Ord. No. 16-85]
In the event that a landlord perfects a successful tax appeal, the tenants
shall receive seventy-five percent (75%) of all refunds of excess taxes as
applied pro rata to the tenants occupying the property as of October 1
of the pre-tax year, after deducting all reasonable expenses incurred by
the landlord in perfecting the tax appeal. A tenant qualifying for a refund
of excess taxes shall be entitled to a refund applicable to the tax year
under appeal and to such years following the appeal as the judgment on
the tax appeal may be effective in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:51A-8. Such
refunds shall be reflected in a downward adjustment of such tenant's rent.
In addition, the landlord shall file with the Board within sixty (60) days
after the entry of judgment on a tax appeal favorable to the landlord a
statement containing the information required by § 112-10B hereof except
that such statement shall reflect the appropriate refund of excess taxes to
the tenant. This section shall be applicable to all property tax appeals in
which a judgment is entered by the County Board of Taxation or the Tax
Court of New Jersey after the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 113
RESTAURANTS
§ 113-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter; the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A business or establishment engaged in the
sale of food, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections which are so
prepared, packaged in paper or other types of disposable wrappers or
containers and served at counters either inside or outside the confines of a
building or motor vehicles, so as to be intended for immediate consumption
either within or without the building or in motor vehicles while parked on
the premises.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food or beverages are prepared,
served and consumed within a building.
§ 113-2. Regulation of service and consumption.
adjudication of a violation of this chapter. A violation affecting more
than one (1) leasehold shall be considered a separate violation as to
each. [Amended 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 16-85]
B. This section shall be enforced by the Chairman of the Board or his
designate or by an aggrieved party filing a complaint with the Clerk of
the Verona Municipal Court.
§ 112-13 VERONA CODE § 113-2
113:292
§ 113-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the sale, service or consumption of food at
refreshment stands at parks, beach clubs, swimming clubs, athletic fields or
other similar recreation areas, or the temporary operation of refreshment
stands at properly licensed circuses, bazaars and other social functions or
parties and social events conducted at a restaurant or to the sale of soda in
cans or bottles at gasoline stations.
§ 113-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
Chapter 114
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 25.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 54.
Business establishments — See Ch. 61.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 109.
Restaurants — See Ch. 113.
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 143.
Fees — See Ch. A175.
§ 114-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. It shall be unlawful for any restaurant or drive-in restaurant to sell or
serve any prepared food or beverages for consumption outside of the
building in which the restaurant or drive-in is located or for
consumption in motor vehicles while parked on the business premises,
including its parking lot, except that nothing herein shall prevent a
carry-out or takeout service from selling food or beverages for
consumption outside the confines of the business premises.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any food purchased in a
restaurant or drive-in restaurant outside the confines of the building in
which the restaurant is located and within the confines of the
restaurant premises or in motor vehicles while parked on the
restaurant's premises.
§ 113-2 RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 114-1
114:293
FOOD — Any raw, cooked, processed edible substances, water, ice,
beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in
part for human consumption.
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the Verona
Health Department which certifies that the holder of such certificate has
successfully completed a course of general instruction given by or approved
by the Verona Health Department or the New Jersey State Department
of Health and covering proper food handling techniques, bacteria
characteristics and growth, spread of food-borne diseases, methods of
preventing food poisoning, equipment and establishment sanitization, dish
washing and sanitization and insect and rodent control.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant, coffee
shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, grill, tea room, sandwich
shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, roadside stand,
industrial feeding establishment, private or public or nonprofit
organization, institution or group which prepares, stores or serves food,
catering kitchen, commissary, box lunch establishment, retail bakery, meat
market, delicatessen, grocery store, public food market or any similar place
in which food or drink is prepared for retail sale or service on the premises
or elsewhere, and any other retail eating or drinking establishment or
operation where food is served, handled or provided for the public with or
without charge.
SUPERVISOR IN CHARGE — The person or individual who is present in
a retail food establishment and who is charged with the responsibility
of supervising or overseeing the preparation or serving of food in such
establishment.
§ 114-2. Adoption of standards.
All retail food establishments in the Township of Verona shall be operated
and maintained in accordance with the requirements and standards of
Chapter XII, Sanitation In Retail Food Establishments And Food And
Beverage Vending Machines, of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, as
may hereafter be amended or supplemented, and in accordance with this
chapter.
§ 114-3. License required; posting; expiration.
No person, individual or entity shall operate a retail food establishment
in the Township of Verona unless a license to operate such establishment
has been issued to such establishment by the Verona Health Department.
Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such retail food
establishment. A license for a retail food establishment as required by this
chapter shall be issued by the Verona Health Department upon the filing
of an application on forms supplied by the Verona Health Department and
upon payment of the licensing fee required by this chapter. All licenses
issued under this chapter shall expire annually on June 30 on each year.
Fees payable under this chapter for licenses shall not be prorated.
§ 114-1 VERONA CODE § 114-4
114:294
§ 114-4. Food handler's certificate requirements; temporary
certificate; issuance; term; renewal.
A. Existing retail food establishments. The following requirements shall be
applicable to all retail food establishments which are operating within
the Township of Verona as of the effective date of this chapter:
(1) Within sixty (60) days from the effective date of this chapter, the
supervisor(s) in charge of every retail food establishment shall
make application to the Verona Health Department for a food
handler's certificate.
(2) Commencing six (6) months from the effective date of this chapter,
no person or entity shall operate a retail food establishment within
the Township of Verona unless there is a supervisor in charge on
the premises during all hours of operation of such establishment
and such supervisor in charge holds either a temporary food
handler's certificate or a food handler's certificate.
B. New retail food establishments; change of ownership. The following
requirements shall be applicable to all new retail food establishments
which commence operation after the effective date of this chapter or
where there has been a change of ownership of an existing retail food
establishment:
(1) Within sixty (60) days from the date that a retail food establishment
commences operation within the Township of Verona or within sixty
(60) days from the date of a change of ownership of a retail food
establishment, the supervisor(s) in charge of such retail food
establishment shall make application to the Verona Health
Department for a food handler's certificate.
(2) Commencing six (6) months from the date that a new retail food
establishment commences operation within the Township of Verona
or commencing six (6) months from the date of a change of
ownership in such retail food establishment, no person or entity
shall operate such retail food establishment unless there is a
supervisor in charge on the premises during all hours of operation
and such supervisor in charge holds either a temporary food
handler's certificate or a food handler's certificate.
C. Temporary food handler's certificate. A temporary food handler's
certificate shall be issued to any person or individual who has made
application to the Verona Health Department for a food handler's
certificate and who has paid the fee required for a food handler's
certificate as provided in this chapter. A temporary food handler's
certificate shall expire six (6) months from the date of issue and shall
not be renewable.
D. Food handler's certificate. A food handler's certificate shall be issued by
the Verona Health Department to any person who has made application
therefor to the Verona Health Department and who has successfully
§ 114-4 RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 114-4
114:295
§ 114-5. Exemptions.
§ 114-6. Nontransferability of license or certificate.
No license or certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
transferable to any person or entity by the holder thereof.
§ 114-7. Fees.
Fees for the issuance of a license or certificate required under this chapter
shall be as established under Chapter A175, Fees, for the following:
completed a course of general instruction given by or approved by
the Verona Health Department or the New Jersey State Department
of Health and covering proper food handling techniques, bacteria
characteristics and growth, spread of food-borne diseases, methods of
preventing food poisoning, equipment and establishment sanitization,
dish washing and sanitization and insect and rodent control. A food
handler's certificate shall be valid for a period of five (5) years from the
date of issue. Upon expiration of a food handler's certificate, the holder
thereof may obtain a renewal of such certificate upon payment of the
fee required by this chapter and upon successfully completing a course
of general instruction as is required for the original certificate.
A. Agricultural markets, covered dish suppers or similar type of infrequent
church or nonprofit type of institution meal services shall be exempt
from this chapter, provided that the owner or operator of such food
operation notifies the Verona Health Department of a planned food
service, activity or event at least one (1) week in advance of such food
service, activity or event, and provided further that the Verona Health
Department has determined that because of the limited or infrequent
nature of the food service operation, such food service operation will
not likely pose a nuisance or hazard to the public health.
B. "Vending machines," as defined in the New Jersey State Health Code,
are exempt from this chapter, provided that they comply with the
applicable provisions of the New Jersey State Health Code.
C. "Bed-and-breakfast" and "community residences," as defined in the
New Jersey State Health Code, are exempt from this chapter, provided
that they comply with the applicable provisions of the New Jersey State
Health Code.
A. Retail food establishment license.
B. Food handler's certificate.
C. Verona Health Department course of general instruction for food
handler's certificate.
D. Fees for reinspection of any food establishment, as same is defined in
this Article, which are necessitated by a conditional or unsatisfactory
§ 114-4 VERONA CODE § 114-7
114:296
§ 114-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for each violation. Each day for
which a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate violation
of this chapter.
Chapter 115
SCHOOL PROPERTY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY MAP
§ 115-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an approved map as an official
finding and record of township properties used for school purposes of the
property within 1,000 feet of such school property and of public buildings
and the property within 500 feet thereof in order to serve as evidence in
or to otherwise assist in prosecutions for driving while intoxicated pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 and for certain controlled dangerous substance offenses
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-1 et seq.
§ 115-2. Establishment and approval of map; amendment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-50, the
Township of Verona governing body does hereby approve and adopt the map
entitled "Map of School Property and Property Within 1,000 Feet Thereof
and of Certain Public Facilities and Property Within 500 Feet Thereof,"
prepared by the Township Engineer, James M. Helb, P.E. and L.S., dated
October 2, 2000, as the official finding and record of the property used
for school purposes which are owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and of property within 1,000 feet of
such school property and the property comprising public housing facilities,
public parks and public buildings as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 and
property within 500 feet thereof. From time to time, the township governing
body may, by ordinance or resolution, approve and adopt revisions to said
map.
rating given at the time of inspection of a said establishment licensed
or to be licensed by the Township of Verona, shall be in the amount of
the license fee application to the facility or premises. [Added 6-6-1994
by Ord. No. 5-94]
E. Any retail food establishment requiring an inspection for licensor or as
a result of an emergency during off-duty hours, such as weekends,
evenings or holidays, shall reimburse the township for reasonable costs
of the inspection, including the salary or wages of the inspector called
as a result of the emergency. [Added 6-6-1994 by Ord. No. 5-94]
§ 114-7 SCHOOL PROPERTY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY § 115-3
115:297
§ 115-3. Filing.
The original map or revisions to said map, or a true copy thereof, shall be
filed and maintained within the office of the Township Clerk.
Chapter 116
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 116-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CONVICTED OFFENDER — Any person who has been convicted of a
violation of the following New Jersey statutes: N.J.S.A. 2C:14-2 (Sexual
assault), N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3 (Criminal sexual contact) and N.J.S.A. 2C:14-4
(Lewdness), wherein the victim of said offense was a person under the age
of eighteen (18) years.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — Any person who resides within the Township of
Verona for more than thirty (30) days in any one (1) year.
§ 116-2. Registration requirements.
A. Any convicted offender who becomes a permanent resident of the
Township of Verona shall, upon obtaining permanent residence status,
as defined in this chapter, register at the Township of Verona Police
Department. At the time of registration, the convicted offender shall
supply the following information to the Verona Police Department:
(1) Name and social security number.
(2) Street address.
(3) Driver's license number.
(4) Make, model and license plate number of any motor vehicle owned
or regularly operated.
(5) Nature of each and every offense for which convicted.
(6) Date of each offense and date of each conviction.
(7) Date of release from custody.
(8) Prosecuting agency for each offense.
(9) Age of victim for each offense.
B. The obligation to provide the information required by Subsection A
above shall be a continuing obligation, and any changes in any of the
information which has been supplied shall be immediately reported to
the Township of Verona Police Department.
§ 115-3 VERONA CODE § 116-3
116:298
§ 116-3. Maintenance of registry.
The Verona Chief of Police shall maintain a registry of convicted offenders
who are required to register with the Verona Police Department in
accordance with this chapter. Such registry shall contain the names of all
registered convicted offenders in alphabetical order and by street address,
with streets listed in alphabetical order. The registry shall be available at
all times for inspection by any person. A copy of the registry, along with
amendments which may be from time to time made, shall be forwarded by
the Chief of Police to the Township of Verona Board of Education.
§ 116-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person charged with violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) and be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both.
§ 116-5. Severability; construal of provisions.
Chapter 118
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
Flood control — See Ch. 77.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 88.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 125.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 127.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 129.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 146.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ 118-1. Short title; purpose.
A. If any section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter is declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection or paragraph shall, to
the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain
in full force and effect, and no such determination shall be deemed to
invalidate the remaining sections, subsections or paragraphs of this
chapter.
B. This chapter shall be liberally construed for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the people of the Township of Verona.
A. Short title. This chapter shall be known as the "Site Plan Review
Ordinance of the Township of Verona."
§ 116-3 SEX OFFENDERS § 118-1
116:299
§ 118-2. Definitions.
All definitions found in the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Verona
shall apply to this chapter.
§ 118-3. Site plan required; administration; exceptions.
B. Purpose. This chapter establishes a site plan review process by the
Planning Board for proposed construction in Verona. The purpose of the
review is to ensure the following:
(1) Preservation of existing natural resources on the site.
(2) Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and
loading.
(3) Adequate screening, landscaping and location of structures.
(4) Exterior lighting needed for safety reasons in addition to any
requirements for streetlighting.
A. General requirements. Site plan review and approval shall be required
before any change of use or addition of use, or before any excavation,
removal of soil, clearing of a site or placing of any fill on lands
contemplated for development. Except as hereinafter provided, no
building permit shall be issued for any building or use, or reduction or
enlargement in size or other alteration of any building or change in use
of any building, including accessory structures, unless a site plan is first
submitted and approved by the Planning Board, and no certificate of
occupancy shall be given unless all construction and development
conform to the plans as approved by the Planning Board.
B. Simultaneous review. The Planning Board shall have the power to
review and approve or deny conditional uses or subdivisions
simultaneously with review for site plan approval without the developer
being required to make further application to the Planning Board or the
Planning Board being required to hold further hearings. The longest
time period for action by the Planning Board, whether it be for
subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever
approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer pursuant to
this subsection, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference
to the request for such conditional use.
C. Site Plan Committee. The Chairman of the Planning Board, with the
approval of the Board, is hereby empowered to appoint a Site Plan
Review Committee consisting of three members of the Board. Said
Committee shall have the duty of reviewing site plan review
applications to determine completeness and either to instruct the Clerk
of the Board as to what elements are incomplete or to report and certify
the application to the Planning Board and advise the Clerk to prepare
notice for a public hearing.
§ 118-1 VERONA CODE § 118-3
116:300
§ 118-4. Application procedure.
D. Exemptions and exceptions. Site plan review requirements may be
waived or exceptions may be granted under the following conditions:
(1) The Planning Board may waive site plan review requirements for a
proposed development when the impact of the proposed
development on the community, surrounding neighborhood and
site will be minimal. Based on a sketch plan, the Planning Board
shall make such finding that the principles and standards as
contained in § 118-17 of this chapter are substantially satisfied and
that no further determination is required.
(2) Site plan approval shall not be required for any detached one- or
two-dwelling-unit buildings or any uses accessory thereto, such as
a private garage or storage shed incidental to residential uses, but
this shall not limit the requirements for submission and approval of
subdivision plats as otherwise required by Township ordinances.121
(3) No amendment shall be required for a site plan review application
made to the Planning Board prior to the effective date of this
chapter and that is developed in accordance with an approval of
such application heretofore or hereafter given by the Planning
Board pursuant to ordinances and regulations then in effect and
superseded by this chapter.
(4) The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary
site plan approval, may grant such exceptions from the
requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and
within the general purpose and intent of the provisions for site plan
review adopted pursuant to this chapter if the literal enforcement
of one or more provisions of the chapter is impracticable or will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to
the land in question.
A. The applicant shall submit nine copies of his complete application and
the fee provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, to the Clerk of the Planning
Board. The time for the Board's review shall not begin to run until the
submission of a complete application with the required fee. Unless the
applicant is informed in writing by the Clerk of the Planning Board
within 45 days of the actual submission of the application that it is
incomplete, said application shall be deemed complete as of the date it
was submitted. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
B. Prior to submission of a formal application, applicants shall be
encouraged to submit sketch site plans for informal discussions, review
and recommendations by the Planning Board. Said sketch site plans
shall be used as a basis for changes, redesign or waiver and to avoid
undue expense and delay in preparing more detailed plans and
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Subdivision of Land; and Ch. 150, Zoning.
§ 118-3 SEX OFFENDERS § 118-4
116:301
§ 118-5. Review by Township officials.
§ 118-6. Time limits for review; preliminary approval; special
conditions; sketch plan review.
specifications. The Planning Board shall not be governed by statutory
time limits in its review of sketch site plans, and it is expressly
understood that compliance with the Planning Board recommendations
shall not bind the Planning Board in subsequent deliberations on a full
application.
C. Applications for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Essex
County Planning Board by the Clerk of the Planning Board for review
whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3).
The Verona Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
D. Soil conservation.
(1) The applicant shall submit copies of the site plan application to the
Soil Conservation Service, Morris County District Office, when
required by N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
(2) No application for site plan approval shall be deemed complete in
the absence of proof that a plan for soil erosion and sedimentation
control has been submitted as required above or proof that such a
plan is not required for the particular application. If the reviewing
authority has failed to grant or deny certification of the erosion
plan at the time of preliminary approval of the applicant's site plan,
preliminary approval shall be conditioned on certification of the
applicant's erosion plan.
A. Upon receipt of a site plan application, the Clerk of the Planning Board
shall notify the following for their review and report and approval
where required:
(1) Township Construction Code Official.
(2) Township Engineer.
(3) Township Traffic Safety Officer.
(4) Township Fire Inspector.
(5) Township Board of Health.
B. Each of the officials reviewing the site plan shall make a written report
to the Planning Board within 10 days. The report of the Construction
Code Official shall certify that there are no code violations or zoning
violations on the subject application.
§ 118-4 VERONA CODE § 118-6
116:302
§ 118-7. Public hearing.
A. Upon the submission to the Clerk of the Planning Board of a complete
application for a site plan for 10 acres of land or less, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer, except that if the application for site
plan approval also involves an application for a relief pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 (Planning Board review in lieu of Board of
Adjustment), the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 95 days of the date of the submission of a complete
application to the Clerk of the Planning Board or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
B. Upon submission of a complete application for a site plan of more than
10 acres, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 95 days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
C. Failure of the Planning Board to reach a decision within the specified
time periods or extension thereof shall result in the approval of the site
plan as submitted.
D. If the Planning Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout
of improvements proposed by the applicant that have been the subject
of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application
for development. The Planning Board shall, if the proposed
development complies with this chapter, grant preliminary site plan
approval.
E. In the event that a plan of development shows common areas, property
and/or facilities, then the Planning Board, as a condition of site plan
approval, may establish such conditions on the ownership, use and
maintenance of such lands as it deems necessary to assure the
preservation of such areas, lands, property and facilities for their
intended purposes. The recorded covenants shall bind each lot, to
assure payment of all assessments, including taxes, which may be
necessary to maintain such common property and/or facilities.
F. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of a applicant to
submit a sketch plan to the Planning Board for informal review, and
neither the Planning Board nor the applicant shall be bound by any
discussions or statements made during such review, provided that the
right of the applicant at any time to submit a complete application for
site plan approval shall not be limited by his submittal of a sketch plan
and the time for the Planning Board's decision shall not begin to run
until the submission of a complete application.
A. A public hearing shall be held on all applications for site plan approval
unless the Planning Board waives review per § 118-3D(1).
§ 118-6 SEX OFFENDERS § 118-7
116:303
B. The Clerk of the Planning Board shall prepare a notice of hearing on the
proposed application. Said notice shall state the date, time and place of
the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered and an
identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on
the current tax duplicate in the Township Tax Assessor's office, and the
location and times at which any maps and documents for which
approval is sought are available.
(1) Notice shall be given by the Clerk of the Planning Board at least 10
days prior to the hearing in the following manner:
(a) Public notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Township or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township.
(b) Notice of all hearings on applications for development
involving property located within 200 feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail
to the Clerk of such municipality.
(c) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to
the Essex County Planning Board of a hearing on an applicant
for development of property adjacent to an existing state or
county road or proposed road shown on the Official County
Map or on the County Master Plan adjoining other county land
or situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
(2) Notice shall be given by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the
hearing in the following manner:
(a) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as
shown on the current tax duplicate located within 200 feet in
all directions of the property which is the subject of such
hearing. Notice shall be given by:
[1] Serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on
said current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the
property; or
[2] Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property
owner at his address as shown on said current tax
duplicate.
(b) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its President, a Vice President, Secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service
on behalf of the corporation.
C. Any notice made by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon
mailing. A fee (see Chapter A175, Fees.) for the preparation of the
§ 118-7 VERONA CODE § 118-7
116:304
§ 118-8. Rights and responsibilities subsequent to preliminary
approval.
Preliminary approval of a site plan shall confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
§ 118-9. Final approval.
address list, as per Subsection B(2) above, shall be charged to the
applicant. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
A. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; natural
resources to be preserved on the site; vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, parking and loading; screening, landscaping and location of
structures; exterior lighting both for safety reasons and streetlighting;
except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Township
from modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to the public health and safety.
B. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
C. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such
revised standards may govern.
A. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by ordinance for final approval
and the conditions of preliminary approval, provided that in the case of
planned development, the Planning Board may permit minimal
deviations from the conditions of preliminary approval necessitated by
change of conditions beyond the control of the developer since the date
of preliminary approval without the developer being required to submit
another application for development for preliminary approval.
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the Clerk of the Planning Board
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval of the application for final approval as
submitted and a certificate of the Clerk of the Planning Board as to
failure of the Planning Board to act shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other required evidence of approval.
§ 118-7 SEX OFFENDERS § 118-9
116:305
§ 118-10. Stasis of approval conditions.
The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the applicant pursuant to this
chapter, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of final approval. If the applicant has
followed the standards prescribed for final approval, the Planning Board
may extend such period of protection for extensions of one year but not
to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, the granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval pursuant to this chapter for the section granted final
approval.
§ 118-11. Guaranties of improvement required.
C. A complete application for final approval shall consist of the following:
(1) A properly completed final site plan approval form.
(2) The required fee.
(3) A site plan in final form, including all the information shown on the
preliminary plan, conditions of preliminary approval, plus all items
set forth in the site plan details (§ 118-16) except where they have
been specifically waived by the Planning Board.
D. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant preliminary and final
approval simultaneously, provided that all application requirements
have been met.
A. As a condition of final site plan approval, the Planning Board may
require and shall accept in accordance with the standards adopted by
this chapter for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of on-tract and off-tract improvements:
(1) Performance guaranty.
(a) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the
Township in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation for improvements it may deem necessary or
appropriate, including the following: streets, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade
trees, surveyor's monuments as shown on the final map and
required by the map filing law, P.L. 1960, chapter 141, (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices,
public improvements of open space and other on-site
improvements and landscaping, provided that no more than
ten percent (10%) of the total performance guaranty shall be in
cash, and the balance shall be in the form of a bond from a
bonding company approved by the Township.
§ 118-9 VERONA CODE § 118-11
116:306
(b) An itemization and cost estimate shall be submitted by the
developer, and the Township Engineer shall review the
improvements and cost estimates for reasonability. Said
itemization shall be the basis for determining the amount of
performance guaranty and maintenance guaranty required by
the Planning Board. The Township Engineer shall forward his
review of the cost improvements to the applicant within 30
days of the date of receipt of a request sent by certified mail for
said review.
(2) The furnishing of a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the
Township Council for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 50% of
the cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental
agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be
installed or the improvements are covered by performance or
maintenance guaranty to another governmental agency, no
performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case may be, shall be
required for such utilities or improvements.
B. The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
Township Council by resolution when portions of the improvements
have been certified by the Township Engineer to have been completed.
The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
Township Council by resolution.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected, and the Township may
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete
such improvements.
D. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the Township Council in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Township Clerk, of the completion of said
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer.
Thereupon the Township Engineer shall inspect all of the improvements
and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the Township Council,
indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of the
improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. If partial
approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements rejected shall be set
forth.
E. The Township Council shall either approve, partially approve or reject
the improvements on the basis of the report of the Township Engineer
and shall notify the obligor in writing, by certified mail, of the contents
of said report and the action of the Township Council with relation
thereto not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial approval
§ 118-11 SEX OFFENDERS § 118-11
116:307
§ 118-12. Off-tract improvements.
is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to
its performance guaranty, except for that portion adequately sufficient
to secure provision of the improvements not yet approved. Failure
of the Township Council to send or provide such notification to the
obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the
improvements and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from
all liability, pursuant to such performance guaranty.
F. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the Township
Council may require the obligor to complete such improvements and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
G. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Township Council or the Township Engineer.
H. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable inspection
fees paid for the foregoing inspection of improvements.
I. Prior to final acceptance of the improvements, the applicant shall file
with the Township Engineer and Construction Code Official as-built
drawings prepared by the applicant's engineer and/or architect
indicating any approved changes from the final plat plan.
A. As a condition for approval of a site plan, a developer may be required
by the Planning Board to pay his pro rata share of the cost of providing
only reasonable and necessary street improvements and water,
sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements therefor, located
outside the property limits of the development but necessitated or
required by construction or improvements within such development.
B. Requirements for providing off-tract improvements shall be based on
the circulation and utility service plan elements of the Township Master
Plan. The pro rata amount of the cost of such facilities that shall be
home by each developer or owner within a related and common area,
shall be determined by the Planning Board in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) Street improvements. The developer's share shall be based on the
average daily traffic generated by the proposed development, as a
proportion of total estimated average daily traffic on the street
based on complete development under existing zoning.
(2) Water, sewer and drainage improvements. The developer's share
shall be based on capacity required by the development in question
as a proportion of total capacity for the service area in which the
development is located.
§ 118-11 VERONA CODE § 118-12
116:308
§ 118-13. Reservation of public areas.
§ 118-14. Findings of fact by Planning Board.
Prior to site plan approval for a planned development, the Planning Board
shall find the following facts and conclusions:
C. Where a developer pays the amount determined as his pro rata share
under protest, he shall institute legal action within one (1) year of such
payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to
the fairness and reasonableness of such amount.
A. General requirements.
(1) If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation
of designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or
public areas within the proposed development before approving a
site plan, the Planning Board may require that such streets, ways,
basins or areas be shown on the site plan in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses. The Planning Board may reserve
the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or areas shown
on the plat for a period of one year after the approval of the final
plat or within such further time as may be agreed to by the
applicant.
(2) Unless during such period or extension thereof the Township shall
have entered into a contract to purchase or institute condemnation
proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser interest in the
land comprising such streets, ways, basins or areas, the applicant
shall not be bound by such reservations shown on the plat and may
proceed to use such and for private use in accordance with
applicable development regulations.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall not apply to streets and
roads, flood control basins or public drainageways necessitated by the
subdivision or land development and required for final approval.
C. Compensation. The applicant shall be entitled to just compensation for
actual loss found to be caused by such temporary reservation and
deprivation of use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has
previously been mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be
deemed to be the fair market value of an option to purchase the land
reserved for the period of reservation, provided that determination of
such fair market value shall include but not be limited to consideration
of the real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved and
prorated for the period of reservation. The applicant shall be
compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering or
other professional services incurred in connection with obtaining site
plan approval caused by the reservation.
§ 118-12 SEX OFFENDERS § 118-14
116:309
§ 118-15. Review by Board of Adjustment.
A. That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to standards for
planned development contained in the Zoning Ordinance.122
B. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space are reliable and the amount, location and purpose of the
common open space are adequate.
C. That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment are adequate.
D. That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established.
E. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
A. Approval with variance application. The Board of Adjustment shall have
the power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Planning Board, site plan approval whenever the
Board of Adjustment is reviewing an application for approval of a
variance pursuant to Section 57d of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New
Jersey of 1975123 and appropriate sections of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Township of Verona. All requirements of this chapter with the
exception of time period for approval shall apply to the site plan
application and Board of Adjustment when acting as the reviewing
board for a site plan application.
B. Time period for approval. Whenever an application for development
requests relief pursuant to Subsection A of this section, the Board of
Adjustment shall grant or deny approval of the application within one
hundred twenty (120) days after submission by an applicant of a
complete application to the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment as to the failure of the Board of
Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence
of approval herein required.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
123. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
§ 118-14 VERONA CODE § 118-15
116:310
§ 118-16. Details of site plan.
C. Referral to Planning Board. An application under this section may be
referred to the Planning Board for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Board of
Adjustment shall act.
A. Preparation; contents.
(1) The site plan and its separate elements shall be prepared by a
professional engineer, land surveyor, architect, landscape architect
or professional planner. The site plan shall be based on the latest
Tax Map information and shall be of a standard size as required by
the map filing act.
(2) The site plan shall consist of a location map, site plan maps(s) of the
affected property and such other maps and information as listed
below. The Planning Board may, at the request of the applicant,
waive any of the various requirements of the maps and
submissions.
B. All maps shall:
(1) Show the name of the applicant and block and parcel number of the
property in question.
(2) Show the name, address and seal of the licensed engineer,
surveyor, architect or planner who had prepared the plan.
(3) Have a North point, scale, date on which plan was prepared and
date of every revision.
(4) Provide a place for signature of Chairman and Secretary of the
reviewing board.
C. The Location Map shall:
(1) Be drawn at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet,
showing the location of the property, all streets, driveways and
property lines within 200 feet of the affected property and all
buildings or structures within 200 feet of the building or structure
proposed by the applicant.
(2) Show the location of the property with respect to surrounding
property and streets.
(3) Identify all properties within 200 feet of the property in question by
block and parcel number, name of owner and address of owner.
(4) Indicate the zoning district in which the property is located and
zoning of all property within a two-hundred-foot radius of the
property in question.
D. The Site Plan Map(s) shall:
§ 118-15 SEX OFFENDERS § 118-16
116:311
(1) Be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 30 feet. The Township
Engineer may give permission to use another scale upon request by
the applicant.
(2) Show all lot line dimensions and area of the lot.
(3) Show the location of all existing buildings, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, waterlines, fire protection facilities, electric and
telephone lines (both above and below ground) and poles, gas and
underground heating systems, pipe lines and other man-made
features.
(4) Show the location of all existing streets and highways on or
adjacent to the property affected, including names, right-of-way
width, pavement width, curbs or sidewalks.
(5) Show the location of all existing easements and rights-of-way and
the purpose for which they have been established.
(6) Show the location of existing rock outcrops, high points,
watercourses, depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas, single
trees not in wooded areas with a diameter of six inches or more as
measured three feet above the base of the trunk and other
significant existing features as determined by survey.
(7) Show the topography of the site, including existing elevations or
contours at vertical intervals of two feet.
(8) Provide datum to which contour elevations refer, preferably United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey.
(9) Show any designated streets, public drainageways, flood control
basins or public areas within the proposed site designated for
public reservation in the Township Master Plan or Official Map.
(10) Show the topography of the site after development at two-foot
contour intervals.
(11) Show all proposed streets with profiles indicating grading and
cross sections showing width of roadway, curbing and sidewalk.
(12) Show the location of proposed buildings and structures, all
accessory structures and fences, if any, including setback, sidelines
and rear yard distances, with dimensions showing present and
future grade elevations at all corners and entrances of said
structures, and floor plans thereof.
(13) Provide a design view of the front, side and rear elevations of the
proposed structure or structures. Design view elevations are also
to be shown where proposed additions or alterations affect such
elevations.
§ 118-16 VERONA CODE § 118-16
116:312
(14) Show the location, type and details of proposed signs and outdoor
lighting, including dimensions, radius of light and intensity of
illumination.
(15) Show the location, type and size of proposed culverts, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, fire protection, electric and telephone
lines and poles, gas and underground heating systems, pipelines
and all other utilities both above and below ground, including the
connection of such proposed facilities with the existing facilities.
(16) Show all means of vehicular access for ingress and egress to and
from the site onto public streets, showing the size and location of
driveways and curb cuts, including the possible organization of
traffic channels, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional
width and any other improvements necessary to prevent a difficult
traffic situation. All pedestrian walkways should also be shown.
(17) Show the location and design of any off-street parking areas or
loading areas showing number of spaces, size and location of bays,
aisles and barriers, and proposed direction of movement.
(18) Show all proposed screening and landscaping, including a separate
planting plan and location of proposed shade trees. If provided, all
recreation areas shall be indicated.
(19) Indicate methods and placement of solid waste disposal and
storage facilities.
(20) Show the storm drainage plan indicating locations of inlet pipes,
swales, detention areas and any other storm drainage facilities as
well as calculations for existing and proposed runoff conditions.
(21) Include, if applicable, a detailed proposal, including covenants,
agreements or other specific documents showing the ownership
and method of assuring perpetual maintenance to be applied to
those areas which are to be used for recreational or other common
purposes.
(22) Indicate the proposed sequence of development with a projected
time schedule for completion of each of the several elements. Such
projection shall include, where applicable, the removal of
structures, trees and brush, temporary drainage considerations,
utilities, road and sidewalk improvements and provisions for the
protection of topsoil.
E. The Planning Board may require other information and data for specific
site plans. This data may include but is not limited to geologic
information, water yields, flood data, environmental information, traffic
counts, road capacities, market information, economic data for the
proposed business or activity, hours of operation and similar
information.
§ 118-16 SEX OFFENDERS § 118-16
116:313
§ 118-17. Standards for review.
The following criteria have been set forth as a guide for evaluating the
adequacy of proposed development in the Township. The Planning Board
shall review the site plan for compliance with all applicable ordinances and
the Master Plan; for harmony with surrounding uses and the overall plan
for development of the Township; for the promotion of the health, safety,
order, efficiency and economy of the Township; and for the maintenance
of property values and the general welfare. Based upon its review and the
degree to which it can make positive findings, the board may approve,
conditionally approve, request modifications or deny approval of the site
plan based on evaluation of the site plan details with respect to:
F. The site plan application shall include certification that no taxes on the
property are delinquent.
A. The site plan's compliance with all provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance,124 including but not limited to off-street parking and
loading; signs and lighting; open space and the generation of
objectional smoke, fumes, noise, odors, dust, glare, vibration or heat.
B. The site plan's compliance with all requirements and standards of the
Subdivision Ordinance,125 including but not limited to standards for
construction, layout, dimensions, materials, stormwater retention or
detention facilities and sewerage facilities.
C. The environmental impact of the development relating to the
preservation of existing natural resources on the site and the impact on
the natural resources of the surrounding properties and neighborhood.
D. The relationship of the development to adjacent uses in terms of
harmonious use and design, setbacks, maintenance of property values
and negative impacts.
E. The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation system.126
F. The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities to
ensure that all such spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently
arranged.127
G. The sufficient width and suitable grade and location of streets designed
to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting
and emergency equipment to buildings.128
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Subdivision of Land.
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Vehicles and Traffic and Ch. 125, Streets and Sidewalks.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Fire Prevention and Ch. 125, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 118-16 VERONA CODE § 118-17
116:314
§ 118-18. Fees.135 [Added 8-13-2012 by Res. No. 74]
Fees for copies of ordinances and the Master Plan are as follows:
H. The coordination of streets so as to compose a convenient system
consistent with the circulation element of the Master Plan.129
I. The design and location of buildings in an efficient and aesthetically
pleasing manner.130
J. The use of landscaping and screening to provide adequate buffers to
shield lights, noise, movement or activities from adjacent properties
when necessary; and to complement the design and location of
buildings and be integrated into the overall site design.
K. Exterior lighting to ensure safe movement and for security purposes,
which shall be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on
adjacent properties.131
L. The location, size and configuration of open space areas to ensure that
such areas are suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses.
M. Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind or water or
from excavation or grading.132
N. Protection and conservation of watercourses and areas subject to
flooding.133
O. The adequacy of water, drainage, sewerage facilities, garbage disposal
and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants.
P. The design and location of signs so as to be aesthetically pleasing,
harmonious with other signs on the site and located so as to achieve
their purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles and
pedestrians.134
A. Chapter 150, entitled "Zoning": $30.
B. Chapter 127, entitled "Master Plan": $150.136
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Vehicles and Traffic.
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 150, Zoning.
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 21, Soil Removal.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Flood Control.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
135. Editor's Note: See also Ch. A175, Fees.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Subdivision of Land.
§ 118-17 SEX OFFENDERS § 118-18
116:315
Chapter 121
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Flood control — See Ch. 77.
Sewers — See Ch. 115.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 125.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ 121-1. Permit required. [Amended 6-21-1966]
No person, hereinafter referred to as "applicant" shall excavate or
otherwise remove soil for sale or for use other than on the premises from
which the soil shall be taken without first having procured a permit and
permission therefor from the Mayor and Council.
§ 121-2. Application procedure; standards for review; issuance.
A. The Mayor and Council shall not consider any application for the
removal of soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until
the owner of the premises shall first file with the Borough Engineer an
application in writing upon forms approved by the Mayor and Council
requesting such permission, together with an engineer's map of the
premises showing the contour lines and proposed contour grades
resulting from such intended removal of soil in relation to the
topography of the premises, and the proposed contour lines and the
proposed grades shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and
Council.
B. The Mayor and Council in considering and reviewing the application
and in arriving at its decision shall be guided and take into
consideration the public health, safety and general welfare, and
particular consideration shall be given to the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the borough.
C. In the event the Mayor and Council shall be of the opinion that the
proposed soil removal will not create conditions inimical to the public
§ 118-18 VERONA CODE § 121-2
121:316
§ 121-3. Application fee.137
Accompanying the application required by this chapter shall be an
application fee to be paid by the applicant to the borough in the sum
provided for in Chapter A175, Fees.
§ 121-4. Specifications.
§ 121-5. Bond.
No permit for soil removal shall be granted or issued unless and until
the owner or applicant shall file with the Mayor and Council a bond, in
form, and with surety acceptable to the borough in such amount as in the
opinion of the Mayor and Council shall be sufficient to ensure the faithful
performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the permission
granted by the Mayor and Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 121-6. Right to hearing.
health, welfare and safety and will not result in the creation of any
sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems,
depressed land values, nor create any drainage, sewerage problems
or other conditions of danger, permission to remove the soil shall
be granted. The Borough Engineer shall issue a permit when all the
requirements of this chapter have been complied with by the applicant.
A. If permission to remove the soil shall be granted, the owner or person in
charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions, and in such a manner that the area shall
be properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform with
the contour lines and grades as approved by the Mayor and Council.
B. The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of
soil, when permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the
top layer of arable soil for a depth of six (6) inches, but such a top layer
of arable soil to a depth of six (6) inches shall be set aside for retention
on the premises and shall be respread over the premises when the rest
of the soil has been removed, pursuant to levels and contour lines,
approved by the Mayor and Council.
A. In the event the Mayor and Council refuse to grant the permit required
by this section the applicant shall be so notified by the Borough Clerk,
by ordinary mail addressed to the applicant at the address set forth on
the application for the permit.
B. The applicant, by letter addressed to the Mayor and Council, may, not
later than thirty-five (35) days after mailing of such notice by the
Borough Clerk, request a hearing before the Mayor and Council to
review its refusal to grant a permit. Such hearing shall be at such time
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 121-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 121-6
121:317
§ 121-7. Violations and penalties.138
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
Chapter 123
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Dogs — See Ch. 68.
Flood control — See Ch. 77.
Site plan review — See Ch. 118.
Soil removal — See Ch. 121.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 125.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 127.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 146.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
and place as the Mayor and Council may designate. The Borough Clerk
shall notify the applicant of the date, time and place of such hearing,
which notice shall be by ordinary mail addressed to the applicant at the
address set forth on the application for the permit. Such notice is to be
mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
138. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 121-6 VERONA CODE § 121-7
121:318
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 23-2005; amended in its entirety
10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 5-12]
§ 123-1.1. Purposes.
§ 123-1.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
A. To prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than
stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
operated by the Township of Verona so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
B. To prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate sewer system(s)
operated by the Township of Verona, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
C. To establish requirements for the proper handling of litter, yard waste
and pet solid waste in the Township of Verona, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
D. To prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any Township-owned
park in Verona or on any other property owned or operated by the
Township of Verona so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
E. To require the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are in
direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge
of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and
other litter) to municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Verona so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
F. To require dumpsters and other refuse containers that are outdoors or
exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits the
spilling, dumping, leaking or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate stormwater
system operated by the Township of Verona and/or the waters of the
state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
G. To regulate the outdoor application of fertilizer so as to reduce the
overall amount of excess nutrients entering waterways, thereby helping
to protect and improve surface water quality. This article does not apply
to fertilizer application on commercial farms.
§ 123-1.1 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-1.2
121:319
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a biodegradable bag
as approved by the Township Engineer, such as to prevent the yard waste
from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its
plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in
promoting plant growth and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for
sale.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or non-physical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Verona, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall
be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C, § 1317 (a), (b) or (c)).
LITTER — Any unused or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
§ 123-1.2 VERONA CODE § 123-1.2
121:320
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or
construction material but does not include the waste of the primary process
of mining or other extraction processes, logging, saw milling, farming or
manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Verona or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other that heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may however contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — Domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal) kept
for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet,
excrement.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P205, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have
not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontacting cooling water.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the Township or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
§ 123-1.2 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-1.2
121:321
a system designated to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails and plastic trash bags.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil-testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet and combination inlet.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
WATER BODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay estuary.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 123-2. Prohibited conduct.
A. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township
of Verona is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also
prohibited unless same is qualified by one of the following exceptions:
(1) Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
(2) Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation and footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
(3) Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact
cooling water).
§ 123-1.2 VERONA CODE § 123-2
121:322
(4) Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
(5) Flows from springs riparian habitats and wetlands. Water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
(6) Residential car washing and residential swimming pool discharges.
(7) Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
(8) Flows from firefighting activities.
(9) Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use
for its intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry-cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
(c) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is
limited to exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does
not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
B. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township of Verona any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste water (other than
stormwater).
C. The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste,
unless the yard waste is containerized, in the street. If yard waste that
is not containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for
placement of yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or
said party shall be deemed in violation of this article.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
E. All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person unless the owner or
§ 123-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-2
121:323
keeper of the animal requires the use of a disability assistance animal
and such animal is being used for that purpose.
F. No person shall feed, in any Township-owned park, or on any other
property owned or operated by the Township of Verona, any wildlife,
excluding confined wildlife (i.e., wildlife contained in zoos, parks, or
rehabilitation centers or unconfined wildlife at environmental
education centers or circus).
G. No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with
one single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing
(excluding the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top
coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot
bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact
with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet either:
(1) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 123-3 below
prior to the completion of the project.
H. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster
does not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the
municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of
Verona.
I. No person shall apply fertilizer:
(1) When runoff-producing rainfall is occurring or predicted and/or
when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer movement off
site exists.
(2) To an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently applied to an
impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the target
surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
(3) Within the buffer of any water body.
(4) More than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time after the end
of the recognized growing season from March 1 to November 15.
J. No person shall apply phosphorus fertilizer.
(1) In outdoor areas except as demonstrated to be needed for the
specific soils and target vegetation in accordance with a soils test
and the associated annual fertilizer recommendation issued by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
(2) Exceptions:
§ 123-2 VERONA CODE § 123-2
121:324
§ 123-3. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 123-1.2 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash and other floating, suspended or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see § 123-3C below.
(a) Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
[1] Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after
land disturbance, provided the application is in
accordance with the requirements established under the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq. and implementing rules;
[2] Reestablished or repairing a turf area in accordance with
good soil practices.
(b) Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or
granular fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the
feeder roots.
(c) Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains.
Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including
bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
§ 123-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-3
121:325
§ 123-4. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions:
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Township Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practically
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device or a catch basin
hood) that is, designed at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
F. Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(1) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules;
§ 123-3 VERONA CODE § 123-4
121:326
§ 123-5. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Township of
Verona and/or other municipal officials of the Township of Verona.
§ 123-5.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
(2) Reestablishing or repairing a turf area in accordance with good soil
practices.
(3) Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
(4) Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
§ 123-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-5.1
121:327

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Management Controls and Requirements
[Adopted 5-16-2007 by Ord. No. 6-07]
§ 123-6. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 123-7.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that provide for disturbance of
land of greater that one or more acres of land that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Verona or by the County of Essex.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act
or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except
§ 123-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-6
121:329
§ 123-7. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the Essex County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management
plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either
be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 123-6 VERONA CODE § 123-7
121:330
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Township of Verona, or political subdivision of this state subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar, dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
§ 123-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-7
121:331
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant the the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zone Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
§ 123-7 VERONA CODE § 123-7
121:332
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 123-8. General standards.
§ 123-9. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 123-9. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent the alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 123-15.
§ 123-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-9
121:333
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 123-9F and G.
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 123-9F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of
an existing public roadway or railroad; or the construction or
enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 123-9F and G to the maximum
extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 123-9F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 123-9F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 123-9 F and
G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
§ 123-9 VERONA CODE § 123-9
121:334
management strategies set forth at Subsection E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental,
or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into
the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
§ 123-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-9
121:335
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 123-9E(2)(i)[2] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see § 123-9E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under the grate: the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate,
which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or a different grate, if each individual
clear space in that grate has an area of no more than seven
square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the
smallest dimension. Examples of grates subject to this
standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (noncurb-
opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 123-9G(1) are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
§ 123-9 VERONA CODE § 123-9
121:336
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 123-9G(1);
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 123-9F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the Essex County Clerk's office,
or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that
measure or an equivalent management measure approved by the
reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 123-12, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 123-9, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
§ 123-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-9
121:337
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types or stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly and indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
§ 123-9 VERONA CODE § 123-9
121:338
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 123-9, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply to the postconstruction stormwater
runoff that is attributable to the portion of the site on
which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 123-7 shall be submitted to the
appropriate Huson-Essex Soil Conservation District for review and
approval in accordance with the requirements of this section and
any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, agricultural development means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
§ 123-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-9
121:339
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
§ 123-9 VERONA CODE § 123-9
121:340
address identified in § 123-12, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 123-12. TSS reduction shall
be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table
2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate of method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A+B-(AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2
TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 123-11C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage system, the eightypercent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless
the runoff from the subareas converge on one site, in which case
the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using
a weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
§ 123-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-9
121:341
§ 123-10. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 123-9F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practice Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 123-12.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficient and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NCRS methodology at § 123-10A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 123-10A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient
or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if land use
type is cultivation).
§ 123-9 VERONA CODE § 123-10
121:342
§ 123-11. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NCRS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/: or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal water table; soil type, permeability
and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and the
presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
§ 123-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-11
121:343
§ 123-12. Sources for technical guidance.
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 123-13D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 123-13.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quality, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 123-9 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 123-9 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsections A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures, such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
§ 123-11 VERONA CODE § 123-12
121:344
§ 123-13. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540.
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625 (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
§ 123-12 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-13
121:345
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this paragraph, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 123-13C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See § 123-13D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance and exemption from safety standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
§ 123-13 VERONA CODE § 123-13
121:346
§ 123-14. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin as
detailed by the NJDEP or designed by a licensed professional engineer.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at § 123-14C below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit 20 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 123-14C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning Board and/or Zoning
Board (as appropriate) to determine if all the checklist requirements
have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards
set forth in this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may include the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
§ 123-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-14
121:347
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 123-8
through 123-11 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions, discharge
capacity for each outlet at different levels of detention and
emergency spillway provisions with maximum discharge
capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 123-9 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
§ 123-14 VERONA CODE § 123-14
121:348
§ 123-15. Maintenance and repair.
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 123-1.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in § 123-14C(1) through (6) of this article when
it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 123-6C shall comply with
the requirements of § 123-15B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventive
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for the preventive and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 123-15B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 123-15B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
§ 123-14 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-15
121:349
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventive and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 123-15B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 123-15B(2) above shall submit an annual maintenance report,
including all preventative and corrective maintenance for the
structural stormwater management measures incorporated into
the design of the development, to the Township Engineer every
May 1.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 123-15B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(9) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 123-15B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by § 123-15B(6) and (7) above.
(10) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 123-15B(2) must post a two-year maintenance guarantee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. This person must develop a
written maintenance and inspection program to be approved by the
Township of Verona. Guidelines for developing a maintenance and
inspection program are provided in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual and the NJDEP Ocean County
Demonstration Study, Stormwater Management Facilities
Maintenance Manual, dated June 1989, available from NJDEP,
Watershed Management Program.
(11) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Township
§ 123-15 VERONA CODE § 123-15
121:350
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 123-15 SOIL REMOVAL § 123-15
121:351
Chapter 125
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Sewers — See Ch. 115.
Site plan review — See Ch. 118.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 127.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ 123-15 VERONA CODE § 123-15
125:352
ARTICLE I
Numbering of Buildings; Maintenance of Sidewalks
[Adopted 8-20-1963139]
§ 125-1. Numbering required; map conformity.
The numbers of all houses and business establishments in the borough shall
correspond with the numbers on the current Tax Map of the borough filed
in the office of the Borough Engineer. It shall be the duty of all property
owners to have their houses and business establishments numbered in
conformity with the numbers designated on such current Tax Map.
§ 125-2. Owner responsible for numbering; placement.
In all cases where any number is or shall be hereafter placed on the Tax
Map by the Borough Engineer, it shall be the duty of the owner thereof
to apply to the Tax Assessor of the borough for the correct number of
such house or business establishment as the same is indicated on the
current Tax Map, and upon such application the Tax Assessor shall furnish
to the applicant the correct number of such property, and the property
owners shall thereupon place or affix to the front of such house or business
establishment the number as designated on the current Tax Map by the
Assessor.
§ 125-3. Notification of nonconformity; official action for
noncompliance.
If the owner of any house or business establishment erected upon any street
where the number appears upon the current Tax Map shall fail to number or
cause to be numbered such house or business establishment in conformity
with the number designated on the current Tax Map as referred to in the
preceding section, after ten (10) days' written notice from the Borough
Clerk, by ordinary mail addressed to the last known address of the owner,
the owner shall be punished as provided in § 125-51.
§ 125-4. Maintenance of sidewalk area required after notification.
The owners or tenants of lands abutting or bordering upon the sidewalks
of the public streets, avenues and highways in the borough shall remove
or cause to be removed from the sidewalks, from the curb to the property
line, in front of or bordering on their lands, all grass, weeds and other
impediments thereon, within three (3) days after notice from the Borough
Engineer to remove the same.
§ 125-5. Noncompliance; subsequent action by Borough officer.
In case the owner or tenant of any land abutting or bordering upon any
public street, avenue or highway in the borough shall neglect or refuse
139. Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from Secs. 22.1 through 22.7 of
former Ch. 22 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted 8-20-1963.
§ 125-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 125-5
125:353
to remove such grass, weeds and other impediments within three (3) days
after notice to remove same, it shall be the duty of the Borough Engineer
or such person as may be designated by the Council to remove or cause to
be removed such grass, weeds and other impediments from the sidewalk in
front of or bordering on such land.
§ 125-6. Lien for cost of maintenance.
The cost paid and incurred by the Borough Engineer or such person as
may be designated by the Council for removing such grass, weeds and
other impediments from any sidewalk as required by the preceding section
shall be by him certified to the Borough Council, which shall examine such
certificate and shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against
the lands abutting or bordering such sidewalk. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become
and form part of the taxes then next to be assessed and levied upon such
lands and shall be collected and enforced according to law.
§ 125-7. Removal of snow and ice required; lien for noncompliance.
[Amended 2-4-1964]
A. The owner or tenant of land fronting upon any street or public place
(intended to include private streets open to the public) within the limits
of the borough where a sidewalk has been graded shall, within twentyfour
(24) hours after a fall of snow or after a freezing of water into ice
upon any sidewalk of whatsoever kind, in front of such land, remove
such snow or ice from such sidewalks in front of such lands owned or
occupied by them, and no such snow or ice shall be thrown onto the
public street. Where snow or ice shall have become frozen to sidewalk
so that it cannot be removed therefrom, such owner or tenant shall
cause such snow or ice to be covered with sand or a comparable
material.
B. In case of the refusal or neglect of such owner or tenant of land thereof
to comply with this section, the Council may cause such snow or ice to
be removed from such sidewalks, and the cost of removing such snow
or ice as ascertained by the Council, with interest thereon, shall be
added to and form a part of the taxes next to be levied and assessed
upon such land, and shall be a lien upon such lands until the same shall
be paid.
§ 125-5 VERONA CODE § 125-7
125:354
ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 8-20-1963140]
§ 125-8. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in or tear up any
surface of any road or street in the borough and maintained by the borough
for any purpose whatsoever, without a written permit first had and obtained
from the Borough Engineer as hereinafter provided.
§ 125-9. Application procedure; separate permit for utility
connections.
Applications for permit required by the preceding section must be made in
writing by the person for a permit for an excavation on any road or street
maintained by the borough, for any purpose whatsoever. Such application
is to state the purpose of such excavation, namely, sewer, water, gas,
telephone or for any purpose not specified herein. Permission to make
excavation or tear up the surface of the road does not carry any right to
make gas, water or sewer connections. A separate permit to make gas,
water or sewer connections must be obtained from proper officials.
§ 125-10. Maximum excavation size; fee calculation.
No permit will be granted under this Article for any excavation in excess of
fifteen (15) square yards by the Borough Engineer. Payment must be made
according to the following schedule, and yardages will be calculated on the
basis of a pavement restoration one (1) foot larger on all sides than the
actual size of opening.
§ 125-11. Fees.
A. The schedule of payments for road openings and storage permits under
this Article shall be as provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, for the
following areas: [Amended 6-16-1980 by Ord. No. 14-80141]
(1) Bituminous pavement on concrete base and reinforced concrete
pavement.
(2) Bituminous pavements on stone base.
(3) Earth shoulder opening.
B. Such payments shall be made to the Borough Engineer, who shall
forthwith transmit such money received for such permit to the Borough
Collector.
140. Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from Secs. 22.8 through 22.19 of
former Ch. 22 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted 8-20-1963.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 125-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 125-12
125:355
§ 125-12. Insurance; bond.
§ 125-13. Safeguards; time limit for completion.
It shall be the duty of the permittee to properly guard the excavation
by the erection of suitable barriers by day and lights by night, and such
permittee shall be liable for any neglect to safeguard the traveling public.
If the excavation extends the full width of the street, only one-half (1/2) of
it shall be made at one time and shall be backfilled before the other half is
excavated, so as not to interfere with traffic. The excavation and backfilling
of same shall be made within the time specified in the permit.
§ 125-14. Pavement restoration.
The borough will restore the pavement so excavated, and the money paid
for the permit shall be used in defraying the expenses of making such
restoration. The permittee shall be liable and responsible for the care and
maintenance of any opening made under this permit and until such time as
the borough has permanently restored the pavement.
§ 125-15. Size limitation on pavement excavations.
When it becomes necessary to open the paved section of any street, such
opening shall not be less than two (2) feet wide nor more than three (3) feet
square and the sides of such openings shall be perpendicular.
§ 125-16. Tunneling.
Tunneling will not be permitted except in special cases when approved by
the Borough Engineer and shall be an unlawful exercise of the privilege
under any permit granted under this Article and a violation thereof.
§ 125-17. Backfilling.
The excavation shall not be backfilled until and unless the permittee has
first notified the Borough Engineer that the excavation is ready for backfill.
After obtaining the approval of the Borough Engineer the permittee shall
backfill the excavation within the time specified in the permit, and if not
done within the time and no extension of time has been obtained, the same
shall be deemed a violation thereof. The material for backfill shall be earth
A. The applicant for a permit under this Article shall indemnify and save
harmless the borough from all accidents and damages consequent
thereupon for and by reason of any opening in any street, avenue, road,
lane or sidewalk and file a certificate of insurance evidencing proper
insurance as follows: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.) per
person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.) per accident.
B. The applicant shall also furnish a bond, in the amount to be approved by
the Borough Engineer, to guarantee that the work will be done in a
workmanlike manner and that proper materials will be used.
§ 125-12 VERONA CODE § 125-17
125:356
or crushed stone in even greater quantities; no stone larger than six (6)
inches in diameter shall be used. No more than six (6) inches of material
shall be backfilled at any time; same shall be thoroughly moistened and
compacted. All excess material shall be removed from the roadway.
§ 125-18. Excavations by public utility corporations.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to openings or excavations
made by a public utility corporation subject to regulation by the Board
of Public Utility Commissioners and which has the right to lay, construct,
install, maintain and operate its works or facilities, or any of them, in any
public road or street of the borough, which are to be made for the purpose
of laying, relaying, constructing, reconstructing, installing, maintaining,
operating or repairing any such works or facilities, if such public utility
corporation shall prior to the doing of any such work have filed with
the Borough Clerk its bond running to the borough in the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.), conditioned for the temporary and permanent
restoration of any road, street or pavement thereof which may be opened
or excavated by such utility, its employees or contractors, without undue
delay, to as good condition as the same was at the time of the opening
thereof and to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer, which bond shall
further provide that the obligation thereof shall be a continuing obligation
to the full amount thereof for each opening of any road or pavement. Such
utility corporation shall, except in cases of emergency, give at least twentyfour
(24) hours' notice to the Borough Engineer of its intention to open or
excavate, which notice shall describe with reasonable certainty the road or
street and section thereof so to be opened and excavated and the purpose
of such opening or excavation and the probable length of time before the
same will be restored to its previous condition. In the case of emergency
openings, a similar notice shall be given to the Borough Engineer as soon as
practicable after such opening is made. The utility corporation so opening
or excavating any such road or street for the purposes aforesaid, or causing
the same to be done by its employees or contractors, shall without undue
delay temporarily and permanently restore such road or street and the
surface thereof to as good condition as the same was at the time of such
opening to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer, and in case of its failure
so to do, the work may be done by the borough under the direction of the
Borough Engineer at the expense of such utility corporation.
§ 125-19. Permit required for equipment storage on streets; signs
and safeguards. [Amended 7-7-1986 by Ord. No. 16-86]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place material of any description
whatsoever or vehicles or containers or other equipment of any nature
whatsoever upon any road, street or sidewalk so as to interfere with the
flow of water along the gutters or to interfere with traffic on such road,
street or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the Borough
Engineer. The permit shall state the approximate quantity of material or
the number of vehicles, containers or equipment to be stored and shall
§ 125-17 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 125-19
125:357
specify the number of days for which such material, vehicles, containers
or equipment shall remain located upon such road, street or sidewalk.
B. It shall be the duty of the permittee to properly guard the materials,
vehicles, containers or other equipment located upon the road, street or
sidewalk by erecting suitable barriers, warning signals and lanterns,
and the permittee shall be liable for any neglect to safeguard the
traveling public. There shall be at all times a carriageway of at least
fourteen (14) feet between materials stored, and provisions must be
made to permit the unobstructed flow of water along the street.
C. Failure of a permittee to remove materials, vehicles, containers or
equipment on the expiration date of a permit without first obtaining a
renewal of a permit from the Borough Engineer shall be deemed a
violation under this chapter. Each day for which a permittee shall fail to
comply with the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate violation
of this chapter.
D. The fee for a permit under this section shall be as provided for in
Chapter A175.
§ 125-19 VERONA CODE § 125-19
125:358
ARTICLE III
Street Dedications
[Adopted 8-20-1963142]
§ 125-20. Conformation required.
All streets dedicated to public use shall meet the requirements of the Article
before they are accepted by the borough.
§ 125-21. Minimum street size; monumenting.
Streets shall be at least fifty (50) feet in width, having a roadway of thirty
(30) feet and sidewalk space of ten (10) feet on either side thereof. The
street shall be properly monumented to the satisfaction of the Borough
Engineer.
§ 125-22. Grade.
Streets, including the sidewalks, must be graded to a true grade as
established by a surveyor and approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 125-23. Paving specifications.
The road bed of streets shall be paved the full distance between curbs or
between the curblines where curbs are not required. The pavement shall
consist of concrete or of not less than eight (8) inches of stone and asphalt
known as the "penetration type," or of a substance and quality recognized
as equally serviceable and acceptable to the Borough Engineer and the
Committee on Streets and Highways.
§ 125-24. Curbs.
Curbs shall be constructed of concrete not less than eighteen (18) inches
high, ten (10) inches thick at the base and six (6) inches at the top.
§ 125-25. Approval of plans for improvements.
Plans and specifications of all improvements shall be subject to the approval
of the Borough Engineer.
§ 125-26. Installation of public utilities.
All public utilities shall be installed prior to the paving of the street.
142. Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from Secs. 22.20 through 22.29 of
former Ch. 22 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted 8-20-1963.
§ 125-20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 125-27
125:359
§ 125-27. Drainage.
Proper drainage facilities shall have been provided and included and shall
consist of catch basins and an underdrainage pipeline on streets of such a
grade as to require such protection.
§ 125-28. Submission of engineering details by Borough Engineer.
A written approval as to all engineering details shall be furnished the Mayor
and Borough Council by the Borough Engineer before they accept any
street.
§ 125-29. Execution of deed; acceptance of street.
After the street is opened on the ground, a deed shall be properly executed
by all the owners of the land within it and delivered to the Mayor and
Borough Council conveying the land to the borough, in fee simple, free
of all encumbrances, including taxes and assessments, which deed shall
be accompanied by three (3) maps, accurately delineating the street and
the recording fees for such deed. The Mayor and Borough Council may
accept the same, provided that the conditions set forth herein are complied
with, but the Mayor and Borough Council shall not be bound to accept any
dedicated street.
§ 125-27 VERONA CODE § 125-29
125:360
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk and Curb Construction
[Adopted 8-20-1963143]
§ 125-30. Permit required for removal, repair and construction.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed,
repair or cause to be repaired, or construct or cause to be constructed, any
sidewalk, driveway entrance or curb or part thereof in the borough unless a
permit therefor shall first be duly obtained from and signed by the Borough
Engineer.
§ 125-31. Application procedure.
The application for a permit required by the preceding section must state
specifically the work intended to be performed, the place and the date of
beginning and completion. Such application must be signed by the owner
or his agent, together with the address of such owner or agent. It must also
state the name and address of the contractor who is to do the work and the
time of beginning and completion of the same.
§ 125-32. Fees. [Added 5-7-1964; amended 6-16-1980 by Ord. No.
14-80144]
Each applicant shall pay at the time that the permit is granted the fees
provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, for the following areas:
§ 125-33. Landowners responsible for repairs.
In accordance with the notice procedure provided in this Article, any
sidewalk or curb on any public street which is out of line or grade, or
broken or out of repair, or is otherwise in need of reconstruction or repair,
shall be relaid to line or grade or the broken portions thereof shall be
repaired or reconstructed by the owner of the land in front of which any
such improvement, reconstruction or repair is to be made.
§ 125-34. Notification.
Whenever the Mayor and Council determine that any sidewalk or curb
repair work is necessary, they shall cause notice thereof, duly signed by the
Borough Engineer, to be served upon the abutting owner, directing such
A. Construction of new driveway aprons.
B. For construction of new curb or new sidewalk where none existed
previously.
C. For major repairs to sidewalk curbing and driveway aprons.
143. Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from Secs. 22.30 through 22.42 of
former Ch. 22 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted 8-20-1963.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 125-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 125-34
125:361
owner to do the work within thirty (30) days after service of the notice. The
notice shall specify in sufficient detail the character of the improvement,
reconstruction or repair to be made, shall set forth a description of the
property affected sufficiently definite to identify the same and shall
otherwise comply with the requirements of Chapter 65 of Title 40 of the
New Jersey Revised Statutes for such case made and provided. The notice
shall give opportunity to such owner to be heard within such thirty-day
period and to offer satisfactory reason why such work should not be done.
Service of the notice and proof of service thereof shall be made in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 65 of Title 40 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes in such case made.
§ 125-35. Noncompliance by landowner; borough work orders;
assessment.
If, in the absence of any good and sufficient reason why work provided for
in this Article should not be done, the abutting landowner fails to make such
improvement, reconstruction or repair within thirty (30) days after service
of the notice aforesaid, then the Mayor and Council may have the work done
at the cost and expense of such owner. The Borough Engineer shall keep an
accurate account of the cost thereof. If such cost or any part thereof is to be
assessed upon the several properties fronting on the improvement, he shall
assess such costs on the several properties fronting on the improvement in
proportion to their respective frontages thereon and file a report thereof
under oath with the Borough Clerk. The Mayor and Council, after notice to
the owner, shall confirm such report and file it with the Tax Collector.
§ 125-36. Interest on assessments; lien; method of payment by
owner.
Sidewalk assessments shall bear interest at the rate specified for delinquent
real estate taxes from the time of confirmation and shall be a lien on the
real estate assessed. Such assessment may, in the discretion of the Mayor
and Council, be paid in equal yearly installments, not exceeding five (5),
with legal interest thereon, and at such time in each year as the Mayor
and Council shall determine, reserving to the owner the right to prepay any
balance, with accrued interest thereon, at one (1) time.
§ 125-37. Construction specifications on file.
Specifications covering materials and workmanship for curbs, sidewalks
and driveway entrances shall be in accordance with written specifications
on file in the office of the Borough Engineer and as approved by the Mayor
and Council.
§ 125-38. Grading.
The contractor or applicant, without additional cost to the Borough, shall
do all necessary grading for curbs, remove all existing obstructions and
bring subgrade to the proper grade. After grading and shaping is done,
§ 125-34 VERONA CODE § 125-38
125:362
all soft spongy or loamy spots in same shall be taken out and refilled at
the contractor's or applicant's expense with sand, gravel or other accepted
material and shall be placed in layers not over six (6) inches in thickness,
which shall be wetted and tamped to secure a firm, hard subgrade, free
from danger of settlement.
§ 125-39. Concrete curbs required.
All curbs hereafter constructed shall be constructed of concrete unless
otherwise permitted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough.
§ 125-40. Location of driveway entrances.
The location of driveway entrances to properties shall be as directed by the
Borough Engineer.
§ 125-41. Concrete specifications.
§ 125-42. Trenches.
Trenches are to be excavated and shaped to the proper depth and grade,
as directed by the Borough Engineer, and to conform with stakes set by the
Borough Engineer for that purpose.
§ 125-43. Warning lights required.
It shall be the duty of the applicant for a permit under this Article, during
the period of the removal or construction of any sidewalk, driveway
entrance or curb or part thereof, to safely guard the space of such removal
or construction during the time between sunset and sunrise with a lighted
lantern securely placed at each end of the space of operation.
A. Concrete shall be thoroughly mixed either on platforms, batch mixer or
be of the ready mixed type, all to be approved and be to the satisfaction
of the Borough Engineer.
B. The sand used must be clean, sharp and dry. The cement must be an
approved branch of portland cement. Stone must be machine broken
trap rock, three-fourths-inch size, free from dust and dirt.
C. The application or spreading of dry cement on the surface to hasten the
settling of concrete is prohibited.
§ 125-38 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 125-43
125:363

ARTICLE V
Damage and Obstruction of Streets
[Adopted 8-20-1963145]
§ 125-44. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to do the following:
§ 125-45. Vehicle construction.
Any vehicle used for the hauling or transporting of materials shall be
constructed of sufficient strength, compactness and tightness to prevent
seeping or dropping of any material through cracks, crevices or openings
therein.
§ 125-46. Designation of vehicle routes by Borough Engineer.
Whenever dirt, stone, ashes or any other material is being hauled or
transported from any excavation or from or to any place in the borough, or
whenever they are being transported to or from any place in the borough in
quantities or in a manner that may occasion accumulation on any sidewalk,
street or public place in the borough, the person transporting such dirt or
material shall, on direction or notice from the Borough Engineer, transport
and haul such material only over such streets as may be designated by the
Borough Engineer.
A. Haul or transport dirt, stone, ashes, or any other material in the
borough in such manner as to spill, drop or track any such material on
any of the sidewalks, streets or public places of the borough.
B. Overload any vehicle or to fill it to such an extent that any of its
contents shall spill from the vehicle or be tracked by such vehicle over
or on any sidewalk, street or public place in the borough.
C. Litter any street, sidewalk or public place in the borough with any
material, papers, dirt, dust, sand, cinders, ashes or any other product.
D. Haul or transport dirt or any material in the borough in such manner as
to cause laying or accumulating of dust or dirt in any street, sidewalk or
public place in the borough.
E. Use any vehicle for the hauling, transportation or excavation of
materials, which vehicles shall be designed, constructed or used in such
manner as to damage streets, sidewalks or curbs.
145. Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from Secs. 22.43 through 22.45 of
former Ch. 22 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted 8-20-1963.
§ 125-44 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 125-46
125:365

ARTICLE VI
Litter
[Adopted 8-20-1963146]
§ 125-47. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, municipal parking lots,
alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
§ 125-48. General prohibition.
No person shall strew, throw, place, deposit or cause to be strewn, thrown,
placed or deposited any rubbish, refuse, waste, garbage, ashes, paper,
periodical, book, magazine, circular, card, pamphlet, glass, wire, tin cans,
tacks or other material into or upon any of the sidewalks, gutters, streets or
public places within the borough.
§ 125-49. Throwing materials from vehicles prohibited.
No person shall throw or drop any bundle, object, article or debris of any
nature from a vehicle, whether in motion or not, when such vehicle is on
any public street or other public place in the borough.
§ 125-50. Exception.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any person duly authorized
by state or local law or to any person to place clean ashes, cinders or salt
upon ice which has formed upon any sidewalk, street or public place.
146. Editor's Note: The provisions of this Article are derived from Secs. 22.46 through 22.49 of
former Ch. 22 of the Revised Ordinances of the Borough of Verona, adopted 8-20-1963.
§ 125-47 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 125-50
125:367

ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted during codification147]
§ 125-51. Violation and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
147. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 125-51 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 125-51
125:369
Chapter 127
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Flood control — See Ch. 77.
Site plan review — See Ch. 118.
Soil removal — See Ch. 121.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 125.
Water — See Ch. 146.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ 127-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the Borough of Verona."
§ 127-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the Borough of Verona in order
to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
the borough. It shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and
development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 127-3. Administration.
A. Planning Board.
(1) The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by
the Planning Board of the Borough of Verona, in accordance with
Section 28 of Chapter 291 of the Laws of the 1975, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
(2) The Chairman of the Planning Board, with the approval of the
Board, is hereby empowered to appoint a Subdivision Committee
consisting of three (3) members of the Planning Board. Said
Committee shall have the power and duty of classifying any sketch
plat as a minor subdivision if it meets with the conditions set forth
in the definition of a minor subdivision and if said Committee shall
find, unanimously, that there exists no cause for review by the
entire Board or for unfavorable action. In such event, the finding of
said Committee shall be deemed favorable referral by the Board,
and the procedure set forth in § 127-6A shall be followed.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 125-51 VERONA CODE § 127-3
127:370
§ 127-4. Interpretation; variance.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Borough of Verona. Any action taken by the Planning
Board under the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration to
the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community.
However, if the subdivider or his agent can clearly demonstrate that,
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal
enforcement of one (1) or more of these regulations is impracticable or
will exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may permit such variance or
variances as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent
of the rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter.
§ 127-5. Definitions and word usage.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board
subdivision approval pursuant to Article 6 of Chapter 291 of the
Laws of 1975148 whenever the Board of Adjustment is reviewing an
application for approval of a variance pursuant to Subsection 57d
of Article 9 of Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975.149
(2) Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant
to Subsection B(1) above, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or
deny approval of the application within one hundred twenty (120)
days after submission by a developer of a complete application to
the Borough Clerk or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application
and a certificate of the Borough Clerk as to the failure of the Board
of Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and
it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by
the county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), the Municipal Board of Adjustment shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board
or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time.
(4) An application under this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of
time within which the Board of Adjustment shall act.
148. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
149. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
§ 127-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-5
127:371
A. Definitions. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following
definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this
chapter:
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board of Adjustment of the Borough
of Verona.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or
more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure,
or of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of
land, for which permission may be required.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and
providing for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood
damage, sedimentation and erosion.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice and gravity.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken
on a preliminary approved major subdivision after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or
fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or
guaranties properly posted for their completion, or approval
conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — A final map of a subdivision and meeting the
requirements of § 127-7C of this chapter.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
§ 127-5 VERONA CODE § 127-5
127:372
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one (1) or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the municipality as set forth in and
adopted pursuant to Section 19 of Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975. 150
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land that does not involve:
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions
thereto, adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of the county pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article 5 of
Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975. 151
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject to
a development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided
that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are
designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership
or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought
The creation of more than three (3) lots fronting on an existing
street.
(1)
(2) Planned development.
(3) Any new street.
(4) Extension of any off-tract improvement.
150. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
151. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
§ 127-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-5
127:373
to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide
the same under this chapter.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and
all owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice
pursuant to Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey. 152
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, which may be accepted
by a municipality to ensure the fulfillment of required improvements
prior to approval, including performance bonds, escrow agreements
and other similar collateral or surety agreements, provided that not
more than ten percent (10%) of the total performance guaranty shall be
required in cash.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough of Verona.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant
to § 127-6 of this chapter prior to final approval after specific elements
of a development plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board
and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of a subdivision and meeting the requirements of § 127-7B of this
chapter.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — Same as "drainage right-of-way."
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state
or county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational
uses.
RESUBDIVISION —
SKETCH PLAT — A sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting
the requirements of § 127-7A of this chapter.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or
which is approved by official action as provided by this act; or which
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according
to law; or
(1)
The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new
streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as
to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
(2)
152. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 127-5 VERONA CODE § 127-5
127:374
§ 127-6. Procedure for subdivision review.
is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county
recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas
and other areas within the street lines.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale
or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions
within the meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created:
divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five (5) acres or larger in size, divisions
of property by testamentary or intestate provisions, divisions of
property upon court order and conveyances so as to combine existing
lots by deed or other instrument. The term "subdivision" shall also
include the term "resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three (3)
Planning Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for
the purpose of classified subdivisions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and such other duties relating to land subdivision which
may be conferred on this Committee by the Board.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
or maintaining proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of
land hereunder for himself or for another.
B. Word usage. The word "shall" is mandatory and not optional.
A. Submission of sketch plat.
(1) Any owner of land within the Borough of Verona shall, prior to
subdividing or resubdividing land, as defined in this chapter,
submit to the Borough Engineer at least two (2) weeks prior to the
regular meeting of the Board a sketch plat and the appropriate
application forms. The Borough Engineer shall tentatively classify
the subdivision as either major or minor and shall discuss the
details of compliance with this chapter with the subdivider.
(2) If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that
effect shall be made on the sketch plat, which will be returned to
the subdivider for compliance with the procedure in Subsections B
and C hereinafter.
(3) If tentatively classified as a minor subdivision by the Engineer, the
sketch plat shall be returned to the subdivider. The subdivider shall
then have twelve (12) black-on-white copies made and return them
§ 127-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-6
127:375
with the original sketch plat to the Borough Engineer at least
two (2) weeks prior to the regular Planning Board meeting. The
Borough Engineer shall then discuss the sketch plat with the
Subdivision Committee prior to the Planning Board meeting. If
approved by unanimous action by the Subdivision Committee as a
minor subdivision, the plat shall be reviewed by a member of the
Committee before the Planning Board.
(4) The Planning Board may waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development if the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee of the Board appointed by the Chairman finds that the
application for development conforms to the definition of "minor
subdivision."
(5) The Planning Board shall either affirm or disapprove the action of
the Subdivision Committee by a majority vote of all of its members.
If approved as a minor subdivision, the plat will then be signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board, with the
notation that it is approved as a minor subdivision and returned to
the subdivider within one (1) week. No further Planning Board
approval shall be required.
(6) The Borough Engineer shall then retain one (1) copy and forward
one (1) copy of the sketch plat showing that it has been approved as
a minor subdivision to each of the following:
(a) Borough Clerk.
(b) Tax Assessor.
(c) Secretary of the Planning Board.
(d) Construction Code Official.
(7) Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of
the subdivision by the Board, provided that the Board may
condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision of
improvements pursuant to § 127-8 of this chapter.
(8) If minor subdivision approval is denied, two (2) copies of the reason
for denial shall be returned with the sketch plat to the applicant.
(9) Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within fortyfive
(45) days of the date of submission of a complete application to
the Borough Clerk or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision approval, and
a certificate of the Borough Clerk as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall
be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the county
recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 127-6 VERONA CODE § 127-6
127:376
(10) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), the Planning Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the Essex County Planning Board or approval by
Essex County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within
the required time period.
(11) Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire one hundred ninety
(190) days from the date of municipal approval unless within such
period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions of
the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), or
a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by
the developer with the county recording officer, the Borough
Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed
accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the Chairman
and Secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing the application
for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the Planning
Board may accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing Act,
P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), provided that, if the
developer chooses to file the minor subdivision as provided herein
by plat rather than deed, such plat shall conform with the
provisions of said Act.
(12) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of two (2)
years after the date of minor subdivision approval, provided that
the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as
provided in this section.
B. Submission of preliminary plat of major subdivision for tentative
approval.
(1) At least twelve (12) black-on-white prints of the preliminary plat,
together with three (3) completed application forms for preliminary
approval, shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk two (2) weeks
prior to the Planning Board meeting at which consideration is
desired. At the time of filing, the fee provided for in Chapter A175,
Fees, shall be paid to the Borough Clerk to cover the costs of
publishing notice of the pending hearings on said subdivision. The
Borough Clerk shall immediately notify the Clerk of the Planning
Board upon receipt of a preliminary plat.153
(2) If the application for development is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified thereof within forty-five (45) days of
submission of such application, or it shall be deemed to be properly
submitted.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 127-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-6
127:377
(3) Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, the Planning Board shall
establish a date and a place for the conducting of a public hearing
thereon. The owner shall notify by registered mail, at least five (5)
days prior to the hearing, all property owners within two hundred
(200) feet of the extreme limits of the subdivision as their names
appear on the borough tax record. Said notice shall state the date,
time and place of hearing, a brief description of the subdivision and
that a copy of said subdivision has been filed with the Borough
Clerk for public inspection. Proof of said notice of mailing shall be
furnished to the Planning Board. The Clerk of the Planning Board
shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the borough at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
(4) Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the Clerk of
the Planning Board one (1) week prior to the hearing to the
Borough Engineer.
(5) The Planning Board shall conduct a hearing on such application in
accordance with the requirements of Section 6 of Chapter 291 of
the Laws of 1975.154
(6) The Planning Board shall, if the proposed subdivision complies with
this chapter and the requirements set forth in Chapter 291 of the
Laws of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), grant preliminary
approval to the subdivision.
(7) If the Planning Board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been
the subject of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted
and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application for
development.
(8) If the Planning Board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, the
Chairman of the Planning Board shall affix his signature to the plat
with a notation that it has received preliminary approval and is
returned to the subdivider for compliance with final approval
requirements.
(9) Time period. Upon the submission to the Borough Clerk of a
complete application for a subdivision of ten (10) or fewer lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
forty-five (45) days of the date of such submission or within such
further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon the
submission of a complete application for a subdivision of more than
ten (10) lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within ninety-five (95) days of the date of such submission
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
154. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
§ 127-6 VERONA CODE § 127-6
127:378
developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval to the subdivision.
(10) Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval of a major
subdivision shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for
a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements, layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks, lot size, yard dimensions and offtract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the municipality from modifying by
ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary
approval as relate to public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary subdivision plat.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one (1) year but not to exceed a total
extension of two (2) years, provided that if the design
standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised
standards may govern.
C. Improvements or guaranties prior to final approval. Before
consideration of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider will have met
the requirements for improvements contained in § 127-8 of this
chapter.
D. Submission of final plat of major subdivision.
(1) The final plat shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk for
forwarding to the Planning Board for final approval. The Borough
Clerk shall immediately notify the Clerk of the Planning Board.
(2) The original tracing, one (1) translucent tracing cloth copy, two (2)
cloth prints, eight (8) black-on-white prints and three (3) copies of
the application form for final approval shall be submitted to the
Clerk of the Planning Board, and one (1) to the Borough Engineer,
at least five (5) days prior to the date of a regular Planning Board
meeting. Unless the preliminary plat is approved without changes,
the final plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications
required by the Planning Board.
(3) The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Borough
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed
and those to be installed, and that the subdivider has complied with
one (1) or both of the following:
§ 127-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-6
127:379
(a) He has installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations and borough ordinances.
(b) A performance guaranty has been posted with the Borough
Clerk in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all
required improvements.
In addition, the final plat shall be accompanied by a
memorandum of agreement which shall have been duly
completed and executed by the developer. Said memorandum
shall be on the form accepted by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Verona and on file and obtainable from the
office of the Borough Engineer. This form for the filing of a
memorandum of agreement shall be deemed to be a part of
this chapter.
(4) The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final
approval conform to the standards established by ordinance for
final approval, the conditions of preliminary approval and, in the
case of a major subdivision, the standards prescribed by the Map
Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), provided
that, in the case of a planned unit development, the Planning Board
may permit minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary
approval necessitated by change of conditions beyond the control
of the developer since the date of preliminary approval without the
developer being required to submit another application for
development for preliminary approval.
(5) Final approval shall be granted or denied within forty-five (45) days
after submission of a complete application to the Borough Clerk or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute final approval, and a certificate of the Borough
Clerk as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued
on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required
and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(6) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), the Planning Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the Essex County Planning Board or approval by
the Essex County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
(7) Upon final approval, copies of the final plat shall be filed by the
Secretary of the Planning Board with the following:
§ 127-6 VERONA CODE § 127-6
127:380
(a) Borough Clerk.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Tax Assessor.
(d) Official issuing certificates as to approval for the subdivision of
land.
(e) Construction Code Official.
(8) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire ninety-five (95)
days from the date of signing of the plat unless within such period
the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the county
recording officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to
exceed one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of the signing
of the plat.
(9) No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county
recording officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board
as indicated on the instrument by the signature of the Chairman
and Secretary of the Planning Board or a certificate has been
issued pursuant to Section 35, 38, 44, 48, 54 or 63 of Chapter 291
of the Laws of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). The signatures of
the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board shall not be
affixed until the developer has posted the guaranties required
pursuant to § 127-8 of this chapter.
(10) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer
pursuant to Subsection B(10) of this section, whether conditionally
or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two (2) years
after the date of final approval, provided that, in the case of a major
subdivision, the rights conferred by this section shall expire if the
plat has not been duly recorded within the time period provided in
this section. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed
for final approval and has duly recorded the plat as required, the
Planning Board may extend such period of protection for
extensions of one (1) year, but not to exceed three (3) extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the granting
of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval
pursuant to Subsection B(10) of this section for the section granted
final approval.
E. Exception in application of subdivision regulations.
(1) The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary
or minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may
be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions for subdivision review and approval of this chapter, if the
§ 127-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-6
127:381
literal enforcement of one (1) or more provisions of this chapter
is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
(2) The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or
deny conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer's being required to
make further application to the Planning Board or the Planning
Board's being required to hold further hearings. The longest time
period for action by the Planning Board, whether it be for
subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the
developer pursuant to this subsection, notice of the hearing on the
plat shall include reference to the request for such conditional use.
F. Appeal procedure.
(1) Any interested party may appeal to the governing body any final
decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board.
Such appeal shall be made within ten (10) days of the date of
publication of such final decisions pursuant to Subsection D of this
section. The appeal to the governing body shall be made by serving
the Borough Clerk in person or by certified mail with a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the name and address of
the appellant and name and address of his attorney, if represented.
Such appeal shall be decided by the governing body only upon the
record established before the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment.
(2) Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by
the governing body by personal service or certified mail to the
appellant, to the applicant and to the Board from which the appeal
is taken at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting. The
parties may submit oral and written argument on the record at
such meeting, and the governing body shall provide for verbatim
recording and transcripts of such meeting.
(3) The governing body shall conclude a review of the record below not
later than forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of the
transcript of the hearing unless the appellant consents in writing to
an extension of such period. The appellant shall arrange for a
transcript for use by the governing body. Failure of the governing
body to hold a hearing and conclude a review of the record below
and to render a decision within such specified period, without such
written consent of the appellant, shall constitute a decision
affirming the action of the Board.
(4) The governing body may reverse, remand or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the final decision of the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
§ 127-6 VERONA CODE § 127-6
127:382
§ 127-7. Plat details.
(5) The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership
of the governing body shall be necessary to reverse, remand or
modify any final action of either Board.
(6) An appeal to the governing body shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed
from was made unless the Board from whose action the appeal is
taken certifies to the governing body, after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with such Board, that, by reasons of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in its opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall
not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court on
application upon notice to the Board from whom the appeal is taken
and on good cause shown.
(7) The governing body shall mail a copy of the decision to the
appellant or, if represented, then to this attorney without separate
charge and for a reasonable charge to any interested party who has
requested it, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the
decision. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the
official newspaper of the borough. Such publication shall be
arranged by the Borough Clerk, and the Borough Council may
make a reasonable charge for its publication. The period of time in
which an appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction may be made
shall run from the first publication, whether arranged by the
municipality or the application.
(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the right of
any party to obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction
according to law.
A. Sketch plat. The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or
some other similarly accurate base, at a scale preferably not less than
two hundred (200) feet to the inch to enable the entire tract to be
shown on one (1) sheet and shall show or include the following
information:
(1) The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to
the entire tract.
(2) All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided and within one hundred (100) feet thereof.
(3) The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent borough tax records.
(4) Block and lot numbers and deed references.
§ 127-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-7
127:383
(5) All streets, roads, drainage rights-of-way, easements, bodies of
water and streams within two hundred (200) feet of the
subdivision.
B. Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn
or reproduced at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one
hundred (100) feet. Preliminary plats shall be designed and drawn by a
licensed (New Jersey) land surveyor, licensed engineer or licensed
planner. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of
§ 127-10 of this chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
(1) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(2) The tract name, block and lot number, date, reference meridian,
graphic scale and the following names and addresses:
(a) Name and address of the record owner or owners.
(b) Name and address of the subdivider.
(c) Name and address of the person who prepared the map.
(3) Acreage of the tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an acre.
(4) Contours, at two (2) vertical intervals, of the land to be subdivided.
Where drainage, street grades or the slope of land in adjacent
areas affect the ultimate development of any plat, the Borough
Engineer may require the subdivider to supply additional data with
regard to such surrounding areas which will permit satisfactory
design of the particular subdivision under consideration.
(5) The location of existing and proposed property and street lines and
existing buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts,
drainpipes, together with any natural features such as wooded
areas and rock formation.
(6) Plans and profiles of all proposed streets within the subdivision and
profiles of existing or future continuing streets a minimum distance
of two hundred (200) feet beyond the subdivision boundaries.
(7) Plans of proposed utility layouts (water, gas and electricity)
showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed utility
system. When an individual water supply is proposed, the plan for
such system must be approved by the appropriate local or state
health agency.
(8) Plans and profiles of all proposed and existing sanitary sewers,
storm drains, drainage ditches or streams to which the proposed
facilities shall be connected. When storm drains, drainage ditches
or brook channel improvements are proposed or required, the plan
for such improvement must be approved by the State Water Policy
§ 127-7 VERONA CODE § 127-7
127:384
Commission if said improvement, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, is of sufficient size as to so warrant.
(9) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat.
C. Final plat. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale
of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, in
compliance with all the provisions of Chapter 358 of the Laws of New
Jersey 1953.155 The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
(1) Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of the owner,
graphic scale and reference meridian.
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with
accurate dimensions, bearings and radii, arcs and central angles of
all curves.
(3) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
(4) Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall
be numbered consecutively, in accordance with borough
ordinances.
(5) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(6) Location and description of all monuments.
(7) Names of owners of adjoining land.
(8) Certification by engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details of
plat.
(9) Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that
the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(10) Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the Borough
Engineer, shall be required to accompany the final plat.
(11) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers.
(12) Current certification by a recognized title insurance company that
the streets are free and clear of all encumbrances.
155. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 358 of the Laws of 1953 added N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.1 through
46:23-9.6, which were repealed by Ch. 141 of the Laws of 1960. Said Ch. 141 added
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., which constitute the current provisions.
§ 127-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-7
127:385
§ 127-8. Improvement guaranties.
(13) Any extension of off-tract improvements necessitated by the
proposed development.
(14) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, pursuant to the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
A. Standard requirements.
(1) Streets, curbs and sidewalks.
(a) All streets shall be graded and provided with an all-weather
base and pavement in keeping with specifications and
standards approved by the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Verona and on file in the office of the Borough Engineer.
Pavement widths shall vary in keeping with the classification of
the street and with the requirements of the Master Plan and
Official Map, but in no case shall they be less than thirty (30)
feet.
(b) Curbs shall be required for all streets and shall be installed to
meet the requirements of the borough and at levels approved
by the Borough Engineer.
(c) A sidewalk shall be installed on both sides of each street in the
location and at the grade given or approved by the Borough
Engineer and according to borough specifications.
(2) Storm drains, sanitary sewerage and utilities. Provisions shall be
made for stormwater drainage, sanitary sewerage and utilities. All
such installations shall be connected with an approved system and
shall be adequate for all present and probable future development
and shall be made according to the standard requirements and
specifications of the Borough of Verona. Sanitary sewers and
appurtenances shall be installed and connected in accordance with
the Sanitary Sewer Ordinances of the Borough of Verona. At the
discretion of the Borough Engineer, stormwater retention or
detention facilities shall be designed and constructed for the
purpose of controlling stormwater runoff from the proposed site.
The facilities shall be designed and constructed in such a manner
as not to allow more than a one-percent increase in runoff from the
developed site into the present drainage system.
(3) Street signs. Appropriate street signs shall be installed at all street
intersections and shall be of a type specified by the Borough of
Verona Department of Public Works.
(4) Street lighting. Appropriate streetlights shall be installed where
designated by the Borough Engineer in accordance with standards
and specifications adopted by the Mayor and Council.
§ 127-7 VERONA CODE § 127-8
127:386
(5) Shade trees. Shade trees shall be planted on each side of every
street at intervals of approximately fifty (50) feet and shall be size
one and three-fourths (1 3/4) inches to two (2) inches and of the
following types: European or silver linden; Norway, Schwedler or
sugar maple; red, pin, black, chestnut or scarlet oak; or other
approved variety.
(6) Monuments. Monuments of the size and shape required by Section
4 of Chapter 358 of the Laws of New Jersey 1953156 shall be placed
in accordance with said statute.
(7) Topsoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least four (4) inches of cover to all
areas disturbed and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. No
topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil.
B. Inspection and costs. All improvements shall be installed under the
supervision and inspection of the Borough Engineer, the cost thereof to
be borne by the developer. Said costs shall be estimated at five percent
(5%) of the total cost of the improvement, and such amount, in the form
of cash or certified check, shall be deposited with the Borough Engineer
before commencement of any construction. If said deposit shall be
insufficient, any additional inspection costs shall be paid by the
developer before the improvement is accepted by the borough. Any
balance from the deposit, after inspection costs have been deducted
therefrom, shall be refunded to the developer.
C. Construction requirements.
(1) Before any developer, his contractor or agents shall install any of
the above-required improvements, said developer, his contractor or
agents must be approved and accepted by the Borough of Verona
for competency and previous experience.
(2) All construction stakes and grades thereon shall be set by a
professional engineer or land surveyor in the employ of the
developer or his contractor, and a duplicate copy of the notes made
therefrom shall be filed with the Borough Engineer.
(3) No construction work shall commence without the Borough
Engineer being properly notified. Such notice shall be given at least
one (1) week before said commencement of work.
(4) The Standard Specifications of the Borough of Verona, as now or
thereafter adopted, shall govern the construction and installation
of all the above improvements. Failure of the developer, his
contractor or agents to conform to said specifications will be just
cause or the suspension of the work being performed, and no
156. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 358 of the Laws of 1953 added N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.1 through
46:23-9.6, which were repealed by Ch. 141 of the Laws of 1960. Said Ch. 141 added
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., which constitute the current provisions. See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11q
for monument specifications.
§ 127-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-8
127:387
person, firm or corporation shall have the right to demand or
claim damages from the Borough of Verona, its officers, agents or
servants by reason of such suspension.
D. Performance guaranty for improvements.
(1) As a condition of final site plan approval, the Planning Board may
require and shall accept in accordance with the standards adopted
by this chapter for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of on-tract improvements:
(a) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the
municipality in an amount not to exceed one hundred twenty
percent (120%) of the cost of installation for improvements it
may deem necessary or appropriate, including streets,
grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting,
shade trees, surveyors' monuments, as shown on the final map
and required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices,
public improvements of open space and other on-site
improvements and landscaping, provided that no more than
ten percent (10%) of the total performance guaranty shall be in
cash, and the balance shall be in the form of a bond from a
bonding company approved by the borough. The Borough
Engineer shall review the improvements required by the
Planning Board which are to be bonded and itemize their cost.
Said itemization shall be the basis for determining the amount
of performance guaranty and maintenance guaranty required
by the Planning Board. The Borough Engineer shall forward his
estimate of the cost of improvements to the applicant within
thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of a request sent by
certified mail for said estimate.
(b) The furnishing of a maintenance guaranty to be posted with
the governing body for a period not to exceed two (2) years
after final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the improvement. In
the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guaranty to another governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guaranty, as the case may be, shall be required
for such utilities or improvements.
(2) The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
Borough Council, by resolution, when portions of the improvements
have been certified by the Borough Engineer to have been
completed. The time allowed for installation of the improvements
§ 127-8 VERONA CODE § 127-8
127:388
§ 127-9. Off-tract improvements.
for which the performance guaranty has been provided may be
extended by the Borough Council by resolution.
(3) If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety,
if any, shall be liable thereon to the borough for the reasonable cost
of the improvements not completed or corrected, and the borough
may, either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof,
complete such improvements.
(4) When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the Borough Council in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Borough Clerk, of the completion of said
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. Thereupon the Borough Engineer shall inspect all of the
improvements and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the
Borough Council, indicating either approval, partial approval or
rejection of the improvements with a statement of reasons for any
rejection. If partial approval is indicated, the cost of the
improvements rejected shall be set forth. Prior to final acceptance
of the improvements, the applicant shall file with the Borough
Engineer and Construction Code Official as-built drawings
prepared by the applicant's engineer and/or architect indicating
any approved changes from the final plat plan.
(5) The Borough Council shall either approve, partially approve or
reject the improvements on the basis of the report of the Borough
Engineer and shall notify the obligor in writing, by certified mail, of
the contents of said report and the action of Borough Council with
relation thereto, not later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of
the notice from the obligor of the completion of the improvements.
Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released
from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, except for
that portion adequately sufficient to secure provision of the
improvements not yet approved. Failure of the Borough Council to
send or provide such notification to the obligor within sixty-five (65)
days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the improvements,
and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability,
pursuant to such performance guaranty.
(6) If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the
Borough Council may require the obligor to complete such
improvements, and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as set forth in this section shall be followed.
(7) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Borough Council or the Borough Engineer.
§ 127-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-9
127:389
§ 127-10. Reservation of public areas.
A. As a condition for approval of a site plan, a developer may be required
by the Planning Board to pay his pro rata share of the cost of providing
only reasonable and necessary street improvements and water,
sewerage and drainage facilities and easements therefor, located
outside the property limits of the development but necessitated or
required by construction or improvement within such development.
B. Requirements for providing off-tract improvements shall be based on
the circulation and utility service plan elements of the Borough Master
Plan. The pro rata amount of the cost of such facilities that shall be
borne by such developer or owner within a related and common area
shall be determined by the Planning Board in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) Street improvements. The developer's share shall be based on the
average daily traffic generated by the proposed development, as a
proportion of total estimated average daily traffic on the street
based on complete development under existing zoning.
(2) Water, sewer and drainage improvements. The developer's share
shall be based on capacity required by the development in question
as a proportion of total capacity for the service area in which the
development is located.
C. Where a developer pays the amount determined as a pro rata share
under protest, he shall institute legal action within one (1) year of such
payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to
the fairness and reasonableness of such amount.
A. General requirements.
(1) If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation
of designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or
public areas within the proposed development, before approving a
subdivision, the Planning Board may require that such streets,
ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses. The Planning Board may reserve
the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or areas shown
on the plat for a period of one (1) year after the approval of the final
plat or within such further time as may be agreed to by the
developer.
(2) Unless during such period or extension thereof the municipality
shall have entered into a contract to purchase or institute
condemnation proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser
interest in the land comprising such streets, ways, basins or areas,
the developer shall not be bound by such reservations shown on the
plat and may proceed to use such land for private use in
accordance with applicable development regulations.
§ 127-9 VERONA CODE § 127-10
127:390
§ 127-11. Design standards.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to streets
and roads, flood control basins or public drainageways necessitated by
the subdivision of land development and required for final approval.
C. Compensation. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for
actual loss found to be caused by such temporary reservation and
deprivation of use. In such instances, unless a lesser amount has
previously been mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be
deemed to be the fair market value of an option to purchase the land
reserved for the period of reservation, provided that determination of
such fair market value shall include, but not be limited to, consideration
of the real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved and
prorated for the period of reservation. The developer shall be
compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering or
other professional services incurred in connection with obtaining
subdivision approval caused by the reservation.
A. General. The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that
will encourage good development patterns within the borough. The
subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions of both the
Official Map and Master Plan as shown thereon. The streets, drainage
rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown on the
officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered in
approval of subdivision plats. Streets and drainage rights-of-way not
shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall be shown on the final
plat in accordance with Section 38 of Chapter 291 of the laws of New
Jersey of 1975157 and shall be such as to lend themselves to the
harmonious development of the borough and enhance the public
welfare in accordance with the following design standards:
B. Streets.
(1) The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
extension of existing streets.
(2) Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
(3) Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal
service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or
some other means of separation of through and local traffic as the
Planning Board may determine appropriate.
(4) The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line
and shall be as follows:
157. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50.
§ 127-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-11
127:391
(a) Arterial and collector streets shall be as indicated on the
Master Plan and Official Map.
(b) All others shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
(5) No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be approved except where the control and disposal of land
comprising such strips has been placed in the Mayor and Council
under conditions approved by the Planning Board.
(6) Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or
the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate
additional width along either one (1) or both sides of said road
unless waived by the Borough Council. If the subdivision is along
one (1) side only, one-half (1/2) of the required extra width shall be
dedicated.
(7) Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed four
percent (4%). Grades on other streets shall not exceed ten percent
(10%). No street shall have a minimum grade of less than one-half
of one percent (1/2 of 1%). Maximum grade within any intersection
shall not exceed three percent (3%), and approaches to any
intersection shall follow a straight course within one hundred (100)
feet of the intersection. Streets shall follow the contours of the land
wherever possible.
(8) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and, in no case, shall be less than sixty degrees. The block corners
at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve
having a radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet and shall have a
clear sight triangle of not less than thirty (30) feet.
(9) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred twentyfive
(125) feet shall be prohibited.
(10) A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves or arterial and collector streets.
(11) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one (1)
point by more than ten degrees (10º) and not more than forty-five
degrees (45º), they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of
not less than one hundred (100) feet for minor streets and three
hundred (300) feet for arterial and collector streets.
(12) All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves
sufficient to provide a smooth transition and sight distance not less
than the following at all points on the road:
(a) For arterial streets: three hundred (300) feet.
(b) For all other streets: two hundred (200) feet.
§ 127-11 VERONA CODE § 127-11
127:392
(13) Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than six hundred
(600) feet and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of
not less than fifty (50) feet. If a dead-end street is of a temporary
nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided and provisions made
for future extension of the street and reversion of the excess rightof-
way to the adjoining properties.
(14)No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
C. Blocks.
(1) Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be
such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the
Zoning Ordinance158 and to provide for convenient access,
circulation control and safety of street traffic. In general, block
lengths shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in areas of
concentrated development.
(2) For commercial group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use as
set forth in the Borough Zoning Ordinance.159
D. Lots.
(1) Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance.160
(2) Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight streets and radial to curved streets.
(3) Each lot must front upon an approved street at least fifty (50) feet
in width.
(4) Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra width line and all setbacks
shall be measured from such line.
(5) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood
conditions or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
E. Public use and service areas.
(1) In large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
§ 127-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 127-11
127:393
§ 127-12. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 129
shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide and located in consultation
with the companies or borough departments concerned.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or street, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of
such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both,
as will be adequate for the purpose.
(3) Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision
containing such features.
A. If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Planning Board is required to
act, such persons shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.) or to imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days,
and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a separate
violation.161
B. In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not
such that a structure on said land in the subdivision would meet
requirements for a building permit under Section 10 of the Official Map
and Building Permit Act (1953),162 the borough may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975.163
C. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider
or his assigns or successors to secure the return of any deposit made or
purchase price paid and also to a reasonable search fee, survey expense
and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within
two (2) years after the date of the recording of the instrument or
transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six (6) years, if
unrecorded.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
162. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.39.
163. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 127-11 VERONA CODE § 127-12
129:394
SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Sewers — See Ch. 115.
Site plan review — See Ch. 118.
Soil removal — See Ch. 121.
Water — See Ch. 146.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ 129-1. Definitions.
The words, terms or phrases listed below, for the purpose of this chapter,
shall be defined and interpreted as follows:
PERMANENT PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — All private swimming pools
as defined in this chapter which are permanently installed where any part
is below grade, except in cases where the pool or portion thereof is below
grade as a result of leveling, and having either an inside structural depth
in excess of twenty-four (24) inches or a surface area in excess of one
hundred twenty (120) square feet or a capacity in excess of one thousand
four hundred (1,400) gallons. Any pool shall be considered permanent if
constructed of masonry material.
PORTABLE SWIMMING POOLS — Any aboveground swimming pool that
is constructed and which is not designed or intended to be stationary or
permanently fixed, but one which is so designed to be removable and stored
each year and which has either an inside structural depth in excess of
twenty-four (24) inches or a surface area in excess of one hundred twenty
(120) square feet or a capacity in excess of one thousand four hundred
(1,400) gallons.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any artificially constructed swimming pool
or tank established or maintained upon any premises in a residential area
or zone by any individual for his own or his family's use or for guests of his
household.
WADING POOL — Any pool not permanently installed and having less than a
twenty-four-inch depth and less than one-hundred-twenty-foot surface area
or less than a one-thousand-four-hundred-gallon capacity.
§ 129-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to establish or construct a swimming pool within the
Borough of Verona without first having obtained a permit therefor in the
manner hereinafter prescribed.
§ 129-3. Application procedure; issuance; exception.
§ 127-12 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 129-3
129:395
§ 129-4. General construction requirements.
§ 129-5. Water supply.
A. Applications for permits for a private swimming pool shall be
accompanied by three (3) sets of plans and specifications or suitable
descriptive brochures and shall be made on such form or forms as may
be required by the Building Inspector, Health Officer and Borough
Engineer, together with a plot plan drawn to scale showing the entire
lot upon which the pool is proposed to be constructed and indicating
thereon the exact size, shape and location of said pool and all other
structures on said lot and the distances of the pool from the property
lines and all structures on said lot.
B. The Building Inspector shall issue a permit for the construction or
installation of a swimming pool, provided that same complies with the
provisions of this chapter, the Building Code and Zoning Ordinance164
and provided further that the application for same has been approved in
writing by the Health Officer and Borough Engineer of the Borough of
Verona.
C. No permit is needed for swimming pools recognized according to this
chapter as "wading pools."
A. All materials used in the construction shall be of a durable quality and
waterproof and easily cleaned. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be used.
Aluminum paint shall not be permitted.
B. Existing property grade should not be changed during installation so as
to adversely affect natural drainage and runoff water in adjoining
properties.
A. There shall be no physical connection between a portable, public or
private water supply system and such pools or their circulating
systems. Portable water for makeup and filling purposes shall be
introduced by means of a discharge pipe over a float-controred surge
tank or over the pool itself and have an air gap of at least six (6) inches
between the orifice of the supply pipe and the pool or tank overflow
level.
B. Private swimming pools may be filled with water from the water system
of the Borough of Verona or from a suitable well approved by the
Borough of Verona Health Officer. The Borough of Verona water system
shall not be used in connection with the operation of a private
swimming pool during any time when restrictions are imposed upon the
use of public water.
C. Filling of pools shall take place at such time designated by the officer of
the Borough Engineer.
164. Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 150, Zoning.
§ 129-3 VERONA CODE § 129-6
129:396
§ 129-6. Drainage.
Private swimming pools shall be equipped with facilities for drainage and/
or backwash with not larger than a two-inch discharge hose or equivalent.
Drainage or backwash should be directed to an accessible storm sewer
or adequate dry well or surface runoff; where, however, only the sanitary
sewer system is available, discharge of pool water into such sanitary sewer
system shall be at the discretion and written permission of the Borough
Engineer. Surface drainage shall not be permitted where such disposal shall
adversely affect any other properties or cause a nuisance or hazard to the
general public.
§ 129-7. Disinfection and filtration.
§ 129-8. Location.
All private permanent swimming pools shall not be constructed nearer than
ten (10) feet to any property line. All private portable pools shall not be
constructed nearer than ten (10) feet to any property line. The pool shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with the setback requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance,165 and no swimming pool shall be erected in the side
or front yards of the property. All filteration equipment and pumps shall be
located not less than five (5) feet from any property line.
§ 129-9. Lighting and electrical equipment.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in such a manner as
to be a nuisance or annoyance to neighboring properties. In no event shall
lights be on after 10:00 p.m. All electrical wiring for light and power used in
conjunction with any swimming pool shall be installed in strict accordance
with the National Electrical Code.166 The wiring and equipment shall be
required to be inspected by the Middle Department Association of Fire
A. Filtering. All private swimming pools installed in the Borough of Verona
shall be equipped with an adequate filtration system capable of turning
over the entire pool water capacity at least once in eight (8) hours. All
circulating pumps should be housed with a suitable strainer or screen
to remove solids, debris, hair, lint, etc.
B. Disinfecting. All swimming pools shall be chlorinated or otherwise
disinfected so as to maintain a supply of chlorine or other approved
disinfecting agents at all times equivalent to four-tenths (0.4) to one
and zero tenths (1.0) parts per million of free available chlorine.
Disinfection and filtration of pool water shall comply to approved
bacteriological standards which may be promulgated by the Health
Officer of the Borough of Verona. Equipment necessary for daily
chemical testing shall be kept on the premises at all times when the
pool is in operation.
165. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Zoning.
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 129-6 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 129-9
129:397
Underwriters, and their card certifying inspection must be filed with the
Building Inspector before the pool is placed in use.
§ 129-10. Noise and nuisances.
All pools shall be maintained and operated so that they do not cause noise,
nuisances or annoyances to neighboring property owners or citizens and
residents of the Borough of Verona.167
§ 129-11. Appearance.
All areas surrounding the pool shall be made and kept neat and attractive so
as to be in conformity with surrounding properties, and no rubbish, debris
or litter shall be permitted to remain or accumulate in or about the pool.
§ 129-12. Enclosures.
§ 129-13. Fees.168
Accompanying each application for permit shall be the fees provided for in
Chapter A175, Fees, for the following areas:
§ 129-14. Inspections.
The Building Inspector, Borough Engineer and the Health Officer, or their
representatives, shall have authority to make such inspections of the
construction and maintenance of the pool and surrounding area as are
necessary from time to time to ascertain that there is compliance with this
chapter and the requirements of the Health and Building Codes.169
A. Every outdoor private swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence of
durable construction not less than four (4) feet nor more than six (6)
feet in height and having openings no larger than four (4) inches,
notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance, or by a wall of a
building or structure; provided, however, in the case of a wading pool,
in lieu of such enclosure, the wading pool may be completely emptied
and stored or may be covered with a suitable strong covering, said
covering to be secured in place when the wading pool is not in use.
B. The enclosure shall be provided with one (1) or more gates or doors of
the same height as the fence, that are self-closing and self-latching and
can be locked when the swimming pool is unattended. Latches and
locks shall be installed at not less than forty-four (44) inches high. Any
access ladder or steps used in connection with aboveground-type
swimming pools shall be removed when the pool is not in use.
A. Permanent pool.
B. Portable pool.
167. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 96, Noise.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 129-9 VERONA CODE § 129-15
129:398
§ 129-15. Enforcement; revocation; hearing.
§ 129-16. Exceptions; appeal for variance.
A. Every private swimming pool installed or constructed or to be installed
or constructed in the borough shall at all times comply with the
requirements of all health authorities having jurisdiction in the
premises, and any nuisance or hazard to health which may exist or
develop in or in consequence of or in connection with any such
swimming pool shall forthwith be abated and removed by the person in
possession or control of such pool upon receipt of notice from the
Building Inspector.
B. In the event a permit is approved and issued, it may thereafter be
revoked by the Mayor and Council. The owner of the premises on which
said swimming pool has been erected and the holder of said permit
shall be served with a written notice setting forth the reasons why the
Mayor and Council seek to revoke the permit and the date and place of
the public hearing. At said public hearing, the owner of the premises or
the holder of the permit shall be heard and have an opportunity to be
represented by counsel and present witnesses.
A. The Board of Adjustment has the power to grant an exception to this
chapter where by reason of exceptional narrowness or shallowness or
shape of a specific lot or by reason of exceptional conditions of such lot
the strict application of the terms of this chapter would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and
undue hardship upon, the owner of such lot; provided, however, that no
exception shall be granted under this section unless such exception can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and unless
such exception will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of
this chapter.
B. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment for an exception to the provisions of
this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved by a decision of the
Building Inspector or of the Borough Engineer pertaining to an
application for a swimming pool permit. Such appeals to the Board of
Adjustment under this section shall be taken within thirty (30) days of
the decision of the Building Inspector or Borough Engineer by filing
with the Borough Clerk a notice, in writing, of such appeal. The
Borough Clerk shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal,
giving due notice thereof to the appellant. Notice of such hearing shall
be given by the appellant to all property owners within two hundred
(200) feet of the appellant's property at least ten (10) days prior to the
time set for the hearing.
169. Editor's Note: As to legislation adopted by the Board of Health, see Part III of this Code.
For the Building Code, see Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 129-15 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 129-17
129:399
§ 129-17. Violations and penalties.170
Any person, partnership, association or corporation, or any member thereof
or officer of same, who violates this chapter or any part thereof shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court, forfeit and pay a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.) or be imprisoned for not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or both. Each and every day such violation continues after notice to
that effect from the Building Inspector or other person in charge shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of this chapter.
Chapter 132
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 104. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 140.
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 129-17 VERONA CODE § 129-17
129:400
ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
[Adopted 8-20-1963171]
§ 132-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other
public place.
TAXICAB —
§ 132-2. Licenses required.
§ 132-3. Types of licenses described.
The following types of licenses are hereby established for the purposes of
this article.
Any automobile, taxicab or other vehicle propelled by motor power,
engaged in the business of the transportation of passengers for hire or
pay within the Township, whether operated from stands in the street or
only on telephone calls to garages, or in any other manner, it being the
intention of this article to include in the definition of "taxicabs" such
vehicles as carry passengers for hire or pay for which public patronage
is solicited.
A.
Any motor-driven vehicle other than stages, omnibuses and vehicles
commonly called "jitneys," using the streets of the Township for the
purpose of carrying passengers for hire, for which public patronage is
solicited and the owner of which vehicle holds himself out to the public
as a carrier of passengers shall be deemed a "taxicab" and must be
licensed under this article.
B.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the taxicab business
within the Township without first having obtained a license therefor as
hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab for anyone in the
taxicab business in the Township without having first obtained a license
therefor as hereinafter provided.
A. Taxicab owner's license. Each person engaged in the taxicab business
within the Township shall obtain an individual license for each taxicab,
up to six taxicabs.
171. Editor's Note: The provisions of this article are derived from §§ 24.1 through 24.12 of
former Chapter 24 of the Revised Ordinances of the Township of Verona adopted
8-20-1963.
§ 132-1 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 132-3
129:401
§ 132-4. Application procedure.
B. Fleet owner's license. The owner of a fleet of six or more taxicabs may
obtain this type of license, which shall authorize a specified number of
taxicabs of the licensee's fleet to engage in the taxicab business within
the limits of the Township at any one time but shall not commit the fleet
owner to the use of specific vehicles, except that the taxicabs operated
shall all belong to the fleet. For the purpose of this subsection, each and
every taxicab comprising a fleet shall be deemed to be a taxicab which
is required to be licensed.
C. Taxicab driver's license. A license to drive shall be obtained by every
individual who shall drive a taxicab which, under the terms of this
article, is required to be licensed.
A. Applications for licenses of all types shall be made to the Mayor and
Borough Council on forms to be provided by the Borough Clerk. These
forms shall require such information as may, from time to time, be
deemed requisite by the Mayor and Council.
B. Applicants for taxicab owners' licenses or fleet owners' licenses shall be
citizens of the United States and at least 21 years of age.
C. Applicants for taxicab licenses shall state the make, motor and serial
number and current motor vehicle license number of each taxicab to be
licensed. Fleet owners shall give this information for each taxicab in
their fleet.
D. Applicants for taxicab licenses shall make each taxicab, including each
taxicab comprising a fleet, available at such time and place as the
Mayor and Council shall designate for the purpose of mechanical and
sanitary inspection.
E. Applicants for taxicab licenses shall submit the insurance policy or
certificate in lieu thereof required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 to 48:16-22 for
each taxicab to be licensed. Fleet owners shall submit such policy or
certificate as required for each taxicab in their fleet.
F. An applicant for a taxicab drivers' license shall be 21 years of age, a
citizen of the United States and shall possess a current state vehicle
operator's license. He shall prove to the satisfaction of the Police
Committee of the Township that he is physically qualified to operate a
taxicab, that he is able to read, write and speak the English language,
that he is of good character and that he has knowledge of traffic
regulations and the geography of the Township.
G. Each applicant for a taxi driver's license shall furnish with his
application two recent identification photographs of himself,
approximately 1 1/2 inches by 1 1/2 inches, and a copy of his
fingerprints, certified to as genuine by the Police Department of the
Borough.
§ 132-3 VERONA CODE § 132-5
129:402
§ 132-5. Fees; issuance; display; transferability; refusal.
A. Fees; period of validity.
(1) Fees to be paid for licenses issued under this article shall be as
provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, for the following licenses.
[Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
(a) Taxicab owner's license.
(b) Fleet owner's license.
(c) Taxicab driver's license.
(2) Temporary driver's license may be issued by the Chairman of the
Police Committee of the Township, without fee, to any driver
qualified under the terms of this article, which license shall be valid
for 15 days from date of issue. Such temporary license shall not be
renewable.
(3) Fees for licenses applied for after the 15th day of November in any
year shall be reduced by 1/3.
(4) Except as otherwise provided, all types of licenses issued under
this article shall be good and valid from the date of issue until the
15th day of May then next ensuing.
(5) All license fees shall accompany the application for license.
B. After favorable action by the Mayor and Council upon an application
submitted in accordance with the terms of this article, the Borough
Clerk shall issue the license applied for. Each license shall show on its
face the type of license issued as follows: "taxicab owner's," "fleet
owner's" or "taxicab driver's."
C. Display.
(1) Every individual taxicab licensed under this article shall carry
affixed therein, so that same may be conveniently read or seen by
any passenger, the license issued and a card containing the name of
the owner of the vehicle, the number of the owner's license and a
photograph of the licensed driver.
(2) Every taxicab which is part of a fleet licensed under the terms of
this article shall carry affixed therein, so that same may be
conveniently read or seen by any passenger, a card containing the
name of the owner of the vehicle, the number of the owner's license
and a photograph of the licensed driver.
D. Transferability.
(1) Taxicab owners' licenses may be transferred from one vehicle to
another belonging to the same owner only after application, in
writing, and approval therefor by the Chief of Police and the
§ 132-5 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 132-5
129:403
§ 132-6. Revocation; temporary suspension.
payment to the Borough Clerk of the transfer fee provided for in
Chapter A175, Fees. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
(2) Taxicab owner's licenses may be transferred from one owner to
another upon application by the parties to the transfer only after
approval by the Mayor and Council and the payment of the transfer
fee provided for in Chapter A175, Fees. [Amended 8-17-1981 by
Ord. No. 6-81]
(3) A taxicab fleet owner may transfer his license from one vehicle to
another and may obtain new licenses for cars added to the fleet
upon application to and approval by the Mayor and Council and the
payment to the Borough Clerk of the transfer fee provided for in
Chapter A175, Fees. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
(4) Fleet owners' licenses shall not be transferable from one fleet
owner to another.
(5) Taxicab drivers' licenses shall not be transferable.
(6) All applications for transfers shall be made upon forms to be
furnished by the Township and shall be accompanied by the full
amount of transfer fees.
E. Upon refusal by the proper authority of any application for original
license or transfer of license, the license fee tendered shall be returned
to the applicant.
A. Any license to be issued in accordance with the terms of this article may
be refused or any license issued in accordance with the terms of this
article may be revoked or a renewal thereof refused by the Mayor and
Council after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) If the license holder or applicant for any license has been
convicted:
(a) Of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction.
(b) Of being a disorderly person in this or any other jurisdiction.
(c) Of a violation of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes.172
(d) Of a violation of any provision of this article.
(2) If the license holder or applicant shall have any judgment
unsatisfied of record against him arising out of an automobile
accident.
(3) If the license holder or applicant is an alien citizen of any nation
which is at war with the United States.
172. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 132-5 VERONA CODE § 132-6
129:404
§ 132-7. Driver identification badge.
Every driver or operator, when in charge of a taxicab licensed under this
article, shall have in his immediate possession a valid taxicab driver's
license and shall wear on his coat lapel a badge to be furnished by the
Township, containing his official taxicab driver's license number.
§ 132-8. Rates.
(4) If the license holder or applicant has failed or fails to render
reasonably prompt, safe and adequate taxicab service. In the case
of fleet owners, adequate service shall be deemed to be twentyfour-
hour service of at least one taxicab.
(5) If a fleet owner has allowed more than authorized number of
taxicabs to operate within the Township.
(6) If the license holder or applicant has failed or fails to comply with
all laws of the state173 or ordinances of the Township or rules and
regulations of the Public Utilities Commission regarding the
ownership and operation of taxicabs.
(7) If, in the case of a driver's license, the applicant or license holder
has in any degree contributed to injury to person or damage to
property arising out of negligent operation of a motor vehicle or
has a communicable or contagious disease.
(8) If, in the case of owner's or fleet owner's license, the motor vehicles
licensed or to be licensed are unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous to
the safety or health of the occupants, or for failure to file certificate
and keep in force the insurance required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 to
48:16-22.
B. Pending a hearing, any license may be suspended by the Mayor or Chief
of Police. Such suspension shall not be for more than 10 days.
A. The maximum taxicab rates established for any points within the limits
of the Township, where the trip originates within the Township limits,
are provided for in Chapter A175, Fees. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord.
No. 6-81]
B. Any taxicab operating with a meter, which meter shall be in full view of
the passenger, may be operated without a meter with the consent of the
passenger, in which event the rates provided in Chapter A175, Fees,
under "Taxicabs operating without a meter" shall apply. [Amended
8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81]
C. Any person charging in excess of these rates shall be guilty of a
violation of this article.
173. Editor's Note: See in particular N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.
§ 132-6 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 132-9
129:405
§ 132-9. Standing areas.
§ 132-10. Solicitation restrictions.
§ 132-11. Inspections of vehicles and records.
All licensed taxicabs and taxicab business records of licensees shall be
subject to inspection, at reasonable times, by any lawful authority of the
Township.
A. The Borough Council is hereby authorized to designate, by resolution,
three places in the Township as public stands for taxicabs as it may
deem expedient and proper, and it may give such direction regarding
the places and position to be occupied at such public stands as it may
deem necessary to preserve order and promote public convenience. No
vehicle which is not licensed under this article shall occupy any part of
such public stands as so designated, and no licensed vehicle shall be
permitted to park in any of the public streets or public places of the
Township, except in such places as are designated. A copy of such
resolution, certified by the Borough Clerk, shall be deemed conclusive
evidence as to the existence and position of any such public stand in any
action under this section.
B. There shall be a metal sign attached to a stanchion on the curb or other
conspicuous place prescribed by the Police Department as the
designated taxi stands, and only such taxicabs as are for hire may
remain at the stand while waiting for employment and only in single
file, pointed in accordance with the traffic regulations. After such
taxicab leaves the line with passengers, those behind shall move up,
and any other taxicab seeking a space on the stand shall approach same
only from the rear thereof.
A. No licensed taxicab, while awaiting employment by passengers, shall
stand on any public street or place other than at or upon a designated
public taxicab stand, nor shall any driver seek employment by
repeatedly and persistently driving to and fro on a short space before,
or by otherwise interfering with the proper and ordinary access to or
egress from, any business, restaurant or other public place; but
employment may be solicited by driving through any public street or
place without stops other than those due to obstructions or traffic and
at a rate of speed that will not interfere with or impede traffic, and no
passengers shall be solicited except by the driver thereof while within
six feet of his taxicab. No passenger shall be taken or discharged except
at the curb.
B. No passenger shall be solicited for any taxicab except by the driver
thereof, and no person operating a taxicab shall permit or allow any
person other than a passenger being transported for hire in or about
such taxicab when in service as a taxicab.
§ 132-9 VERONA CODE § 132-12
129:406
§ 132-12. Right to legislate additional rules reserved.
There is hereby reserved to the Mayor and Council the right to make,
by resolution, such rules and regulations in relation to the operation of
taxicabs and the conduct of the operators thereof as it may, from time to
time, determine to be necessary and proper in the best interests of the
citizens of the Township, and a certified copy of such resolution shall be
forwarded to all licensees.
§ 132-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment
in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 132-12 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 132-13
129:407

ARTICLE II
Limousines
[Adopted 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 3-15]
§ 132-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIMOUSINE or LIVERY SERVICE — Includes any automobile or motor car
with a carrying capacity of not more than nine passengers, not including the
driver, used in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held
out, announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run
over any of the streets or public highways of this state and which is hired
by charter or for a particular contract or by the day or hour or other fixed
period or to transport passengers to a specified place or places or which
charges a fare or price agreed upon in advance between the operator and
the passenger. Nothing in this article shall be construed to include taxicabs,
hotel buses or buses employed solely in transporting schoolchildren or
teachers or autobuses, which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of
Public Utilities, or interstate auto buses required by federal or state laws
or rules of the Board of Public Utilities to carry insurance against loss from
liability imposed by law on account of bodily injury or death. A limousine
shall not include a vehicle owned and operated directly or indirectly by a
business engaged in the practice of mortuary science when that vehicle
is used exclusively for providing transportation related to the provision of
funeral services.
PERSON — Includes any individual, copartnership, association, corporation
or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any
court whatsoever.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, parkway, highway or public
roadway.
§ 132-15. Certification required.
No person shall maintain or operate a limousine or livery service in the
Township unless the owner thereof has secured a limousine service
certification, signed by the Township Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:16-22.3(a) and 22.3(b).
§ 132-16. Application for license.
A. Applications for licenses of all types shall be made to the Mayor and
Township Council on forms to be provided by the Township Clerk. These
forms shall require such information as may, from time to time, be
deemed requisite by the Mayor and Council.
B. Applicants for limousine owners' licenses or fleet owners' licenses shall
possess a driver's license valid in the State of New Jersey and be at
least 21 years of age.
§ 132-14 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 132-16
129:409
§ 132-17. Insurance required.
No such limousine or livery service shall be operated wholly or partly along
any street in the Township of Verona until the owner of the limousine or
livery service shall have filed with the Township Clerk an insurance policy
of a company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws
of this state in the sum of $1,500,0000, required to be provided by law
against loss by reasons of the liability imposed by law upon every limousine
or livery service owner for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered by any person as the result of an accident occurring by reason of
the ownership, maintenance or use of the limousine or livery service upon
any public street. The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of
any final judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such limousine or livery service or any fault in
respect thereto and shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss,
damage or injury in the aforesaid.
§ 132-18. Power of attorney.
The owner of the limousine or livery service shall execute and deliver to
the Township Clerk of Verona a power of attorney wherein and whereby the
owner shall appoint the Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Verona
his true and lawful attorney exclusively for the purpose of acknowledging
service of any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served
C. Applicants for limousine licenses shall state the make, model and serial
number and current motor vehicle license number of each limousine to
be licensed. Fleet owners shall give this information for each limousine
in their fleet.
D. Applicants for limousine licenses shall make each limousine, including
each limousine comprising a fleet, available at such time and place as
the Verona Police Department shall designate for the purpose of
mechanical and sanitary inspection.
E. Applicants for limousine licenses shall submit the insurance policy or
certificate in lieu thereof required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 to 48:16-22 for
each limousine to be licensed. Fleet owners shall submit such policy or
certificate as required for each limousine in their fleet.
F. An applicant for a limousine drivers' license shall be 21 years of age, a
citizen of the United States and shall possess a current state vehicle
operator's license. He shall prove to the satisfaction of the Verona
Police Department that he is physically qualified to operate a limousine,
that he is able to read, write and speak the English language, that he is
of good character and that he has knowledge of traffic regulations and
the geography of the Township.
G. Each applicant for a limousine driver's license shall furnish with his
application two recent identification photographs of himself,
approximately two inches by two inches.
§ 132-16 VERONA CODE § 132-18
129:410
against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance
policy filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-24.
§ 132-19. Credential check.
Before issuance of a limousine or limousine driver's license, an applicant
shall be subject to a name and credential check by the Verona Police
Department. Upon completion of the credential check, applicant will be
subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3a and shall submit to being
fingerprinted by the an agent or vendor contracted by the Division of State
Police in the Department of Law and Public Safety once every two years.
§ 132-20. Vehicle inspection; required equipment.
Applicants for limousine licenses shall make each vehicle available at such
time and place as the Verona Police Department shall designate for the
purpose of mechanical and sanitary inspection. A general examination of
the condition of the vehicle to ascertain its fitness to operate, which shall
include, at a minimum, an examination of the tires, windshield wipers, horn,
condition of the front and rear windshield and side windows, front and rear
lights, fluid levels and brakes. Vehicles shall be clean and road-ready for use
as well as have:
§ 132-21. Fees.
The annual license fee shall be $30 per vehicle; $20 per driver.
§ 132-22. Enumeration of powers.
The Manager shall have charge of and shall control the examination of
applicants for licenses for taxicabs, liveries, limousines and drivers thereof;
the licensing, regulation and inspection of taxicabs, limousines and liveries;
the licensing of drivers; and the enforcement of all the provisions of this
chapter. The Manager shall have the power to approve, deny, suspend or
revoke any taxicab, limousine or livery license of the licenses of drivers
of taxicabs, limousines or liveries, for cause as hereinafter provided. The
powers conferred on the Township Clerk by this chapter shall be exercised
under the control of the Manager.
A. A two-way communication system, which at a minimum shall provide
for communication to a person outside the vehicle for a distance of not
less than 100 miles and which equipment may be satisfied by a mobile
telephone.
B. A complete first aid kit and an operable fire extinguisher, which shall be
placed in an accessible place within the vehicle.
C. A side board attached to the permanent body construction of the
vehicle if the height of the vehicle is 10 inches or more above the
ground.
§ 132-18 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 132-23
129:411
§ 132-23. Right to legislate additional rules reserved.
There is hereby reserved to the Mayor and Council the right to make,
by resolution, such rules and regulations in relation to the operation of
limousines and the conduct of the operators thereof as it may, from time
to time, determine to be necessary and proper in the best interests of the
citizens of the Township, and a certified copy of such resolution shall be
forwarded to all licensees.
§ 132-24. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
the following penalties:
(1) For operating a limousine without a license issued by a municipality
pursuant to R.S.48:16-17, knowingly permitting a driver to operate
a limousine without a validly issued driver's license or a validly
issued commercial driver license if required pursuant to N.J.A.C.
13:21-23.1, failure to have filed an insurance policy in the amount
of $1,500,000 which is currently in force as provided in R.S.
48:16-14 or in the amounts required pursuant to Section 14 of P.L.
1999, c. 356 (N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.4), operating a limousine in which
the number of passengers exceeds the maximum seating capacity
as provided in R.S. 48:16-13 or Section 2 of P.L. 1997, c. 356
(N.J.S.A. 48:16-13.1): a fine of $2,500 for the first offense and a fine
of $5,000 for the second or subsequent offense;
(2) For operating a limousine without the special registration plates
required pursuant to Section 12 of P.L. 1979, c. 224 (N.J.S.A.
39:3-19.5), or operating a limousine without the limousine being
properly inspected as provided in R.S. 39:8-1: a fine of $1,250 for
the first offense and a fine of $2,500 for the second or subsequent
offense;
(3) For operating a limousine without the attached sideboards
required by Section 11 of P.L. 1999, c. 356 (N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.1),
failure to retain within the limousine appropriate proof of
insurance pursuant to R.S. 48:16-17 or failure to execute and
deliver to the chief administrator the power of attorney required
pursuant to R.S. 48:16-16: a fine of $250 for the first offense and
$500 for the second and subsequent offense;
(4) For failure to be equipped with a two-way communications system,
a removable first-aid kit, and an operable fire extinguisher as
required by Section 11 of P.L. 1999, c. 356 (N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.1), or
any other violation of the provisions of Article 2 of Chapter 16 of
Title 48 of the Revised Statutes other than those enumerated in this
subsection: a fine of $50 for the first offense and $100 for the
second and subsequent offense.
§ 132-23 VERONA CODE § 132-24
129:412
§ 132-25. Duration of license.
All limousine licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the
same date as their certificate of liability insurance.
§ 132-26. Issuance of license.
The Township Clerk, upon the filing of the required insurance policy, shall
issue a license certificate showing that the owner of the limousine or
livery service has complied with the terms and provisions of this article.
Such license certificate shall recite the name of the insurance company,
the number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of every
limousine or livery service insured thereunder and the registration of the
same. The license certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place within
the limousine or livery service.
B. Violations of this section shall be enforced and penalties collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999,
P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). The Superior Court or any
municipal court where the violation was detected, or where the
defendant was apprehended, shall have jurisdiction to enforce this
section. Penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition
to those otherwise imposed according to law. All penalties collected
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be forwarded as provided
in R.S. 39:5-40 and Subsection b. of R.S. 39:5-41.
C. State Police officers may enter the property of the operator of a
limousine service to conduct an inspection of documents and vehicles
upon probable cause that the operator is violating R.S. 48:16-14, R.S.
48:16-17, R.S. 48:16-22, Section 11 of P.L. 1999, c. 356 (N.J.S.A.
48:16-22.1), Section 14 of P.L. 1999, c. 356 (N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.4), or
Section 12 of P.L. 1979, c. 224 (N.J.S.A. 39:3-19.5).
§ 132-24 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 132-26
129:413
Chapter 136
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 44.
Flood control — See Ch. 77.
Park rules and regulations — See Ch. 100.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 107.
Shade trees and shrubs — See Ch. 171.
§ 136-1. Purpose.
The Borough of Verona finds that the unregulated and uncontrolled
destruction and removal of trees upon lots and tracts of lands within the
Borough of Verona has resulted in increased soil erosion, has decreased
fertility of the soil, has created dust and mosquito breeding places, has
caused depreciation in property values and has impaired the stability and
value of real estate, with the result that there has been and will be in
the future a detriment to the public health and welfare which requires the
passage of this chapter.
§ 136-2. Definitions.
Definitions. The terms used in this chapter shall be deemed and construed
to have the following meanings:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation or
any group of two (2) or more of the foregoing.
OWNER — Any person having title to any lot, plot, piece or parcel of land.
TENANT — Any person in possession of any lot, piece or parcel of land, with
or without a lease, but with the permission of the owner.
UNIMPROVED LOT — Any clearly defined piece of land, the location,
dimensions and boundaries of which are determined by the latest official
record, upon which no structure permanently affixed to the land, with a
roof, and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure, has been constructed.
§ 136-3. Destruction of trees restricted.
No person or persons shall destroy and remove two (2) or more trees
with a diameter in excess of four (4) inches, measured one (1) foot above
the ground, growing upon any unimproved lot or tract of land within the
Borough of Verona, County of Essex, unless said destruction or removal is
accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 132-26 VERONA CODE § 136-4
136:414
§ 136-4. Application procedure.
Any person or persons desiring to remove or destroy any such trees in
excess of the sizes referred to in § 136-3 above shall file an application
therefor with the Borough Engineer on the forms provided for such purpose.
Said application shall identify the lot or tract of land upon which the trees
are located, disclose the name and address of the owner, tenant or duly
authorized agent of said owner and tenant and shall show the exact location
of the trees sought to be destroyed or removed.
§ 136-5. Inspection by Borough Engineer.
If said application, together with any previous application or applications,
discloses that two (2) or more trees in excess of the size referred to
in § 136-3 of this chapter, are to be destroyed or removed from said
unimproved lot or tract of land, the Borough Engineer shall examine into
the matter by personal inspection of the premises referred to in the
application, by inspecting the trees referred to therein and by observing
the drainage condition and topographical condition existing upon said lands
and the vicinity thereof.
§ 136-6. Basis for determination by Borough Engineer.
After completing his examination, the Borough Engineer shall make a
determination with respect to whether or not the permit applied for should
be granted. The Borough Engineer shall, at all times, follow the intent of
this chapter, which is to preserve trees wherever this can be accomplished,
and he shall not make a favorable determination with respect to the
aforesaid application unless he finds that one (1) or more of the following
conditions exist:
§ 136-7. Issuance of permit; refusal.
If the determination of the Borough Engineer is favorable, he shall issue
the permit applied for. If said determination is unfavorable, the Borough
Engineer shall promptly notify the applicant in writing with respect thereto
and shall not issue said permit.
A. The area where such tree is located will be occupied by a building or
structure, a driveway or recreation area, a roadway, a drainage right-ofway
or a server line, or the area where such tree is located within
fifteen (15) feet of any of the foregoing.
B. The area where such tree is located has a depression or fill of land
which is deemed injurious or dangerous to said tree or other trees
located nearby.
C. The presence of said tree is likely to cause hardship or will endanger
the public or an adjoining property owner by reason of it being diseased
or dead or for some other adequate reason within the intent of this
chapter.
§ 136-4 TREES § 136-8
136:415
§ 136-8. Violations and penalties.174
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both.
Chapter 140
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 104.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 125.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 132.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 136-8 VERONA CODE § 136-8
136:416
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 140-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 140-2. Repealer.
Upon final approval according to law, all former traffic ordinances and
resolutions of the Township of Verona are hereby repealed except that this
repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any
person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby
repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 140-3. Severability.
Each section of this chapter is an independent section. If any section of
this chapter is held to be invalid, then such invalidity shall not affect the
remaining sections of this chapter.
§ 140-4. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 140-1 TREES § 140-4
136:417

ARTICLE II
Parking, Stopping and Standing
§ 140-5. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this Article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 140-6. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 140-35), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 140-7. Night parking. [Amended 2-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1-94]
A. No vehicle shall be parked on any street within the Township of Verona
between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless an overnight
parking permit has been issued for such vehicle as provided hereunder.
B. Overnight parking permits.
(1) Overnight parking permits shall be available to any person,
provided that the following standards and conditions are met:
(a) The applicant for a permit occupies a one-family dwelling
within the Township of Verona, and the property on which such
one-family dwelling is located does not contain at least two onsite
parking spaces (i.e., sufficient garage or driveway facilities
to accommodate two or more vehicles);
(b) The applicant for a permit occupies a two-family dwelling
within the Township of Verona, and the property on which such
two-family dwelling is located does not contain at least two onsite
parking spaces (i.e., sufficient garage or driveway facilities
to accommodate two or more vehicles) for each dwelling unit;
or
(c) The applicant occupies a dwelling unit within a multifamily
dwelling (a building consisting of three or more dwelling units)
within the Township of Verona, and the property on which such
multifamily dwelling is located does not contain on-site parking
for the applicant's vehicle.
(2) An applicant for a permit shall be the owner or lessee of the vehicle
for which a permit is issued.
(3) Permits shall be issued only for passenger automobiles, as defined
in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, and shall not be issued for any recreational
§ 140-5 TREES § 140-7
136:419
vehicles, as defined in § 150-3 of the Verona Code, or for any
commercial vehicles or other types of vehicles.
(4) Permits shall not be transferable from the applicant to any other
person. However, permits may be transferred from one vehicle to
another vehicle owned or leased by the same applicant upon the
filing of a transfer application and the payment of a transfer
application fee.
(5) Permits shall be prominently and permanently displayed on the
rear driver side window of the vehicle for which a permit has been
issued.
(6) All vehicles for which overnight parking permits have been issued
shall be subject to all other parking regulations set forth in the
Township of Verona Vehicle and Traffic Code and to all applicable
state laws concerning parking.
(7) Vehicles for which an overnight parking permit has been issued
shall not be authorized to park upon any of the following streets
between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.: Pompton Avenue
(Route 23), Mt. Prospect Avenue, Bloomfield Avenue, Lakeside
Avenue, Grove Avenue and Fairview Avenue.
(8) Applications for overnight parking permits and applications to
transfer permits from one vehicle to another shall be filed in the
office of the Township Clerk on forms to be provided by the Clerk's
office. Fees for overnight parking permits and fees for transfer
applications shall be as established under Chapter A175 of the
Verona Code and shall be payable upon issuance or transfer of a
permit.
C. No parking will be permitted at public school parking sites between
10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless specifically authorized by the Board of
Education.
D. No parking will be permitted at the 880 Bloomfield Avenue (Community
Center) parking site or at the Verona Community Pool parking lots
between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless specifically authorized by the
Township. [Added 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 4-10]
E. No parking will be permitted at any metered space in Municipal Lot No.
1 (off Park Place), and Municipal Lot No. 2 (off Grove Avenue), between
2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless specifically authorized by the Township.
[Added 8-13-2012 by Ord. No. 4-12]
F. No parking will be permitted in municipal parking lots off of White Rock
Road between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 8-14]
§ 140-7 VERONA CODE § 140-8
136:420
§ 140-8. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule
II (§ 140-36) of any day except Sundays and holidays, unless otherwise
indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said
Schedule II, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 140-9. Stopping or standing prohibited on certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule III (§ 140-37) of any day except Sundays and holidays, unless
otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
said Schedule III, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 140-10. Parking time limited on certain streets and public offstreet
parking areas. [Amended 8-5-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV (§ 140-38) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule IV of any day except Sundays and holidays, unless otherwise
indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets or public off-street
parking areas described in said Schedule IV, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 140-11. Alternate side of the street parking.
No person shall park a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule V
(§ 140-39) of any day, unless otherwise indicated upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule V, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 140-12. Parking in fire areas.
§ 140-12.1. Angle parking. [Added 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95]
No angle parking shall be permitted except upon the streets and at the
locations designated in Schedule VIA (§ 140-40.1).
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46 and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-53, certain parking
yards and parking places which are open to the public or to which the
public is invited, located within the township, more particularly
described in Schedule VI (§ 140-40), shall be regulated in the manner
specified in Schedule VI, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. The township is authorized to post the necessary signs or striping,
indicating the regulations as described in this section. Appropriate
signs or striping shall be provided in each public private parking area,
the cost of which shall be borne by the owner of the property.
§ 140-8 TREES § 140-12.1
136:421

ARTICLE III
Exclusions
§ 140-13. Trucks over four tons excluded from certain streets.
Trucks over four tons' registered gross weight are hereby excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 140-41) except
for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets, said Schedule VII
being attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 140-13.1. Vehicles over six tons excluded from certain streets.
[Amended 11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90; 9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91]
Vehicles over six tons' registered gross weight limit are hereby excluded
from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIIA (§ 140-41.1),
said Schedule VIIA being attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 140-13 TREES § 140-13.1
136:423

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 140-14. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 140-42),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as oneway
streets in the direction indicated.
§ 140-14 TREES § 140-14
136:425

ARTICLE V
Through Streets; Stop and Yield Intersection
§ 140-15. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IX (§ 140-43), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 140-16. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X (§ 140-44), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 140-17. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule XI (§ 140-45), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield right-of-way signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
§ 140-15 TREES § 140-17
136:427

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 140-18. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 140-46), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 140-18.1. Dropoff/pickup zones designated. [Added 8-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-10]
The locations described in Schedule XIIA (§ 140-46.1), attached to and made
a part of this chapter are hereby designated as dropoff/pickup zones.
§ 140-19. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIII (§ 140-47), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 140-20. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIV (§ 140-48) attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 140-20.1. Restricted parking for use by handicapped persons.
[Added 8-5-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96]
The locations described in Schedule XXIV (§ 140-57.1), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as restricted parking
areas for use by handicapped persons pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5.
§ 140-20.2. Restricted parking for use by fire and rescue personnel.
[Added 8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
The locations described in Schedule XXV (§ 140-57.2), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated parking areas for use by
Verona firefighters and Rescue Squad members.
§ 140-18 TREES § 140-20.2
136:429

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions and Lane Reservations
§ 140-21. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XV (§ 140-49), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 140-22. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XVI (§ 140-50), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 140-23. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule XVII (§ 140-51),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, whenever official signs are
present prohibiting such turn.
§ 140-24. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule XVIII (§ 140-52), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 140-21 TREES § 140-24
136:431

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency No Parking
[Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
§ 140-25. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 140-26. No parking; declared emergencies.
§ 140-27. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner of such vehicle shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and
storage which may result from such removal before regaining possession of
such vehicle.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of
the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XIX (§ 140-53 )
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. The Township Director of Public Safety or, in his absence, the ranking
member of the Verona Police Department is hereby authorized to
declare an emergency and to direct the posting of emergency noparking
signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires or public
celebrations dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other
conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Upon the
declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon streets or
parts of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs are
displayed.
B. In the event that the Sheriff of Essex County, or his designee, has
declared a state of emergency during disaster conditions such as fires,
floods, major accidents, terrorist attacks, storms or other events and
conditions which may interfere with the free flow of traffic, there shall
be no parking upon streets or sections of streets where "Emergency No
Parking When Declared" signs are displayed as described in Schedule
XIX (§ 140-53 ) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
C. The Verona Police Department shall make a reasonable effort to give
notification that emergency no-parking signs have been or will be
posted or that an emergency has been declared to the operator or
owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of
emergency no-parking signs or prior to the declaration of an
emergency.
§ 140-25 TREES § 140-28
136:433
§ 140-28. (Reserved)
§ 140-28 VERONA CODE § 140-28
136:434
ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
§ 140-29. Limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XX (§ 140-54), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 140-30. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 140-29 TREES § 140-30
136:435

ARTICLE X
Traffic Control Signals
§ 140-31. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule XXI (§ 140-55), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 140-32. Installation of signals. [Amended 11-5-1990 by Ord. No.
12-90; 9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91]
(Reserved)
§ 140-31 TREES § 140-32
136:437

ARTICLE XI
No-Passing Zones
§ 140-33. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are hereby established and maintained along those
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXII (§ 140-56), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated and
numbered as indicated.
§ 140-33 TREES § 140-33
136:439

ARTICLE XII
Mid-Block Crosswalks
§ 140-34. Mid-block crosswalks established. [Amended 11-5-1990
by Ord. No. 12-90]
Pedestrian crosswalks are hereby established at those mid-block locations
described in Schedule XXIII (§ 140-57), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 140-34 TREES § 140-34
136:441

ARTICLE XIII
Schedules
§ 140-35. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-6, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Arnold Way Both From Fairview Avenue to terminus
Balston Drive
[Added 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 8-14]
North From a point 19 feet west of the
west-side driveway of 14 Balston
Drive continuing for 63 feet west
then north
Belleclair Place East From Afterglow Way to Cole Road
Bloomfield Avenue North From 90 feet east of Cumberland
Avenue east 160 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From 205 feet east of Cumberland
Avenue east 250 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Cumberland Avenue west 100
feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Derwent Avenue east 70 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Fairview Avenue east 265 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Fairview Avenue west 365
feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Gould Street east 100 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Grove Avenue east 105 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Grove Avenue west 60 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Hillcrest Terrace west 100
feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Linn Drive west to North
Caldwell line
Bloomfield Avenue North From Park Avenue east 105 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Park Place east 290 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Park Place west 110 feet
Bloomfield Avenue
[Added 10-17-2005
by Ord. No.
17-2005]
North From 267 feet west of Park Place
for 94 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From 210 feet east of Pine Street
135 feet east
Bloomfield Avenue North From Pine Street east 140 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Pine Street west to Linn Drive
§ 140-35 TREES § 140-35
136:443
Name of Street Side Location
Bloomfield Avenue North From Pompton Avenue west for 410
feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From 100 feet east of Rockland
Terrace 25 feet east
Bloomfield Avenue North From Westview Road east for 105
feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Westview Road to Elmwood
Road
Bloomfield Avenue Northeast From 175 feet east of Gould Street
for 105 feet
Bloomfield Avenue
[Added 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 8-14]
South From a point located at the west
corner of the driveway of 287
Bloomfield Avenue continuing 130
feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Brookdale Avenue west 105
feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From 120 feet east of Chestnut
Road 135 feet east
Bloomfield Avenue South From East Lincoln Street west 105
feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Fells Road to Chestnut Road
Bloomfield Avenue South From Forest Avenue east to West
Lincoln
Bloomfield Avenue South From Forest Avenue west 135 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Lakeside Avenue 380 feet
east
Bloomfield Avenue South From Lakeview Place east 110 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From 10 feet east of prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Malvern
Place east 175 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Montrose Avenue east 100
feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Mt. Prospect Avenue east to
Sunset Avenue
Bloomfield Avenue South From Mt. Prospect west 325 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From North Caldwell line to Fells
Road
Bloomfield Avenue South From Park Avenue west 105 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From South Prospect Avenue east
130 feet
§ 140-35 VERONA CODE § 140-35
136:444
Name of Street Side Location
Bloomfield Avenue South From South Prospect Avenue west
150 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Verona Place east 85 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From West Lincoln Street east 175
feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From 40 feet of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Westview
Road to the easterly curb of
Brookdale Avenue
Brookdale Court Both From Brookdale Avenue to terminus
Centennial Field
access drive [Added
11-21-2011 by
Ord. No. 16-11]
Both From Veteran's Field parking lot to
White Rock Road
Chestnut Road
[Added 11-20-1995
by Ord. No. 15-95]
West From Bloomfield Avenue to
Oakridge Road
Church Street West From Claremont Avenue to
Bloomfield Avenue
Civic Center North In front of H.B. Whitehorne School
Claremont Avenue North From Montclair Line to Bloomfield
Avenue
Claremont Avenue
[Added 10-17-2005
by Ord. No.
17-2005]
South From Park Avenue 75 feet east
Claremont Avenue
[Added 10-17-2005
by Ord. No.
17-2005]
South From Park Avenue 75 feet west
Cole Road Both From Afterglow Avenue to terminus
Commerce Court
[Added 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 8-14]
East From a point 424 feet from Ozone
Avenue continuing 20 feet
Cook Lane Both From Park Avenue to terminus
Crestmont Road East From Westover Road north to
terminus
Crestmont Road West From Claremont Avenue north 450
feet
Cumberland Avenue Both From Bloomfield Avenue to
Claremont Avenue
§ 140-35 TREES § 140-35
136:445
Name of Street Side Location
Cumberland Avenue
[Added 7-14-2008
by Ord. No. 9-08]
East Starting at the northeast corner of
Claremont Avenue and Cumberland
Avenue continuing north 75 feet
Depot Street East From Pine Street north 120 feet
East Lincoln Street East From Bloomfield Avenue to West
Lincoln Street
Elk Road [Added
11-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 12-2003]
South Entire length
Elmwood Road East From Bloomfield Avenue to Cedar
Grove line
Fairview Avenue East From Bloomfield Avenue north 150
feet
Fairview Avenue East From Franklin Street north to
Sampson Drive
Fairview Avenue East From 25 feet south of entrance
driveway of Municipal Pool to
Cedar Grove line
Fairview Avenue
[Added 12-18-2006
by Ord. No. 14-06]
East From Sampson Drive north 70 feet
Fairview Avenue
[Added 12-18-2006
by Ord. No. 14-06]
East From Valleyview Road north 70 feet
Fairview Avenue West From Cedar Grove line south to
prolongation of the northerly curb
of Sampson Drive
Fairview Avenue
[Amended
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 17-2005]
West From 272 feet north of Pine Street
for 99 feet
Fells Road Both From Bloomfield Avenue south to
Essex Fells line
Floyd Road East From Claremont Avenue to
Newman Avenue
Forest Avenue East From Bloomfield Avenue to Fairway
Avenue
Franklin Street
[Added 2-7-2011
by Ord. No. 1-11]
South From the southeast corner of
Fairview Avenue continuing 85 feet
east
Gould Street East From Bloomfield Avenue to
Personette Avenue
§ 140-35 VERONA CODE § 140-35
136:446
Name of Street Side Location
Gould Street West From Bloomfield Avenue north 250
feet
Grove Avenue Both From Linden Avenue north and
south for 150 feet
Grove Avenue East From Bloomfield Avenue north 160
feet
Grove Avenue East From 275 feet north of Bloomfield
Avenue 370 feet
Grove Avenue East From 118 feet north of Franklin
Street north for 300 feet
Grove Avenue West From Bloomfield Avenue north 192
feet
Grove Avenue
[Added 11-3-2003
by Ord. No.
12-2003; amended
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 17-2005]
West 78 feet north from the northwest
corner of Franklin Street
Harrison Street South From Forest Avenue to Chestnut
Road
Hillside Avenue North From Lakeside Avenue to Oakridge
Road
Hillwood Terrace West From Fairview Avenue to terminus
Lakeside Avenue
[Added 12-6-2004
by Ord. No.
16-2004]
East From the West Orange boundary
244 feet north
Lakeside Avenue
[Added 1-3-1994
by Ord. No. 10-93]
West From the north curbline of Balston
Drive to a point 140 feet north of
the north curbline of Whitney
Terrace
Lakeside Avenue West From Bloomfield Avenue south for
150 feet
Lakeside Avenue
[Added 9-16-1996
by Ord. No. 11-96]
West From the curbline of Bloomfield
Avenue (extended) 140 feet south;
and from a point 314 feet south of
the curbline of Bloomfield Avenue
(extended) 260 feet south
Lakeview Place West From Bloomfield Avenue to
terminus
Lanning Avenue North From 200 feet west of Elmwood
Road west 353 feet
§ 140-35 TREES § 140-35
136:447
Name of Street Side Location
Lanning Road
[Added 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 8-14]
North From a point 196 feet from the
northwest corner of Lanning Road
and Elmwood Road continuing 391
feet
Linden Avenue Both From Grove Avenue east and west
for 150 feet
Linden Avenue North From Fairview Avenue to Pompton
Avenue
Linden Avenue South From 150 west of Derwent Avenue
300 feet west
Linn Drive [Added
12-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 15-97]
East From Bloomfield Avenue north 240
feet
Linn Drive [Added
12-4-1995 by Ord.
No. 17-95]
East From Personette Avenue north 50
feet
Linn Drive [Added
12-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 15-97]
East From Personnette Avenue north 75
feet
Linn Drive [Added
12-4-1995 by Ord.
No. 17-95]
East From Personette Avenue south 50
feet
Linn Drive [Added
12-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 15-97]
East From Personette Avenue south 75
feet
Linn Drive West From Bloomfield Avenue north to
terminus
Louisburg Square Both From Pompton Avenue to terminus
Malvern Place West From Bloomfield Avenue to
Claremont
Manor Road North/West From Park Avenue to terminus
Martin Road East From Claremont Avenue to
Pompton Avenue
Montrose Avenue East From Pease Avenue to Bloomfield
Avenue
Morningside Road North From Lakeside Avenue to Oakridge
Road
Mount Vernon
Square
Both From Pompton Avenue to terminus
Municipal Pool Drive Both From Fairview Avenue to terminus
§ 140-35 VERONA CODE § 140-35
136:448
Name of Street Side Location
Oakridge Road West From Bloomfield Avenue to Hillside
Avenue
Orchard Street South From Fairview Avenue to Rockland
Terrace
Otis Place Both From Claremont Avenue to
terminus
Otsego Road
[Added 8-5-1996
by Ord. No. 3-96]
East From Claremont Avenue to
Woodland Avenue
Overlook Park Both From Afterglow Avenue to terminus
Park Avenue Both From Bloomfield Avenue to
Claremont Avenue
Park Avenue East From Bloomfield Avenue to
Hathaway Lane
Park Avenue West From Bloomfield Avenue south 100
feet
Parkhurst Place
[Amended
2-17-1998 by Ord.
No. 3-98]
West From Pine Street north to terminus
Park Place Both From Bloomfield Avenue north to
terminus
Park Place [Added
7-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 9-08]
West Starting at the northwest corner of
Bloomfield and Park Place
continuing 37 feet north
Pease Avenue Both From Lakeside Avenue west 100
feet
Personette Avenue
[Added 8-5-1996
by Ord. No. 3-96]
North From Gould Street westerly to a
point 187 feet from the intersection
of Linn Drive
Personette Avenue
[Added 8-5-1996
by Ord. No. 3-96]
North From Linn Drive easterly 110 feet
Personette Avenue
[Added 12-15-1997
by Ord. No. 15-97]
North From Linn Drive easterly 125 feet
Personette Avenue
[Added 12-15-1997
by Ord. No. 15-97]
South From Linn Drive easterly to Depot
Street
§ 140-35 TREES § 140-35
136:449
Name of Street Side Location
Pine Street
[Repealed
9-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 12-98]
Pine Street [Added
7-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 9-08]
North Starting at the northwest corner of
Fairview Avenue and Pine Street
continuing 79 feet west
Pine Street South From Fairview Avenue to
Bloomfield Avenue
Rockland Terrace West From Orchard Street to Bloomfield
Avenue
Rose Terrace West From Newman Avenue south to
terminus
Sampson Drive
[Added 12-6-2004
by Ord. No.
16-2004]
North From Grove Avenue to Fairview
Avenue
Sampson Drive
[Added 12-6-2004
by Ord. No.
16-2004]
South From end of angle parking west to
Fairview Avenue
South Prospect
[Added 11-3-2003
by Ord. No.
12-2003]
East From Morningside Road to Pease
Avenue
Stonewood Parkway
[Added 8-6-2001
by Ord. No.
6-2001]
West From Sunset Avenue southerly 231
feet
Sunnyside Place West From Pine Street north to terminus
Sunset Avenue North From Mt. Prospect Avenue east 150
feet
Sunset Avenue North From Mt. Prospect Avenue west
150 feet
Sunset Avenue South From Mt. Prospect Avenue to Park
Avenue
Sunset Avenue South/East From Mt. Prospect Avenue to
Bloomfield Avenue
§ 140-35 VERONA CODE § 140-35
136:450
Name of Street Side Location
Sunset Avenue
[Added 9-2-1997
by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 8-6-2001
by Ord. No.
6-2001]
West From Bloomfield Avenue south 243
feet
Verona Place West From Bloomfield Avenue south to
terminus
West Lincoln Street East/South From Bloomfield Avenue to East
Lincoln
Westview Road West From Claremont Avenue to
Bloomfield Avenue
Whitney Terrace
[Added 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 8-14]
East From a point 53 feet north of the
north side of the driveway of 17
Whitney Terrace continuing for 53
feet north then east
Windemere Road
[Added 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 8-14]
North From a point 47 feet south of the
south corner of the driveway of 16
Windemere Road continuing for 63
feet south then east
Windemere Road
[Added 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 8-14]
South From a point located at the storm
drain at 15 Windemere Road
continuing 63 feet west then south
Woodland Avenue South From Pompton Avenue to Elmwood
Road
Woodland Place Both From Woodland Avenue to Linden
Avenue
§ 140-36. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-8, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed on any day except Sundays and holidays, unless
otherwise indicated, upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets:
§ 140-35 TREES § 140-36
136:451
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Cambridge Road
[Added
11-3-2003 by
Ord. No.
12-2003]
North 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon.-Fri.
245 feet east from
Pompton Avenue
Cambridge Road
[Added
11-3-2003 by
Ord. No.
12-2003]
South 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon.-Fri.
220 feet east from
Pompton Avenue
Fairview Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon.-Fri.
From Hillwood Terrace
to Franklin Street
curbline extended
Forest Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./School days
From 170 feet north of
Morningside Road north
for 218 feet
Gould Street
[Added
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No.
17-2005]
West 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From 228 feet from
Bloomfield for 346 feet
Grove Avenue
[Added
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No.
17-2005]
East 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 4:00
p.m./School days
From Franklin Street
north 114 feet
Grove Avenue
[Added
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No.
17-2005]
East 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 4:00
p.m./School days
From 440 feet from
Franklin Street to Ann
Street
Grove Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./Mon.-Fri.
From 120 feet north of
Franklin Street north for
300 feet
Hathaway Lane North 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Sat., Sun.
and holidays, May
16 through Sept.
15
Entire length
Lakeside Avenue
[Added
9-16-1996 by
Ord. No. 11-96]
East 7:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m./Sundays
From the curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue
(extended) 823 feet
south
§ 140-36 VERONA CODE § 140-36
136:452
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Lakeside Avenue
[Repealed
9-16-1996 by
Ord. No. 11-96]
Marion Road
[Added
5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 4-10]
North 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m.; 2:30 to 3:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Sept. 1 through
June 30
From the northwest
corner of Forest Avenue
west 150 feet
Pine Street
[Added
9-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 12-98;
repealed
7-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 9-08]
Sampson Drive
[Added
9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 8-14]
North During certain
hours as directed
by the Board of
Education for the
public's safety
High school parking lot
South Prospect
Street [Added
5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 4-10]
East 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
From the Southeast
corner of Bloomfield
Avenue south 250 feet
Sylvan Road East 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Sat., Sun.
and holidays, May
16 through Sept.
15
Entire length
Valhalla Way North 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Sat., Sun.
and holidays, May
16 through Sept.
15
Entire length
Valley View Road North 11:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Sat., Sun.
and holidays, June
1 through Sept. 15
Entire length
§ 140-36 TREES § 140-37
136:453
§ 140-37. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provision of § 140-9, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle on any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bloomfield Avenue North From Fairview Avenue east for 260
feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Fairview Avenue west for 365
feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Gould Street east 100 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Linn Drive west to Caldwell
line
Bloomfield Avenue North From Montclair line west to
Pompton Avenue
Bloomfield Avenue North From Park Place east 380 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Park Place west 110 feet
Bloomfield Avenue North From Pine Street east 140 feet
Bloomfield Avenue
[Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
North From the west curbline of Pine
Street to a point 650 feet westerly
therefrom
Bloomfield Avenue
[Repealed 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
Bloomfield Avenue North From Pompton Avenue west 410
feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Brookdale Avenue west 105
feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Caldwell line to Fells Road
Bloomfield Avenue South From Fells Road to Chestnut Road
Bloomfield Avenue South From Lakeside Avenue east 380
feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From 10 feet east of the
prolongation of the easterly
curbline of Malvern Place 175 feet
west
Bloomfield Avenue South From Montrose Avenue east 85 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Mt. Prospect Avenue west
325 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From Mt. Prospect Avenue to
Sunset Avenue
Bloomfield Avenue South From Park Avenue west 105 feet
§ 140-37 VERONA CODE § 140-37
136:454
Name of Street Side Location
Bloomfield Avenue South From South Prospect east 130 feet
Bloomfield Avenue South From South Prospect west 150 feet
Bloomfield Avenue
[Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
South From the west curbline of West
Lincoln Street to a point 585 feet
westerly therefrom
Bloomfield Avenue
[Repealed 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
Bloomfield Avenue South From West Lincoln Street to Forest
Avenue
Bloomfield Avenue South From 40 feet east of the
prolongation of the easterly
curbline of Westview Road 135 west
Centennial Field access
drive [Added
11-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 16-11]
Both FromVeteran's Field parking lot to
White Rock Road
Fairview Avenue
[Amended 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
East From the north curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 145
feet northerly therefrom
Fairview Avenue West From Pine Street north 245 feet
Gould Street [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
Both From the north curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 120
feet northerly therefrom
Grove Avenue [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
East From the north curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 70
feet northerly therefrom
Grove Avenue [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
West From the north curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 110
feet northerly therefrom
Malvern Place [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
East From the north curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 65
feet northerly therefrom
Malvern Place [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
West From the north curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 100
feet northerly therefrom
Montrose Avenue
[Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
East From the south curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 95
feet southerly therefrom
Mount Prospect Avenue East From Bloomfield Avenue
Mount Prospect Avenue East From West Orange line north 900
feet
§ 140-37 TREES § 140-37
136:455
Name of Street Side Location
Park Avenue [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
East From the north curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 85
feet northerly therefrom
Park Avenue [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
East From the south curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 80
feet southerly therefrom
Park Avenue [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
West From the north curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 75
feet northerly therefrom
Park Avenue [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
West From the south curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 85
feet southerly therefrom
Pine Street [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
Both From the north curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 100
feet therefrom
Pompton Avenue East From Bloomfield Avenue north to
Cedar Grove line
Pompton Avenue West From Cedar Grove line south to
Bloomfield Avenue
South Prospect Street
[Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
Both From the south curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 87
feet southerly therefrom
West Lincoln Street
[Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
East From the south curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 110
southerly therefrom
West Lincoln Street
[Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
West From the south curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue to a point 75
feet southerly therefrom
§ 140-38. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking. [Amended 8-5-1996 by
Ord. No. 3-96]
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-10, no person shall park a
vehicle for longer than the time limit shown on any day, except Sunday
and holidays, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the following streets,
parts of streets or public off-street parking areas:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Beechwood Road Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
Bloomfield
Avenue
Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
§ 140-37 VERONA CODE § 140-38
136:456
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
880 Bloomfield
Avenue
Community
Center [Added
11-21-2011 by
Ord. No. 16-11]
East
side of
building
2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire lot
Civic Center
Driveway
[Added
8-6-2001 by
Ord. No.
6-2001]
Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday only
(not applicable to
permit holders)
Entire length
Civic Center
[Added
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 17-05]
West 20 minutes; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From 87 feet north of
Bloomfield Avenue for
52 feet
Claremont
Avenue [Added
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 17-05]
South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Montclair
Avenue to Pompton
Avenue
Crestmont Road
[Added
8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-01]
West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Westover Road
to Claremont Avenue
East Lincoln
Street [Added
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 17-05]
West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Gould Street West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
Grove Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Bloomfield
Avenue to Personette
Avenue
Lakeside Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
Linn Drive
[Added
2-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 1-11]
West 1 hour; All/All From the southwest
corner of the driveway
of 34 Linn Drive
continuing for 28 feet
(2 spaces)
Montrose
Avenue
West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Bloomfield
Avenue to Hill Street
§ 140-38 TREES § 140-38
136:457
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Nassau Road Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Pompton to
Witherspoon Road
Oakridge Road East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Fells Road to
point opposite north
curbline of Chestnut
Road
Pine Street
[Added
7-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 9-08]
North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From a point 79 feet
west of the
intersection of
Fairview Avenue and
Pine Street continuing
to Sunnyside Place
Rockland
Terrace
East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
South Prospect
Street
[Repealed
5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 4-10]
South Prospect
Street
West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Bloomfield
Avenue south for 125
feet
West Lincoln
Street
[Amended
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 17-05]
West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Westover Road Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Pompton to
Witherspoon Road
§ 140-39. Schedule V: Alternate Side of the Street Parking.
(Reserved)
§ 140-40. Schedule VI: Parking in Fire Areas. [Added 7-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 9-09]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following fire areas:
§ 140-38 VERONA CODE § 140-40
136:458
Name of Street or
Area
Location
Civic Center at H.B.W.
School
Curb nearest the last parking space on the east
curb 272 feet north then west
342 Claremont
Avenue
East side of building from the sidewalk 179 feet
north
151 Fairview Avenue West curb front driveway, entire curbline, 443 feet
East curb front driveway from a point 59 feet east
of the entrance continuing 200 feet following the
contour of the curb
Continuing for 112 feet after the handicap and
drop-off area of 97 feet
Behind 151 Fairview
Avenue
East curb, 271 feet north to south
West curb, 245 feet north to south
Green Acres Drive West curb from Bloomfield Avenue south in front of
Buildings 3 and 5, 179 feet continuing in front of
Building 7, 70 feet south
Continue south on west curb from last parking
space 124 feet to the end of driveway
North curb closest to Building 5, 90 feet east to
west
East end of complex near Building 2, 130 feet
south to north
East end of complex near Building 4, 150 feet
south to north
South side of Building 4 curb nearest the building,
85 feet east to west
Hillwood Terrace West curb nearest the building 161 feet following
the contour of the curb
East curb 60 feet north
Municipal Lot No. 1 at
H.B.W. School
West curbline next to school along contour line
north then east 253 feet
Driveway from Park
Avenue
North curbline nearest Buildings 6 and 7, 132 feet
west to east
South curbline across from Building 7, 90 feet
west to east
265 — 345 Pompton
Avenue Pilgrim Plaza
Curbline nearest the front of stores, south to north
645 feet
South side of building, 40 feet west to east
North side of building, 166 feet west to east
§ 140-40 TREES § 140-40
136:459
Name of Street or
Area
Location
339 and 341 Pompton
Avenue
Curbline in front of stores, 79 feet south to north
South side of building, 140 feet west to east
343 — 345 Pompton
Avenue
Curbline in front of stores 88 feet west to east
Eastside of building, 35 feet south to north
West side of building, 50 feet south to north
Wedgwood Drive Island curbline radius, 710 feet
Driveway between Buildings 1 and 8, 151 feet east
and west curbs
Driveway between Buildings 6 and 7, east curb (60
feet); west curb (73 feet)
Driveway between Buildings 8 and 9, east and
west curbs, 60 feet
Driveway behind Buildings 4 and 5, west curb, 402
feet, south to north
East curb near Building 4, south to north, 45 feet
Rear driveway behind Building 3, west curb, 200
feet south to north
East curb, 119 feet south to north
From Hamilton Road north curb, 197 feet west
§ 140-40.1. Schedule VIA: Angle parking. [Added 2-21-1995 by Ord.
No. 3-95]
The following streets/locations are designated for angle parking:
Name of Street Side Location
Personette Avenue
[Added 12-15-1997
by Ord. No. 15-97]
North 125 feet east from the
intersection of Linn Drive, east a
distance of 65 feet*
Sampson Drive South
(west-bound)
25 feet west from the
intersection of Grove Avenue,
west for a distance of 625 feet
* NOTE: Also designated as handicapped parking, see § 140-57.1.
§ 140-41. Schedule VII. Trucks Over Four Tons and Busses Excluded
From Certain Streets. [Amended 11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90;
9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91]
In accordance with the provision of § 140-13, trucks over four tons'
registered gross weight and buses shall be excluded from using the
§ 140-40 VERONA CODE § 140-41
136:460
following streets except for pickup and delivery of materials on such streets
or for access to pickup or delivery on a street in Verona:
Name of Street Limits
Claremont Avenue Entire length
Depot Street Entire length
Derwent Avenue Entire length
Forest Avenue Entire length
Franklin Street Entire length
Hillside Avenue Entire length
Kenwood Avenue Entire length
Linden Avenue Entire length
Linn Drive [Added 9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
Entire length
Morningside Road Entire length
Oakridge Road Entire length
Orchard Street Entire length
Personette Avenue [Amended
9-2-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
Entire length
Pine Street Entire length
Reid Place Entire length
South Prospect Street Entire length
Sunset Avenue Entire length
Woodland Avenue Entire length
§ 140-41.1. Schedule VIIA: Vehicles Over Six Tons Excluded From
Certain Streets. [Amended 11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90]
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-13.1, vehicles over six tons'
registered gross weight limit are excluded from Brookdale Avenue at Verona
Brook in the Township of Verona.
§ 140-42. Schedule VIII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-14, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as a one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
§ 140-41 TREES § 140-42
136:461
Name of Street Direction
of Travel
Limits
645 Bloomfield
Avenue (east
driveway) [Added
9-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 12-11]
North Driveway exit
645 Bloomfield
Avenue (west
driveway) [Added
9-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 12-11]
South Driveway entrance
Brookdale Court East Brookdale School parking lot
to Brookdale Avenue
Brookdale Court West Brookdale Avenue to
Brookdale School parking lot
Centennial Field
access drive [Added
11-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 16-11]
West From Veteran's Field parking
lot to White Rock Road
Church Street South From Claremont Avenue to
Bloomfield Avenue
Civic Center Drive
(east side)
North From Bloomfield Avenue to
terminus
Civic Center Drive
(west side)
South From terminus to Bloomfield
Avenue
Claremont Avenue West From Montclair line to
Pompton Avenue
Claremont Avenue West From Cumberland Avenue
west to Bloomfield Avenue
Cumberland Avenue North From Bloomfield Avenue to
Claremont Avenue
Hillcrest Terrace North From Bloomfield Avenue to
Claremont Avenue
Martin Road North From Beach Road to Pompton
Avenue
Montrose Avenue
[Added 11-20-1995
by Ord. No. 15-95]
South From Bloomfield Avenue to
Hill Street, from 7:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m. on Sunday only
Municipal Lot No. 1
[Added 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 8-14]
East First driveway on Park Place
for the municipal lot
§ 140-42 VERONA CODE § 140-42
136:462
Name of Street Direction
of Travel
Limits
Municipal Lot No. 1 South Parking lot to Bloomfield
Avenue
Municipal Lot No. 1
[Added 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 8-14]
West Second driveway on Park
Place for the municipal lot
Municipal Pool Drive
(north side)
West From terminus to Fair-view
Avenue (during pool's
summer months' operation)
Municipal Pool Drive
(south side)
East From Fairview Avenue to
terminus (during pool's
summer months' opera-tion)
Personette Avenue
[Added 12-15-1997
by Ord. No. 15-97]
West From Depot Street to Linn
Drive
Pine Street West From Depot Street to
Bloomfield Avenue
Sampson Drive
[Added 2-21-1995
by Ord. No. 3-95]
West From Grove Avenue to
Fairview Avenue
Westview Road South From Claremont Avenue to
Bloomfield Avenue
§ 140-43. Schedule IX: Through Streets. [Amended 11-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 12-90]
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-15, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street, except where yield signs are provided for.
Name of Street Limits
Durrell Street [Added
9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
8-14
Entire length
Fairview Avenue Entire length
Forest Avenue From Bloomfield Avenue south to Morningside
Road
Grove Avenue Entire length
Mount Prospect Avenue Entire length
Oakridge Road From Bloomfield Avenue south to Hillside
Avenue
§ 140-42 TREES § 140-43
136:463
Name of Street Limits
Pleasant Valley Way/
Lakeside Avenue
[Amended 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 8-14]
Entire length
Pompton Avenue
(Route No. 23)
Entire length
Sunset Avenue [Repealed
2-7-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000]
Valhalla Way [Added
9-19-2011 by Ord. No.
12-11]
Entire length
§ 140-44. Schedule X: Stop Intersections. [Amended 11-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 12-90]
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-16, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Intersecti on Stop Sign On
Afterglow Avenue and Afterglow Way Afterglow Way
Afterglow Avenue and Sunset Avenue Afterglow Avenue
Brentwood Drive and Wildwood
Terrace
Wildwood Terrace
Brookside Terrace and Linden
Avenue
Brookside Terrace
Cambridge Road and Nassau Road Cambridge Road
Chestnut Road and Beechwood Road Beechwood Road
Claremont Avenue and Cumberland
Avenue
Cumberland Avenue
Claremont Avenue and Elmwood
Road [Added 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
10-93]
Claremont Avenue
Claremont Avenue and Elmwood
Road [Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 9-08]
Elmwood Road
Claremont Avenue and Martin Road
[Added 7-20-2009 by Ord. No.
9-09]
Martin Road
§ 140-43 VERONA CODE § 140-44
136:464
Intersecti on Stop Sign On
Claremont Avenue and Montclair
Avenue [Added 7-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 9-09]
Montclair Avenue
Crestmont Road and Claremont
Avenue
Crestmont Road
Depot Street and Personette Avenue
[Added 11-20-1995 by Ord. No.
15-95]
Depot Street
Elmwood Road and Claremont Avenue [Repealed 9-3-1991 by Ord. No.
10-91]
Elmwood Road and Linden Avenue [Repealed 9-3-1991 by Ord. No.
10-91]
Elmwood Road and Linden Avenue
[Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No.
9-08]
Linden Avenue
Elmwood Road and Woodland Avenue [Repealed 9-3-1991 by Ord. No.
10-91]
Forest Avenue and Fairway Avenue Fairway Avenue
Forest Avenue and Gerdes Avenue Gerdes Avenue
Forest Avenue and Harrison Street
[Added 1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
20-2004; amended 7-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 9-09]
Forest Avenue
Forest Avenue and Hillside Avenue175
[Added 7-20-2009 by Ord. No.
9-09]
Forest Avenue
Forest Avenue and Morningside
Road176 [Added 7-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 9-09]
Forest Avenue
Franklin Street and Brookside
Terrace
Franklin Street
Glen Road and Sunset Avenue Glen Road
Gould Street and Personette Avenue Gould Street
Harrison Street and Chestnut Road
[Added 9-2-1997 by Ord. No.
9-97]
Harrison Street
175. Editor's Note: A prior entry for Forest Avenue and Hillside Avenue was repealed 9-3-1991
by Ord. No. 10-91
176. Editor's Note: A prior entry for Forest Avenue and Morningside Road was repealed
9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91
§ 140-44 TREES § 140-44
136:465
Intersecti on Stop Sign On
Harrison Street and Forest Avenue
[Added 1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
20-2004]
Harrison Street
Hillside Avenue and Forest Avenue Forest Avenue
Hillside Avenue and Forest Avenue
[Added 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
10-93]
Hillside Avenue
Linden Avenue and Elmwood Road Elmwood Road
Linden Avenue and Elmwood Road
[Added 7-20-2009 by Ord. No.
9-09]
Linden Avenue
Linden Avenue and Otsego Road
[Added 7-20-2009 by Ord. No.
9-09]
Linden Avenue
Linden Avenue and Otsego Road Otsego Road
Linden Avenue and Wildwood
Terrace
Linden Avenue
Linden Avenue and Wildwood
Terrace
Wildwood Terrace
Maple Terrace and Forest Avenue Maple Terrace
Montrose Avenue and Pease Avenue
[Added 11-20-1995 by Ord. No.
15-95]
Montrose Avenue
Morningside Road and Forest Avenue Forest Avenue
Morningside Road and Forest Avenue
[Added 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
10-93]
Morningside Road
Morningside Road and Mountain
Road
Mountain Road
Morningside Road and South
Prospect Street
South Prospect Street
Nassau Road and Cambridge Road
[Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
Cambridge Road
Oakridge Road and Beechwood Road
[Added 2-7-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000]
Oakridge Road northbound
Oakridge Road and Fells Road Fells Road
Oakridge Road and Hillside Avenue Oakridge Avenue
§ 140-44 VERONA CODE § 140-44
136:466
Intersecti on Stop Sign On
Oakridge Road and Stocker Road
[Added 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
10-93]
Oakridge Road
Oakridge Road and Stocker Road
[Added 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
10-93]
Stocker Road
Otis Place and Claremont Avenue Otis Place
Otsego Road and Linden Avenue
[Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No.
9-08]
Linden Avenue
Park Avenue and Sunset Avenue
(3-way stop) [Added 9-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 12-11]
Park Avenue (eastbound)
Park Avenue and Sunset Avenue
(3-way stop) [Added 9-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 12-11]
Park Avenue (southbound)
Pease Avenue and South Prospect
Street [Repealed 9-3-1991 by Ord.
No. 10-91]
Pease Avenue and South Prospect
Street [Added 1-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 10-93]
South Prospect Street
Personette Avenue and Linn Drive
[Added 12-4-1995 by Ord. No.
17-95]
Personette Avenue
Pine Street and Depot Street Depot Street
South Prospect Street and Harrison
Street
Harrison Street
South Prospect Street and Parsons
Court
Parsons Court
South Prospect Street and Pease
Avenue
Pease Avenue
Sunset Avenue and Brookdale
Avenue [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord.
No. 6-2001]
Brookdale Avenue
Sunset Avenue and Douglas Place
[Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
Douglas Place
Sunset Avenue and Mountainview
Road [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
Mountainview Road
Sunset Avenue and Park Avenue Park Avenue
§ 140-44 TREES § 140-44
136:467
Intersecti on Stop Sign On
Sunset Avenue and Park Avenue
(3-way stop) [Added 9-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 12-11]
Sunset Avenue (northbound)
Sunset Avenue (southbound) and
Wayland Drive (3-way stop) [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
Sunset Avenue (westerly side)
Sunset Avenue (westbound) and
Wayland Drive (3-way stop) [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
Sunset Avenue (northerly side)
Wayland Drive and Sunset Avenue
(3-way stop) [Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
Wayland Drive (easterly side)
Wayland Drive and Sunset Avenue
[Added 9-10-1998 by Ord. No.
12-98; amended 2-7-2000 by Ord.
No. 2-2000; repealed 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
Westover Road and Crestmont Road
[Added 9-2-1997 by Ord. No.
9-97]
Westover Road
White Rock Road and Centennial
Field access drive [Added
11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 16-11]
Centennial Field access drive
White Rock Road and Elm Road
[Added 7-20-2009 by Ord. No.
9-09]
Elm Road
Wildwood Terrace and Linden Avenue [Repealed 9-3-1991 by Ord. No.
10-91]
Wildwood Terrace and Linden
Avenue [Added 7-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 9-08]
Linden Avenue
Wildwood Terrace and Woodland
Avenue
Wildwood Terrace
Woodland Avenue and Brookside
Terrace
Woodland Avenue
Woodland Avenue and Elmwood Road Elmwood Road
§ 140-45. Schedule XI: Yield Intersections.
(Reserved)
§ 140-44 VERONA CODE § 140-46
136:468
§ 140-46. Schedule XII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-18, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Bloomfield
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. -Sat.
From 135 feet west of
Montrose Avenue
west for 50 feet
Park Place West 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. -Sat.
From 25 feet north of
Bloomfield Avenue
north for 75 feet
§ 140-46.1. Schedule XIIA: Dropoff/Pickup Zones. [Added 8-16-2010
by Ord. No. 10-10]
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-18.1, the following described
locations are hereby designated as dropoff/pickup zones:
Name Side Location
Community Pool Lot South From a point 38 feet
south of the main
entrance, continuing 40
feet along the curbline,
as posted
§ 140-47. Schedule XIII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-19, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
Fairview Avenue East From 28 feet north of Bloomfield Avenue
north for 50 feet
§ 140-48. Schedule XIV: Bus Stops. [Amended 11-5-1990 by Ord.
No. 12-90]
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-20, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
§ 140-46 TREES § 140-48
136:469
Name of Street Side Location
Bloomfield
Avenue
North (westbound)
Chestnut Road (mid-block), beginning
at the prolongation of the westerly
curbline of Chestnut Road and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom
Cumberland Avenue (far side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
Cumberland Avenue and extending 100
feet westerly therefrom
Fairview Avenue (near side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Fairview
Avenue and extending 110 feet easterly
therefrom
Forest Avenue (mid-block), beginning
at the prolongation of the easterly
curbline of Forest Avenue and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom
Grove Avenue (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Grove Avenue
and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
Hillcrest Terrace (far side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Hillcrest
Terrace and extending 100 feet
westerly therefrom
Linn Drive (far side), beginning at the
westerly curbline of Linn Drive and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom
Montrose Avenue (mid-block),
beginning 65 feet east of the
prolongation of the easterly curbline of
Montrose Avenue and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom
Park Avenue (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Park Avenue
and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom.
Park Place (near side), beginning at the
easterly curbline of Park Place and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom
Pompton Avenue (Rt. 23) (far side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
Pompton Avenue and extending 250
feet westerly therefrom
§ 140-48 VERONA CODE § 140-48
136:470
Name of Street Side Location
Westview Road (near side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Westview
Road and extending easterly 105 feet
therefrom
Bloomfield
Avenue
South (eastbound)
Brookdale Avenue (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
Brookdale Avenue and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom
Cumberland Avenue (mid-block), 10
feet easterly from the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Cumberland
Avenue and extending 135 feet
westerly therefrom
East Lincoln Street (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
East Lincoln Street and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom
Fells Road (near side), beginning at the
westerly curbline of Fells Road and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
Forest Avenue (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Forest Avenue
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Malvern Place (mid-block), beginning
10 feet west of the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Malvern Place and
extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
Montrose Avenue (far side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Montrose
Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
Mt. Prospect Avenue (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
Mt. Prospect Avenue and extending 135
feet westerly therefrom
Park Avenue (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Park Avenue
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Park Place (far side), beginning at the
prolongation of the easterly curbline of
Park Place and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom
§ 140-48 TREES § 140-48
136:471
Name of Street Side Location
South Prospect Street (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
South Prospect Street and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom
West Lincoln Street (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
West Lincoln Street and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom
Westview Road (mid-block), 40 feet
east of the prolongation of the easterly
curbline of Westview Road and
extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
Fairview Avenue East
(north-bound)
From 78 feet north of Bloomfield
Avenue North for 72 feet.
Pompton Avenue East
(north-bound)
Claridge Drive (near side), from
Claridge Drive south for 105 feet
Louisburg Square (near side),
Louisburg Square south for 105 feet
Nassau Road (far side), from Nassau
Road north for 100 feet
Westover Road (near side), from
Westover Road south for 105 feet
Pompton Avenue West
(south-bound)
Claremont Avenue (near side), from
Claremont Avenue north for 105 feet
Martin Road (near side), beginning at
the prolongation of north side of
Nassau Road extending north 105 feet
§ 140-49. Schedule XV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-21, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Bloomfield Avenue Entire length
Fairview Avenue Entire length
Grove Avenue Entire length
Lakeside Avenue Entire length
Mount Prospect Avenue Entire length
Pompton Avenue Entire length
§ 140-48 VERONA CODE § 140-50
136:472
§ 140-50. Schedule XVI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-22, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Intersection
(Location) Prohibited Turn
Bloomfield Avenue (eastbound) at Civic Center
entrance [Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No.
14-06]
Left (from 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. weekdays)
Bloomfield Avenue (westbound) at Driveway
to 699-701 Bloomfield Avenue [Added
6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 7-2003]
Left
Bloomfield Avenue at Claremont Avenue/
Derwent Avenue (westbound)
Right
Bloomfield Avenue (westbound) at Rockland
Terrace [Added 8-5-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96]
Right (from 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. daily)
Brookdale Court onto Brookdale Avenue
[Added 8-13-2012 by Ord. No. 4-12]
Left between 7:30 a.m.
and 8:30 a.m. and 2:30
p.m. and 3:30 p.m.
Claremont Avenue/Derwent Avenue at
Bloomfield Avenue
Left
Claremont Avenue (eastbound) at Pompton
Avenue [Added 9-10-1998 by Ord. No.
12-98; amended 10-17-2005 by Ord. No.
17-2005]
Left
Claremont Avenue (westbound) at Pompton
Avenue [Added 10-17-2005 by Ord. No.
17-2005; amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No.
9-08]
Left (from 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m., 4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday)
Driveway exit from 101 Bloomfield Avenue
(Block 9, Lots 22 and 23) at Bloomfield
Avenue (closest drive to intersection of
Bloomfield Avenue and Mount Prospect
Avenue) [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
Left
Driveway, 624 Bloomfield Avenue at
Bloomfield Avenue (southbound) [Added
3-18-1991 by Ord. No. 3-91]
Left
Upon exiting from 623-627 Bloomfield Avenue
(Block 92, Lot 7) [Added 9-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 11-06]
Left
§ 140-50 TREES § 140-50
136:473
Intersection
(Location) Prohibited Turn
Driveway exit from 699-701 Bloomfield
Avenue onto Bloomfield Avenue to Bloomfield
Avenue [Added 6-16-2003 by Ord. No.
7-2003]
Left
Driveway entrance for Bloomfield Avenue
from West Lincoln Street [Added 12-18-2006
by Ord. No. 14-06]
Right
Driveway exit from 725 Bloomfield Avenue
onto West Lincoln Street [Added 12-18-2006
by Ord. No. 14-06]
Left
Driveway exit from Block 9, Lots 22 and 23, at
Mount Prospect Avenue (closest driveway to
intersection of Mount Prospect Avenue with
Bloomfield Avenue) [Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
Left
Driveway exit from parking yard at 1 Sunset
Avenue [Added 9-2-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
Left
Martin Road at Pompton Avenue (northbound) Left
Municipal Lot No. 1 exit at Bloomfield Avenue Left
Pease Avenue (eastbound) at Lakeside Avenue
[Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 9-08]
Left (from 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m., 4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday
Pine Street at Bloomfield Avenue (westbound) Left
Sunset Avenue at the driveway entrance of 1
Sunset Avenue [Added 9-2-1997 by Ord.
No. 9-97]
Right
Woodland Avenue (eastbound) at Pompton
Avenue [Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No.
9-08]
Left (from 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday)
§ 140-51. Schedule XVII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-23, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Location Prohibited Right Turn
Malvern Place [Added
2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
1-11]
From southbound on Malvern Place to
westbound on Bloomfield Avenue
§ 140-50 VERONA CODE § 140-52
136:474
§ 140-52. Schedule XVIII: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-24, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection
(Location)
Lane Reserved Purpose
(Reserved)
§ 140-53. Schedule XIX: No-Parking During Snow Emergency; No-
Parking During Declared Emergencies. [Amended 4-21-2003 by
Ord. No. 2-2003]
§ 140-54. Schedule XX: Speed Limits. [Amended 11-5-1990 by Ord.
No. 12-90; 9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91]
Name of Street Side Location
Lakeside Avenue
[Added 7-14-2008
by Ord. No. 9-08]
35 From Bloomfield Avenue to Gerdes Avenue
(entire length)
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 140-25, no person shall park a
vehicle upon either side of any of the streets or parts of streets thereof
listed below whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such
that it covers the street or highway:
Name of Street Location
All Streets within the Municipality --
B. In accordance with the provisions of § 140-26B, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets thereof listed below
whenever the Sheriff of Essex County or his designee has declared an
emergency:
Name of Street Side(s) Location
Bloomfield Avenue Both Between Fells Road and Sunset
Avenue
Fairview Avenue Both Between Bloomfield Avenue
and State Highway Route 23
Grove Avenue Both Between Bloomfield Avenue
and Ozone Avenue
Lakeside Avenue Both Between Bloomfield Avenue
and Gerdes Avenue
Mount Prospect
Avenue
Both Between Bloomfield Avenue
and West Orange Township
Boundary Line
§ 140-52 TREES § 140-55
136:475
§ 140-55. Schedule XXI: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-31, traffic control signals shall
be installed at the following described intersections:
Intersections
(Reserved)
§ 140-56. Schedule XXII: No-Passing Zones. [Amended 11-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 12-90; 9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91]
(Reserved)
§ 140-57. Schedule XXIII: Mid-Block Crosswalks.
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-34, pedestrian crosswalks are
hereby established at those mid-block locations listed below:
Name of Street Location
Gould Street
[Added
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 17-2005]
320 feet north of the curbline of Bloomfield Avenue
Grove Avenue 179 feet north of the north curbline of Franklin
Street
Lakeside Avenue
[Added 8-16-2010
by Ord. No. 10-10]
170 feet south of the curbline of Morningside Road
§ 140-57.1. Schedule XXIV: Handicapped Parking. [Added 8-5-1996
by Ord. No. 3-96]
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-20.1, the following described
locations are restricted for use by handicapped persons:
Name of Street Side Location
Bloomfield Avenue
[Added 10-17-2005
by Ord. No. 17-2005]
North From a point 146 feet west of
Grove Avenue continuing for 42
feet (in front of 676 Bloomfield
Avenue)
Brookdale Avenue
School Lot [Added
9-2-1997 by Ord. No.
9-97]
Southwest From a point 85 feet 11 inches
northerly from the southwest
corner of the parking lot, north a
distance of 13 feet
§ 140-55 VERONA CODE § 140-57.1
136:476
Name of Street Side Location
Civic Center Lot
[Added 9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
South From a point 26 feet 6 inches
westerly from the intersection of
the easterly curb of the
northbound driveway with the
parking lot, west a distance of 13
feet
Cliff Street [Added
9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
8-14]
East Starting at a point 335 feet north
of the northeast corner of Cliff
Street and Beach Street continuing
22 feet
Community Pool
Parking Lot [Added
8-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-10]
North From a point 13 feet north of the
main entrance continuing 87 feet
(along the curbline), 8 spaces
Community Pool
Parking Lot [Added
8-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-10]
North From a point 125 feet north of the
main entrance continuing 35 feet
east (along the curbline), 2 spaces
Community Pool
Parking Lot [Added
8-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-10]
South From a point 13 feet south of the
main entrance continuing 10 feet
(along the curbline), 1 space
Community Pool
Parking Lot [Added
8-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-10]
West From a point 63 feet west of the
main entrance continuing 36 feet
west, 12 feet north and 12 feet
south, 4 spaces
East Lincoln Street
[Added 2-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 1-11]
West From the northwest corner of the
driveway at 14 East Lincoln Street
continuing 18 feet north
East Lincoln Street
[Added 2-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 1-11]
West From the southwest corner of the
driveway at 14 East Lincoln Street
continuing 18 feet south
102 Elmwood Road
[Added 7-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 9-09]
West Starting 233 feet from the
northwest corner of Elmwood Road
and Elk Road and continuing 37
feet north
FN Brown School Lot
[Added 9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 12-6-2004
by Ord. No. 16-2004]
Southwest From a point 168 feet easterly
from the southwest corner of the
parking lot, east a distance of 40
feet (containing 3 spaces)
§ 140-57.1 TREES § 140-57.1
136:477
Name of Street Side Location
Forest Avenue School
Lot [Added 9-2-1997
by Ord. No. 9-97]
Northeast From a point 13 feet 9 inches
westerly from the northeast corner
of the parking lot, west a distance
of 13 feet
Grove Avenue [Added
12-6-2004 by Ord.
No. 16-2004]
East From a point 418 feet north of
Franklin Street for a distance of 22
feet
Grove Avenue [Added
10-17-2005 by Ord.
No. 17-2005]
West From Personette Avenue for 70
feet to the area designated as “No
Parking Between Signs,” a
distance of 25 feet; thence
continuing for 66 feet (3 spaces in
front of 56 Grove Avenue)
Hill Street [Added
7-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 9-09]
North Starting 30 feet from the
northwest corner and continuing
40 feet
Hill Street [Added
7-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 9-08]
North Starting 88 feet from the
northwest corner of Montrose
Avenue and Hill Street continuing
50 feet
Lanning Avenue
[Added 9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 11-3-2003
by Ord. No. 12-2003]
Northeast From a point along the northerly
side of Lanning Avenue 304 feet
from the intersection of the
easterly side of Otsego Road with
Lanning Avenue, easterly a
distance of 31 feet
Lanning Avenue School
Lot [Added 9-2-1997
by Ord. No. 9-97]
Northeast From a point 47 feet 3 inches
easterly from the northeast corner
of the parking lot, easterly a
distance of 13 feet
Linden Avenue [Added
2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
1-11]
South From the southeast corner of the
driveway at 105 Linden Avenue
continuing for 30 feet
Linn Drive [Added
2-17-1998 by Ord.
No. 3-98]
East From a point 73 feet northerly
from the intersection of Personette
Avenue, northerly a distance of 20
feet
Linn Drive [Amended
12-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-06]
East From a point 179 feet southerly
from the intersection of Personette
Avenue, southerly a distance of 40
feet
Linn Drive [Added
5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
4-10]
East From a point 24 feet north of first
driveway continuing for a distance
of 27 feet
§ 140-57.1 VERONA CODE § 140-57.1
136:478
Name of Street Side Location
Linn Drive [Added
5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
4-10]
East From a point starting at second
driveway north for a distance of 30
feet
Linn Drive [Added
5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
4-10]
East From a point starting at second
driveway south for a distance of 30
feet
Malvern Place [Added
9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
8-14]
East Starting at a point 45 feet north of
the northeast corner of Bloomfield
Avenue and Malvern Place
continuing 22 feet
Montrose Avenue
[Added 2-17-1998 by
Ord. No. 3-98;
repealed 5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 4-10]
Montrose Avenue
[Added 5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 4-10]
West From a point 145 feet south of
Bloomfield Avenue continuing for a
distance of 30 feet
Municipal Lot No. 1
[Added 9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
Southeast From a point 58 feet 7 inches
westerly from the southeast corner
of the parking lot, then northerly
23 feet 7 inches, then northerly a
distance of 13 feet (angled)
Municipal Lot No. 1
[Added 9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
Southeast From a point 111 feet 9 inches
westerly from the southeast corner
of the parking lot, then northerly
28 feet 8 inches, then north a
distance of 13 feet (angled)
§ 140-57.1 TREES § 140-57.1
136:479
Name of Street Side Location
Municipal Lot No. 1
[Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
N/A 8 spaces, beginning at a point in
Municipal Parking Lot No. 1, the
following 2 courses from the
intersection of the northerly side
line of Bloomfield Avenue with the
common boundary line between
Tax Map Block 86, Lots 69 and 70;
from said intersection along said
boundary line northeasterly 154
feet; thence parallel with the
northerly side line of Bloomfield
Avenue 30 feet northwesterly to
the point of beginning; thence still
parallel with the northerly side line
of Bloomfield Avenue 106 feet
northwesterly, along with an area
21 feet northerly and at a right
angle to the described line
Municipal Lot No. 1
[Added 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
N/A 2 spaces, beginning at a point in
the dividing line between the lands
of the Township of Verona and the
lands of the Verona Board of
Education being distant
northwesterly 160 feet from the
intersection of said lands with the
northwesterly side line of Park
Place; thence northwesterly along
said dividing line 20 feet, along
with an area 28 feet northerly and
at right angle to the described line
Municipal Lot No. 2
[Added 9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
Southeast From a point 96 feet 3 inches
westerly from the southeast corner
of the parking lot, west a distance
of 13 feet
Orchard Street [Added
11-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 12-2003]
North From the northeast corner of the
intersection of Orchard Street and
Rockland Terrace going west for
25 feet beyond the fire hydrant
Overhill Road [Added
5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
4-10]
South From a point 50 feet east of the
southeast corner continuing for a
distance of 30 feet
Personette Avenue
[Added 12-15-1997
by Ord. No. 15-97]
North 125 feet from the intersection of
Linn Drive, east a distance of 65
feet*
§ 140-57.1 VERONA CODE § 140-57.1
136:480
Name of Street Side Location
South Prospect Street
[Added 9-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 12-98]
East From a point 100 feet north of the
intersection of South Prospect
Street with the northerly side of
Hill Street, northerly a distance of
20 feet
South Prospect Street
[Added 5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 4-10]
West From a point 155 feet south of the
southwest corner continuing for a
distance of 46 feet
Verona Community Pool
[Added 7-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 9-08]
North Starting at a point in the northeast
lot on the northeast corner of the
handicap ramp continuing west 32
feet (2 spots)
Verona Community Pool
[Added 7-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 9-08]
North Starting at a point at the southeast
corner of the pool entrance ramp
continuing 45 feet (2 spots)
Verona Community Pool
[Added 7-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 9-08]
North Starting at a point at the
southwest corner of the pool
entrance ramp continuing north
130 feet (5 spots)
Verona High School
Driveway [Added
9-2-1997 by Ord. No.
9-97]
Northwest From a point along the
northeasterly side of the driveway
193 feet 6 inches from the
intersection of the northeasterly
side of the driveway with the
easterly side of Fairview Avenue,
southerly a distance of 21 feet
Verona High School
Driveway [Added
9-2-1997 by Ord. No.
9-97]
Southwest From a point along the southwest
side of the driveway 141 feet 9
inches from the intersection of the
southwest side of the driveway
with the easterly side of Fairview
Avenue, south a distance of 65 feet
10 inches
Verona High School
Lot/Sampson Drive
[Added 9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
Southwest From a point 193 feet 6 inches
easterly from the southwest corner
of the parking lot, easterly a
distance of 26 feet (two spaces)
* NOTE: Designated as angle parking, see § 140-40.1.
§ 140-57.2. Schedule XXV: Restricted Parking for Use by Fire and
Rescue Personnel. [Added 8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
In accordance with the provisions of § 140-20.2, the following described
locations are hereby designated as restricted parking areas for use by
Verona firefighters and Rescue Squad members:
§ 140-57.1 TREES § 140-57.2
136:481
Name Side Location
Community Pool Lot South From a point 79 feet
west of the service gate
continuing 45 feet (5
parking spaces)
§ 140-57.2 VERONA CODE § 140-57.2
136:482
ARTICLE XIV
Metered/Permit Parking
§ 140-58. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, which are not defined in Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of this article:
PARKING METER — A mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with
this article placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of
this article. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend
the legal parking time established by the Mayor and Council and, when
operated, shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time and,
at the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER/PERMIT ZONE — Any restricted on-street or off-street
parking lot upon which parking meters are installed and in operation or in
which appropriate signs designate permit parking. Vehicles weighing over
7,000 pounds will not be permitted in permit parking spaces.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone,
adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of
a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb
or on the surface of the street or lot adjacent to or adjoining the parking
meters.
PERMIT PARKING SPACE — Any space within a designated municipal
parking zone specifically authorized for the parking of a single vehicle
which displays an authorized permit issued by the municipality.
§ 140-59. Designations of parking spaces.
The Township Engineer is hereby directed and authorized to provide for the
marking off of individual parking spaces in the parking meter/permit zones
designated and described in § 140-68, said parking spaces to be designated
by lines painted or marked on the curbing or surface of the street or lot. At
each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a
way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so
designated.
§ 140-60. Installation of parking meters/permit parking signs.
The Township Engineer shall cause parking meters to be installed upon
the curb, sidewalk or area immediately adjacent to the parking spaces
provided for in § 140-68 of this Article. No parking meters shall be installed
in areas where parking is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-138. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the regulation, control,
operation, maintenance and use of such parking meters. Each device shall
be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of
the appropriate coin, lawful money of the United States of America, for the
period of time prescribed in § 140-69. Each device shall be so arranged that,
§ 140-58 TREES § 140-60
136:483
upon expiration of the lawful time limit, it will indicate by a proper, visible
signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in such case the right
of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator, owner,
possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter
provided. Permit parking signs shall be installed adjacent to all designated
permit parking spaces.
§ 140-61. Operation of parking meters.
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or
Police Department or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any
parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the
operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering said parking meter space,
immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in said meter such proper
coin of the United Sates of America as is required for such parking meter
and as is designated by proper directions on the meter, and when required
by the directions on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the
deposit of the proper coin, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism
on such meter in accordance with directions properly appearing thereon,
and failure to deposit such proper coin and to set the timing mechanism
in operation when so required shall constitute a violation of this Article.
Upon the deposit of such coin (and the setting of the timing mechanism in
operation when so required), the parking space may be lawfully occupied
by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for
the part of the street in which said parking space is located, provided that
any person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter
which indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous
occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as
his occupancy of said space does not exceed the indicated unused parking
time. If said vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space and if
the meter shall indicate such illegal parking, then and in that event such
vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of
legal parking time, and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this
Article.
§ 140-62. Manner of parking.
When a parking meter space is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk,
no person shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in such parking
space in any other position than with the foremost part of such vehicle
nearest to the parking meter; when a parking meter space is diagonal to
the curb or sidewalk, no person shall park or permit the parking of any
vehicle in such parking space in any other position than with the foremost
part of such vehicle nearest to the parking meter; when a parking meter or
permit parking sign shall have been installed at the head of and immediately
adjacent to any parking space on a municipal off-street parking lot, no
person shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in such parking space
in any other position than with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to
the parking meter or sign; provided, however, that in municipal off-street
§ 140-60 VERONA CODE § 140-62
136:484
parking lots, signs shall be erected indicating that head-on parking only is
permitted. In any event, a vehicle shall be parked within the lines marked
on the pavement measuring such parking space.
§ 140-63. Violations.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Article for any
person to:
§ 140-64. Reports of violations; citations.
A. Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of
legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein
described or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of
parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular
parking meter zone.
B. Permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent
to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal indicating
that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked
beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
C. Park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space or
in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area
designated by such lines or markings.
D. Deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair
the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this Article.
E. Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device
or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
F. Park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any parking meter space
where the meter does not register lawful parking.
G. Park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any permit parking space
unless the vehicle displays an authorized permit issued by the
municipality.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers, acting in accordance with
instructions issued by the Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this Article.
(2) The state license number of such vehicle.
(3) That such vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of
this Article.
§ 140-62 TREES § 140-64
136:485
§ 140-65. Impounding of vehicles.
Any vehicle left parked for a period exceeding two hours succeeding
expiration of the maximum parking time indicated during the hours of
operation specified in the space in which the vehicle is parked shall be
towed, under the direction of the Police Department, to the Township
Garage or any other place designated by the Chief of Police for
impoundment, subject to redemption by the owner upon payment of $50,
for towing charges, and a storage fee of $10, for each day or portion thereof
during which it remains in said garage or other place.
§ 140-66. Purpose of meter deposits/fees.
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters or fees collected for
permit parking as provided herein are levied and assessed as fees to provide
for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets
and also the cost of supervising and regulating the parking of vehicles
in the parking meter permit zones created thereby and to cover the cost
of the purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation,
maintenance, control and use of the parking meters described herein.
§ 140-67. Collection of coins from meters; disposition thereof.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to designate some proper person or
persons to make regular collections of the moneys deposited in said meters
and to deliver such to the Treasurer.
§ 140-68. Parking meter/permit parking zones designated.
(4) Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
B. Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the
owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a
provision of this Article and instructing such owner to report to the
Municipal Court in regard to such violation.
A. On-street parking meter zones. On all days between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays and Sundays, parking or standing
a vehicle in parking meter space in the on-street parking meter zones
described below shall be lawful only upon the deposit of such amount as
is indicated on the meter for the specified period of time. [Amended
11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90]
Name of Street Side Location
Bloomfield Avenue North From Hillcrest Terrace to Fairview
Avenue
Bloomfield Avenue South From West Lincoln Street to
Brookdale Avenue
§ 140-64 VERONA CODE § 140-68
136:486
§ 140-69. Parking meter rates. Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001; 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 16-2004; 10-17-2005 by Ord. No.
17-2005]
The parking meter rates in the Township will be established at $0.25 per
hour up to a maximum of two or four hours as designated by the Township
Manager.
§ 140-70. Permit parking/fees.
Name of Street Side Location
Gould Street West Starting at a point 254 feet from
Bloomfield Avenue north for 292
feet
Lakeside Avenue East Starting at a point 151 feet from
Bloomfield Avenue south for 1,100
feet
Lakeside Avenue West From Bloomfield Avenue south for
1,000 feet
Montrose Avenue West Starting at a point 50 feet from
Bloomfield Avenue south for 60 feet
Rockland Terrace East From Bloomfield Avenue north for
230 feet
South Prospect Street East Starting at a point 64 feet from
Bloomfield Avenue south for 82 feet
South Prospect Street West Starting at a point 72 feet from
Bloomfield Avenue south for 70 feet
B. Off-street parking meter/permit parking zones. Parking or standing a
vehicle in a parking meter/permit parking space in the off-street
parking meter/permit parking zones described below shall be lawful
only when not in excess of the maximum parking time indicated during
the hours of operation specified, on all days except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, and only upon the deposit of such amount as is indicated
for each specified period of time in metered parking space or display of
permit as appropriate.
Name of Lot
(Location)
177Municipal Parking Lot No. 1
Municipal Parking Lot No. 2
H. B. Whitehorne parking lot (Park Street)
177. Editor's Note: Civic Center, which immediately preceded this entry, was repealed 8-5-1996
by Ord. No. 3-96.
§ 140-68 TREES § 140-70
136:487
A. Permits will be sold only for periods and fees as follows: Amended
3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 3-2005]
(1) Quarterly: $75.
(2) Semiannual: $130.
(3) Annual: $250.
B. Permits may be obtained from the Municipal Treasurer's office, which is
responsible for the administration and control of permits.
C. Permits may be color coded for use in specific municipal parking lots as
approved by the Township Manager or his designee. [Amended
8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001; 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 16-2004]
D. Criteria for the issuance of permits. [Added 12-6-2004 by Ord. No.
16-2004]
(1) The issuance of parking permits, if available, in municipal lots as
defined above shall be limited to residents, business owners and
their employees in the Township.
(2) Employees of Township business entities may be required to
provide proof of employment.
E. Vehicles exceeding 20 feet in length shall not be permitted parking in
municipal parking lots. [Added 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 16-2004]
§ 140-70 VERONA CODE § 140-70
136:488
ARTICLE XV
Towing
[Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 14-06; 9-9-2015 by Ord. No.
8-15178]
§ 140-71. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(u), a list of towing contractors that will provide towing services
for the Township of Verona ("Township") on a rotating basis and to establish,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49, regulations governing contractors who
provide towing services for the Township.
§ 140-72. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings, unless context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABANDONED AUTOMOBILE — Any automobile that is left along a public
roadway or other public property or on private property without the owner's
consent for a period of more than 48 hours or for any period without license
plates or a current registration sticker. An abandoned automobile shall
also include any automobile that is left unattended and positioned so as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic for any period of time.
APPLICATION FEE — A nonrefundable fee of $500 due and payable to the
Township at the time that a towing contractor submits an application for a
towing license.
AUTOMOBILE — Any motor vehicles that are designed to run primarily
on roads for the transport of people and/or goods, whether personally
or commercially owned or leased. For purposes of this definition, an
automobile shall be assumed to include, without limitation, private cars,
station wagons, sport utility vehicles, minivans, motorcycles, mopeds, allterrain
vehicles, other personal mobility devices and any vehicle whose
weight is 10,000 pounds or under. For purposes of determining what
constitutes non-basic towing services, an automobile does not include any
oversized vehicles, such as trucks or buses.
BASE OF SERVICE — The location where a towing licensee stations its
towing vehicle(s) when not in use.
BASIC TOWING SERVICES — The removal and transportation of an
automobile at the request or call of authorized personnel or members of
the Township's Police Department as may be required when the automobile
is abandoned, disabled, damaged in accidents, illegally parked, recovered
after being stolen or, in cases of emergency, removed from a highway,
street, or other public or private road, parking area, or storage facility, and
other services normally incident thereto, but does not include recovery of
an automobile from a position beyond the right-of-way or berm or from
178. Editor's Note: Sections 140-71.1 through 140-71.15 were renumbered as §§ 140-71
through 140-85 to maintain the organizational structure of the Code.
§ 140-71 TREES § 140-72
136:489
being impaled upon any other object within the right-of-way or berm. Such
excluded towing services are covered by non-basic towing services.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Township's Police Department or his/
her designee.
LICENSE FEE — An annual fee of $500, or as otherwise set forth in this
article, payable to the Township for the administration of towing licenses.
LICENSE TERM — A period, not to exceed three calendar years, during
which a towing licensee has been awarded a towing license. A new license
term commences every three calendar years on January 1, commencing in
2016, and expires every three calendar years on December 31, commencing
in 2018. In the event that a towing license is issued after the
commencement of a new license term, the license shall expire at the
conclusion of that particular license term irrespective of the date of
issuance.
MAJORITY OWNERS/SHAREHOLDERS — For purposes of this article, any
person or entity with an ownership interest that is greater than 10% in a
towing contractor.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which an automobile
or oversized vehicle collides with, or otherwise comes into contact with,
any other object, thereby rendering the automobile or oversized vehicle
inoperable and requiring that the automobile or oversized vehicle be towed
or removed for placement in a storage facility. This includes all situations
that are accidental to one person even if caused by the intentional acts of
another.
NON-BASIC TOWING SERVICES — All towing services that are not
subsumed within the definition of basic towing services or for towing
services to be provided for oversized vehicles.
OVERSIZED VEHICLES — For purposes of this article, any motor vehicle
that is not an automobile, as defined herein, and whose weight is greater
than 10,000 pounds. Such motor vehicles shall include, without limitation,
large trucks, buses and tractor trailers.
STORAGE FACILITY — An enclosed property leased or owned by a towing
licensee where automobiles and oversized vehicles towed from the
Township will be stored until retrieved by the owner or lessor.
STORAGE FEES — The maximum allowable sums to be charged by a towing
licensee for storage of an automobile per twenty-four-hour period or a
fraction thereof. Each new twenty-four-hour period begins at 12:01 a.m.
TOWING CONTRACTOR — An individual or entity duly licensed by the State
of New Jersey to perform towing services.
TOWING LICENSE — A license issued by the Township to a towing
contractor who has successfully met all of the qualifications and application
requirements, as set forth in this article, to provide towing services for the
Township.
§ 140-72 VERONA CODE § 140-72
136:490
TOWING LICENSEE — A towing contractor that has obtained a license to
provide towing services for the Township in accordance with the provisions
of this article, and any other applicable Township ordinances relating to
towing services.
TOWING SERVICES — The act of retrieval and removal of automobiles and
oversized vehicles from the Township by a towing licensee. For purposes
of this article, said services are subsumed within the definitions of "basic
towing services" and "non-basic towing services" herein.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts, or underreach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of automobiles
and oversized vehicles.
§ 140-73. License required; application process; investigation of
applicants.
A. No person or entity desiring to provide towing services for the
Township shall engage in the business of towing within the Township
without being a towing contractor and first obtaining a towing license
from the Township.
B. All towing contractors seeking a towing license under this article are
required to complete, sign and verify a written application on a form
furnished by the Township Clerk. The application shall include, without
limitation:
(1) The name, business address, telephone number, driver's license
number and social security number of the owner of the towing
contractor. If the towing contractor is a corporation or limited
liability company or other incorporated entity, the application shall
contain the name, residence, business address, and telephone
number of every majority owner/shareholder, as well as the entity's
employer identification number.
(2) The name, home address, telephone number, driver's license
number and social security number of each driver employed by the
towing contractor.
(3) The vehicle identification number and proof of registration for each
vehicle to be operated by the towing contractor in the performance
of towing services.
(4) A detailed listing of the equipment to be utilized while providing
towing services. The listing shall include the following information:
type of towing vehicle and whether it is owned or leased. All leased
and rented equipment must be permanently located at the towing
licensee's base of service at all times during the license term. Each
piece of the equipment must meet the minimum standards set forth
herein. Equipment that cannot meet these minimum standards
shall not be used to provide towing services.
§ 140-72 TREES § 140-73
136:491
(5) The name and address of the towing contractor's insurer, along
with copies of all applicable policies of insurance or certificates of
insurance coverage, as provided in this article.
(6) A certification that the towing contractor will be able to provide
towing services, as set forth in this article, anywhere in the
Township with a maximum response time of 15 minutes.
(7) A certification that the towing services will be available 24 hours a
day, seven days per week, when the towing licensee is expected to
be available for towing services.
(8) A certification that the storage facility(s) will remain open for the
period of time specified in this article.
(9) An agreement to abide by the fee schedule set forth in this article.
An agreement to provide free towing services for automobiles and
oversized vehicles owned or leased by the Township.
(10) A detailed site plan indicating the location of the storage facility,
the number of vehicles that can be properly stored, and the total
square footage of the storage area.
(11) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of three business
references that have known the towing contractor for at least three
years.
(12) An agreement to indemnify and hold the Township harmless from
any claims arising out of towing services provided by the towing
contractor.
C. Each towing contractor must be able to demonstrate to the Township
that it is thoroughly qualified and experienced in the towing and
removal of automobiles and oversized vehicles and that it has adequate
equipment, expertise, storage facility(s), licensing, and personnel to
perform the towing services required by this article, and in a manner
satisfactory to the Police Department.
D. A designee of the Police Department shall be charged with the
investigation of towing contractors who have submitted an application
for a towing license to the Township and shall recommend the issuance
of a maximum of three towing licenses when it is determined that:
(1) Public necessity and convenience require the towing service for
which an application has been submitted.
(2) A towing contractor has submitted a complete written application
along with requisite proofs, certifications and the applicable
application fee, as provided in this article.
(3) A thorough background investigation of the towing contractor
reveals that the towing contractor has met application
§ 140-73 VERONA CODE § 140-73
136:492
§ 140-74. License term; expiration; application fees; license fees.
requirements and is otherwise qualified to provide towing and
storage services for the Township in accordance with this article.
E. The Police Department will conduct a background check of each towing
contractor, its majority owners/shareholders, officers, principals and
employees.
(1) A background check of the towing contractor shall include, without
limitation:
(a) A criminal records search of the towing contractor, its majority
owners/shareholders, officers, principals and employees.
(b) Obtaining driver's abstracts for the towing contractor, its
majority owners/shareholders, its principals and each driver
listed in the application.
(c) Verification of ownership, registration and insurance for each
towing vehicle listed in the application.
(d) Inspection of the towing contractor's storage facility(s) to
ensure compliance with the requirements of this article.
(2) Any persistent violations and/or high incidence of motor vehicle
accidents in the past 10 years may render a particular driver and/or
towing contractor ineligible to qualify for a towing license or may
be grounds for the revocation of a towing license issued by the
Township.
(3) A conviction of a felony by any majority owner/shareholder, officer,
principal, employee or subcontractor of a towing contractor shall
disqualify the towing contractor from a towing license unless
waived by the Township, at its sole discretion.
A. Licenses are issued for a term of three calendar years, commencing on
January 1, 2016, and expiring on December 31, 2018, unless
applications are called for midterm due to public necessity and
convenience or as a result of the revocation, suspension or voluntary
surrender of a towing license previously issued to another towing
licensee. All towing licenses shall expire on December 31 of the third
year issued, commencing in 2018, irrespective of the date of issuance.
B. There is no ownership right in a towing license and there shall not be
any automatic renewal of any towing license. All towing licenses shall
expire on December 31 of the third year issued, commencing in 2018. A
towing licensee desiring to renew a towing license due to expire shall
submit a new application not later than October 31 of the year in which
the towing license is set to expire. A towing contractor desiring to apply
for an available towing license shall submit an application not later than
§ 140-73 TREES § 140-74
136:493
October 31 of the year in which the current towing licenses are set to
expire.
C. Applications for a towing license shall be made available to the public at
the Township Clerk's office every three calendar years on October 1,
commencing in 2015, and shall be due no later than October 31 of that
year. The Township shall post notice of opportunities for licenses on its
website and in the official Township newspaper. Applications will be
investigated by the Police Department on a first-come-first-served basis.
The first three towing contractors who submit completed applications
to the Township Clerk and who, upon investigation by the Police
Department, are determined by the Police Department to successfully
meet all of the requirements for towing services of this article shall be
issued towing licenses.
D. Applications for a towing license shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee of $500, payable to the Township.
E. In addition to the application fee, there is an annual license fee of $500,
payable to the Township for every year that the towing license is issued.
(1) License fee.
(a) The annual license fee is due on or before December 1 for the
following calendar year in accordance with the following
schedule:
License Fee Schedule for License Term Commencing
January 1, 2016
Year License Fee Due Date
2016 $500 December 1, 2015
2017 $500 December 1, 2016
2018 $500 December 1, 2017
(b) In the event a towing license is issued after the commencement
of the license term, the annual license fee, as assessed in this
article, is due at the time that the towing license is issued.
Irrespective of when a towing license is issued, the annual
license fee of $500 for the following calendar year of the
license term is due on or before December 1.
(2) There shall be no prorating of license fees unless a towing license is
issued on or after July 1 of any calendar year. The license fee for a
towing license issued on or after July 1 shall be $250, payable to the
Township and due at the time of issuance.
(3) The annual license fee shall be accompanied by current proofs of
registration and insurance, as well as an updated list of towing
vehicles and drivers along with evidence of their articulated
driver's license and social security number, as provided in this
article. Failure to abide by this requirement shall be a basis for
§ 140-74 VERONA CODE § 140-74
136:494
§ 140-75. Issuance and revocation of licenses.
revocation of a towing license. It is the sole responsibility of the
towing licensee to promptly provide the Township with an updated
list of towing vehicles and drivers, along with requisite proofs, as
changes in towing vehicles and personnel are made throughout the
year.
(4) An annual license fee not received by the Township Clerk on or
before December 1 for the following calendar year is considered a
delinquency and shall result in immediate suspension of the towing
license until such time as the delinquency is cured. If uncured
within 30 days, such a delinquency shall be grounds for revocation
of the towing license. More than one suspension for any reason in
any given license term, including delinquent payment of license
fees, may result in revocation of the towing license.
A. A towing license may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon any of the
following grounds:
(1) Failure to satisfy any of the requirements in § 140-73 above.
(2) Submitting a fraudulent or misleading application.
(3) A criminal conviction or disorderly persons offence involving moral
turpitude of any majority owner/shareholder, officer, principal or
employee of the towing contractor.
(4) Failure to respond reliably and promptly to calls for towing services
or any other unsatisfactory performance. However, an occasional
failure to respond to a call for towing services for good cause, such
as during periods of severe inclement weather, shall not be a basis
for suspension or revocation of a towing license.
(5) Failure to utilize safe and adequate equipment as defined in this
article.
(6) Violations of motor vehicle laws and/or municipal ordinances.
(7) Failure to maintain appropriate insurance as required by this
article.
(8) Failure to pay annual license fees in a timely manner.
(9) Violations of any of the provisions of this article or any of the rules,
regulations, and policies promulgated herein.
(10) Complaints of any kind, including, but not limited to, service,
overcharging, theft of parts, damage to towed automobiles and
oversized vehicles, discourteous treatment, and the like.
B. The Township Clerk shall promptly notify a towing contractor of the
approval or denial of his application by the Police Department.
§ 140-74 TREES § 140-75
136:495
§ 140-76. Transferability of license; display.
§ 140-77. Additional towing licensee requirements.
C. The towing license shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the towing licensee and the address of the
storage facility(s) where towed automobiles and oversized vehicles
are to be stored.
(2) The towing license number.
(3) Dates of issuance and expiration of the towing license.
(4) Signature of the Township Clerk and the Seal of the Township.
D. The Township Clerk shall send a copy of the towing license to the Police
Department for filing and shall keep a permanent record of towing
licenses issued.
E. It is the sole responsibility of the towing licensee to promptly notify the
Township of any updates or changes to information provided on the
towing license, including, without limitation, the list of towing vehicles
and drivers employed by towing licensee. A failure to promptly notify
the Township Clerk of changes to information contained on the towing
license may result in suspension and/or revocation of the towing
license.
F. If during any three-year license term a particular towing licensee
voluntarily surrenders his towing license for any reason whatsoever
and/or is suspended and/or has his towing license revoked for any
reason under this article or for any other such proper reason, then it
shall be in the discretion of the Township Manager and Police Chief to
fill such towing licensee's slot in accordance with the criteria in this
article.
A. A towing license issued under this article shall not be transferable or
assignable.
B. A copy of the towing license shall be prominently displayed in each
vehicle providing towing services for the Township. Each towing
licensee shall produce the original towing license whenever called upon
to do so.
A. Payment to towing licensee.
(1) The towing licensee shall, at its sole expense, prepare a printed bill
for distribution to the owner or lessor of an automobile or oversized
vehicle for whom towing services have been provided. The printed
bill shall reflect the fee to be paid in accordance with the rates
stated on the fee card, unless otherwise approved by the Police
Department. The printed bill shall also include the information
required to be printed on the fee card as well as a statement to the
§ 140-75 VERONA CODE § 140-77
136:496
effect that all complaints shall be referred to the Police
Department. The Police Department shall approve the format of
this form.
(2) The towing licensee shall accept from any owner, lessor or a
representative of an automobile or oversized vehicle methods of
payment in the form of cash, certified check, money order and by at
least one major credit card. A major credit card is defined as one
issued under American Express, Discover, MasterCard, or Visa. The
towing licensee is not obligated to accept personal checks for
payment.
B. Hours of service.
(1) Towing services must be provided on a twenty-four-hour, sevenday-
per-week, basis. It is required that a towing vehicle be on the
site of the event within 15 minutes of the time of the call from the
Police Department. The towing licensee shall provide the Police
Department a telephone number that will be manned at all times to
quickly dispatch towing vehicles.
(2) The towing licensee's normal hours of operation for the public shall
be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00
a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Saturday or as otherwise approved by the
Police Department. The Police Department shall be provided
twenty-four-hour access to the storage facilities.
C. Storage.
(1) The storage facility(s) shall be located within a three-mile radius of
600 Bloomfield Avenue, Verona, NJ, in order that police vehicles
transporting persons to the storage facility are never more than a
ten-minute drive from the Township's borders in the event of an
emergency and to facilitate the ability of automobile and oversized
vehicle owners, lessors or their representatives to obtain access to
affordable public transportation to retrieve their towed vehicles.
(2) At a minimum, the storage facility(s) shall include storage capacity
of up to 20 motor vehicles for the exclusive use of each towing
licensee in a secure fashion and equipped with ample lighting.
D. Employees.
(1) The towing licensee shall employ a sufficient number of employees
to comply with the minimum operational requirements set forth in
this article.
(2) No person shall be employed by the towing licensee for towing
services under this article unless he has submitted to a background
check and has been approved by the Police Department.
(3) All drivers of the towing licensee shall be over the age of 18 years
and must have a valid New Jersey State driver's license and shall
§ 140-77 TREES § 140-77
136:497
have submitted to a background check and been approved by the
Police Department.
(4) Complaints of any kind, relative to service, overcharging, theft of
parts, damage to automobiles or oversized vehicles, discourteous
treatment, and the like that are referred to the Police Department
for investigation may result in suspension and/or revocation of the
towing license.
(5) The towing licensee agrees that its majority owners/shareholders
and/or officers shall be responsible, except as otherwise provided
by law, for the negligent acts of its employees while acting under
this article.
E. Conduct of towing licensees and operators generally. No towing
licensee shall:
(1) Stand at any public street, intersection, or any public property,
awaiting for employment, without first obtaining the consent of a
police officer, or stand on any private property without first
obtaining the consent of the owner of the property.
(2) Seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his tow
vehicle in a short space in front of any disabled vehicle or by
otherwise interfering with the properly and orderly progress of
traffic along the public highways. The towing licensee shall wait
until it receives official notification from the Police Department
before commencing operations.
(3) Permit or invite loitering within or near the location of a motor
vehicle accident.
(4) Solicit, demand, or receive from any person any pay, commission or
compensation whatsoever, except the proper fee for performing
basic towing services and non-basic towing services in accordance
with the fee schedule.
(5) Pay any gratuity, tip, moneys or compensation of any kind to any
third person not involved in a motor vehicle accident or to any
Township employee for information as to the location of the motor
vehicle accident or for soliciting the employment of towing
licensee's services, nor give any gratuities, fees or other
compensation or gifts to any Township employee.
(6) Act in an unprofessional manner, be discourteous or disrespectful
to members of the public as well as representatives of the
Township. While members of the public, especially those whose
automobiles or oversized vehicles may have been towed or
impounded, may at times resort to strong language, threats and
unbecoming behavior toward the towing licensee, the towing
licensee and its employees are expected to exercise restraint and
§ 140-77 VERONA CODE § 140-77
136:498
not to respond in kind, and thereby reflect unfavorably upon the
Township.
F. Classification of equipment.
(1) The towing licensee is solely responsible for the safety,
maintenance, and operation of each piece of equipment utilized
while performing towing services. The towing licensee shall
provide a minimum of one light-duty wrecker, one car carrier
vehicle and at least one of those vehicles shall be equipped with
four-wheel drive.
(2) The towing licensee shall supply a manufacturer's certification of
the lifting capacities of the devices on each type of towing vehicle
with application submission. A certified testing laboratory test
result is also acceptable for rating lift capacity.
(3) Towing vehicles shall be equipped with two-way communications
with towing licensee's office facilities. These communications shall
be available 24 hours a day.
(4) Towing vehicles shall be equipped at all times with safety vests for
operators, first aid kits, hand tools, lockout kits, flashlight, broom,
shovel, absorbent materials to clean up spills, work gloves and
receipts for services rendered. No additional charge for use of this
equipment is permitted.
(5) Towing vehicles shall be kept in a clean and neat appearance to be
reasonably accommodating to persons who may come in contact
with such vehicles.
(6) Towing vehicles shall have the name, address, and telephone
number of the towing licensee painted on or permanently attached
to both sides of the tow vehicle in compliance with Motor Vehicle
and Traffic Laws of New Jersey (Title 39 of the Revised Statutes).
(7) All towing vehicles shall be properly permitted by the State of New
Jersey for the use of flashing amber emergency lights. Permits shall
comply with Motor Vehicle and Traffic Laws as referenced above.
(8) All towing vehicles shall be registered in the name of the towing
licensee in compliance with Motor Vehicle and Traffic Laws as
referenced above.
G. Record book of automobiles and oversized vehicles towed.
(1) The towing licensee shall record all automobiles and oversized
vehicles towed in a book kept for such purposes, which book shall
include, as a minimum, the following information:
(a) The details of each automobile or oversized vehicle serviced or
transported, together with full information of the motor
§ 140-77 TREES § 140-77
136:499
vehicle, the name and address of the owner or lessor and the
charges paid for towing services.
(b) Full information shall include, without limitation, the license
plate number, VIN registration number, make, model, color and
year of each motor vehicle.
(c) The record book herein described shall be kept open for
inspection at all times to any duly authorized representative of
the Township.
(d) All records related to towing services for the Township shall be
stored electronically and retained by the towing licensee for a
minimum of seven years.
(2) The towing licensee shall maintain a record of all personal property
in a towed automobile or oversized vehicle that it can observe in
sight at the time it comes into possession of same.
(3) Authorized representatives of the Township shall have access to
any of the records required to be kept by the towing licensee.
(4) There shall be a control number assigned by the Police Department
to be used in every instance by the Township and the towing
licensees when towing services are requested by the Township. All
forms, communications, and other documents memorializing the
transaction shall use this control number.
H. Policies and procedures.
(1) The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to
establish from time to time written policies and procedures as may
be reasonable and necessary to obtain compliance with the terms
of this article and the laws of the State of New Jersey. All written
policies promulgated by the Chief of Police are subject to approval
by the Township Manager.
(2) All regulations, policies and procedures as well as the towing
licensee's rate cards shall be made available for inspection by the
public at the Township Clerk's office during normal business hours
and at the Police Department.
I. Disputes and adjustments.
(1) Complaints by motor vehicle owners or lessors of price gouging or
any other objectionable practice by any towing licensee will be
referred to the Chief of Police, who shall promptly investigate and
resolve any disputes.
(2) Any disputes over the interpretation of this article, including the
reasonableness of any charges assessed, shall be settled amicably,
if possible, through negotiations between the towing licensee, the
Police Department and the Township Manager.
§ 140-77 VERONA CODE § 140-77
136:500
§ 140-78. Insurance.
(3) In cases where the Township has mistakenly directed that an
automobile or oversized vehicle be towed or has acted on incorrect
information supplied by official sources, the towing licensee will be
reimbursed by the Township only for the minimum applicable
towing fee as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50.
J. Subcontracts and leases.
(1) Towing licensees shall not lease or rent equipment without the
written approval of the Township. No towing licensee shall contract
space at its storage facility to another towing licensee. The
equipment must comply with the minimum requirements of these
specifications, and the contract to lease or rent equipment must be
at least for the duration of the license term issued by the Township.
All leased and rented equipment must be permanently located at
the towing licensee's base of service at all times during the license
term. Copies of all leases must be filed with the Township Clerk.
(2) Except as set forth in Subsection J(3) below, the towing licensee
shall not be able to subcontract his equipment or portions of the
work to other towing licensees.
(3) In the event that a towing licensee on the rotating list is unavailable
due to vacation, the towing licensee may subcontract his
equipment or work for a maximum of two weeks twice per year only
to another towing licensee who is approved by the Chief of Police.
A. Towing licensees shall be required to purchase, maintain, and provide
during the duration of the license proof of insurance furnished by a
reputable insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
New Jersey, containing the following coverage with liability limits as set
forth below:
(1) Garage liability/comprehensive general liability insurance policy in
an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit covering
bodily injury and property damage liability, including, without
limitation, personal injury, products liability (where applicable),
independent contractor, and completed operation coverage.
(2) Garage-keepers' legal liability insurance policy in an amount not
less than $500,000. Said policy must include both comprehensive
and collision, and an endorsement to include "on hook."
(3) Automobile liability insurance policy in an amount not less than
$500,000 combined single limit covering bodily injury and property
damage liability, including, without limitation, owned, nonowned,
and hired vehicles.
§ 140-77 TREES § 140-78
136:501
§ 140-79. Denial, suspension, or revocation of license; notice of
hearing.
(4) Workers' compensation insurance as required by law, including,
without limitation, statutory New Jersey workers' compensation
benefits, and employers' liability of at least $100,000.
(5) Excess/umbrella liability. In the event that garage liability and/or
automobile liability cannot be purchased up to the required
$1,000,000 limit, an excess liability or umbrella liability policy must
be purchased to effect a total liability limit of $1,000,000. Excess or
umbrella liability policies will not be required for garage and
automobile policies that meet or exceed the $1,000,000 minimum
limit.
B. The garage liability and automobile liability policies shall name the
Township as an additional named insured and certificate holder.
A. No application for a towing license shall be denied under this article
without appropriate notice first being given to the towing contractor.
(1) When the Police Department denies an application for a towing
license, the Township Clerk shall notify the towing contractor in
writing that the application has been denied and the reason(s) for
the denial.
(2) A towing contractor whose application has been denied may
request a hearing on said application by serving a request for a
hearing upon the Township Clerk.
(3) A hearing date shall be set no less than seven calendar days nor
more than 30 calendar days from the date of receipt of the request
for a hearing. The hearing date, time and place shall be
communicated to the towing contractor in writing via certified
mail, return receipt requested.
(4) The hearing shall be held before the Township Manager and Police
Chief.
(5) The decision of the Township Manager and Police Chief shall be
issued in writing no later than seven calendar days after the
conclusion of the hearing and is final and binding on all parties.
B. A towing license may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon any of the
grounds set forth in this article. No towing license shall be suspended
or revoked under this article without appropriate notice first being
given to the towing licensee.
(1) Notice of a hearing for the suspension or revocation of a towing
license shall be given to the towing licensee in writing.
(2) The notice of hearing shall be served upon the towing licensee by
the Chief of Police or his/her designee, either personally or by
§ 140-78 VERONA CODE § 140-79
136:502
§ 140-80. Rotary list of towing licensees.
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall specifically set
forth the grounds of complaint and the date, time and place of the
hearing to be held by the governing body of the Township.
(3) The hearing date shall be no less than seven calendar days nor
more than 30 calendar days after the notice of the proposed
suspension or revocation is served upon the towing licensee.
(4) The towing licensee shall have the right to file an answer to the
Notice and to appear in person, or be represented by counsel, and
give testimony at the place and time fixed for the hearing.
(5) The hearing shall be held before the Township Manager and Police
Chief.
(6) The decision of the Township Manager and Police Chief shall be
issued in writing no later than seven calendar days after the
conclusion of the hearing and is final and binding on all parties.
A. Upon the issuance of the towing licenses in accordance with this article,
a list of towing licensees will be generated by the Chief of Police for the
provision of basic towing services for the Township on a rotating basis.
The rotation schedule is to be determined by the Chief of Police based
upon the needs of the Township.
B. The list of towing licencees shall be maintained under the direct
supervision of the Chief of Police.
C. A towing licensee shall be placed on the rotary list in the order his
towing license was issued.
(1) Each new towing licensee shall initially be placed last on the list.
(2) No towing licensee may be listed more than once, and no towing
licensee shall be permitted to lease its towing vehicles or storage
facilities to another towing licensee in order to receive multiple
calls.
D. Towing services must be provided on a twenty-four-hour, seven-daysper-
week, basis. It is required that a towing vehicle be on the site of the
event within 15 minutes of the time of the call from the Police
Department. If a towing licensee is called and for any reason does not
or cannot perform the requested towing service, the next towing
licensee on the list will be called to perform the towing service.
E. If no towing licensee on the rotating list is able to perform towing
services when necessary, the Township is entitled to have said service
performed by a towing contractor not contained on the rotating list.
F. During adverse weather conditions or other emergency conditions, all
towing licensees on the rotating list shall give priority to requests for
§ 140-79 TREES § 140-80
136:503
§ 140-81. Fee schedule and fee cards.
§ 140-82. Non-basic towing services.
This article is not intended to regulate or set fees for non-basic towing
services, as defined in this article. Such towing services, if requested, shall
be billed at reasonable prevailing rates. The towing licensee shall submit a
towing services made by the Township over requests made by third
parties.
A. All fees to be charged for roadside, towing and storage services for
basic towing services are set by ordinance and amended by resolution
as determined by the Township's governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.49 and, where applicable, shall be in compliance with fee limits
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50. Refer to Exhibit A for the most current
fee schedule.179 A copy of the fee schedule is also posted at the
Township Clerk's Office and the Police Department.
B. There shall be no additional charges, other than those provided in the
fee schedule.
C. The fee schedule shall not apply when the operator of the automobile
elects either a specific tower or to be towed to a destination other than
the towing licensee's storage facility. In such cases, the towing charges
shall be mutually agreed upon in writing between the operator of the
automobile and the towing licensee.
D. The fees for basic towing services and storage fees set forth in the fee
schedule are the maximum amounts that a towing licensee may charge
for the initial towing service, as well as any subsequent towing services
for the same automobile.
E. Fee cards and statement of rates.
(1) The towing licensee, at his sole expense, shall prepare a written
statement of rates on three-inch-by-five-inch printed fee cards
which will be provided to the Police Department for distribution to
automobile owners at the scene of a motor vehicle accident.
(2) The fee card shall provide information on reclaiming an
automobile, the name of the towing licensee, its owner, the towing
license number, location of the storage facility, telephone number
and hours of operation for the public. The card shall also state the
towing licensee's rates for basic towing services and include all
methods of acceptable payment.
(3) The rates applicable to basic towing services performed shall be
posted in a conspicuous place, visible to the public at the towing
licensee's place of business.
179. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 140-80 VERONA CODE § 140-82
136:504
list of fees in advance for non-basic towing services to the Chief of Police,
who shall have the sole discretion in determining reasonable prevailing
rates.
§ 140-83. Enforcement; regulations.
The Police Department in general and the Chief of Police in particular shall
enforce the provisions of this article as well as the rules and regulations
adopted hereunder.
§ 140-84. Indemnity.
The towing licensee, as part of its application, will execute an agreement
to hold harmless, indemnify and defend, at towing licensee's expense, the
Township, its employees and officials from any and all claims, demands,
suit or action for personal injury or property damage brought against the
Township, its employees and officials for any activities which arise out of
any services performed under this article.
§ 140-85. Copy on file.
This article and the fee schedules contained herein shall be available to the
public in the Township Clerk's office during normal business hours and at
the Police Department during its hours of operation and shall be posted on
the Police Department's website.
§ 140-82 TREES § 140-85
136:505
Chapter 143
VENDING MACHINES, FOOD AND BEVERAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sale of ice — Ch. 164.
§ 143-1. Permit required for operation; licenses required for
machines.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person or for any body corporate
or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to:
§ 143-2. Fees.
A. Engage in the operation of one (1) or more machines or devices offered
for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other
means, dispense unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
package, but not including canned or bottled beverages, without the
necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending operation,
without first having applied to and procured a permit from the Board of
Health of this municipality so to do or without complying with any and
all of the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of
New Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by said Board.
B. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
municipality one (1) or more machines or devices offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other means,
dispense unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package,
without the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending
operation, without first having applied to and procured a license for
each such machine or device from the Board of Health of this
municipality or without complying with any and all of the provisions of
the Food and Beverage Vending Code of New Jersey (1961) as adopted
or amended by said Board.
A. The fees for permits and licenses as required by § 143-1 above, for the
purpose of raising revenue and for regulation and control, to be paid
annually to this municipality, are provided for in Chapter A175, Fees,
for the following areas:180
(1) Licenses.
B. All permits and licenses issued under authority of this chapter shall
expire on the 31st day of December each year.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 140-85 VERONA CODE § 143-2
143:506
§ 143-3. Application procedures; issuance; nontransferability.
Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
§ 143-1 above shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Food
and Beverage Vending Code of New Jersey (1961) as adopted and amended
by the Board of Health of this municipality. Such permits and licenses are
not transferable.
§ 143-4. Suspension; revocation; reinstatement.
Permits and licenses issued under authority of this chapter may be
suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Board of Health of this municipality
pursuant to the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Code of New
Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by said Board of Health.
§ 143-5. Noninterference with state and federal government.
No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 143-6. Violations and penalties.181
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.) or by imprisonment in the county jail
for a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, and each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and
each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate
and distinct offense.
Chapter 146
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood control — See Ch. 77.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 125.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 127.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
Fees — See Ch. A175.
C. Permit and license fees shall be paid to the Board of Health.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 143-2 WATER AND SEWERS § 143-6
146:507

ARTICLE I
Water Use Regulations and Rates
§ 146-1. Establishment; legislative purposes.
There is hereby established a consolidated Township Water and Sewer
Utility. The purposes of this chapter are to promote the operation and
maintenance of an adequate water supply system for the inhabitants,
businesses and institutions within the Township; to promote the proper
operation and maintenance of the Township public sewer system and to
thereby assure proper disposal of sewage and wastewater; to provide an
adequate record of water and sewer connections and appurtenances; to
prescribe a method of establishing fees and charges for connection to and
use of the municipal water supply and sewage systems; and to provide for
an appropriate method of billing such fees and charges.
§ 146-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of Articles I, II and III of this chapter, unless the context
specifically indicate otherwise, the meanings of the following terms shall be
as follows:
BUILDING — A structure having a roof and intended for permanent,
temporary or continuous occupancy.
CONSUMER — A person who contracts for water service from the Township
of Verona.
DEPARTMENT — The Township of Verona Water Department consisting of
employees of the Township who work under the supervision of the Township
Engineer.
EQUIVALENT METER CONNECTION — A standard unit of water use
applicable to a single-family residential water customer based upon a water
meter size of 5/8 linch to 3/4 inch.[Added 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
OWNER — Any person who, either alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall have legal or equitable title to any premises to which water is supplied
by the Township of Verona, whether or not such person has actual
possession thereof, and shall include but not be limited to an executor,
administrator, trustee, receiver, guardian or mortgagee in possession,
regardless of how such legal or equitable title was acquired.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any building or
structure located thereon.
SERVICE LINE — A line used to supply a single consumer only.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The duly appointed Engineer of the Township of
Verona.
§ 146-1 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-3
146:509
§ 146-3. Administration.
All powers associated with the administration of the Township of Verona
public water supply and distribution system are vested in the Township
Engineer or his duly authorized agent or representative in the Department,
subject to overall supervision of the Township Manager.
§ 146-4. Applicability.
Any person or consumer who receives a supply of water for any purpose
from the Township of Verona shall be subject to rules and regulations as
set forth herein. Where two or more persons or consumers are supplied by
a single service line, any violation of the rules or regulations set forth in
this chapter shall be presumed to be a violation as to all such persons or
consumers, and the Township may take such action as could be taken as if
such service line supplied one person or consumer.
§ 146-5. Liabilities of owner.
§ 146-6. Application for water supply.
Application for water supply must be made on forms prescribed and made
available by the Township Engineer and must be signed by the owner of the
premises to be served or by the owner's authorized agent. The filing of an
application for water supply shall constitute the consent of the owner to all
the rules and regulations pertaining to the water supply and shall constitute
an agreement to pay all rents or other charges fixed by the Township of
Verona as set forth in this chapter.
§ 146-7. Application for service connection. [Amended 7-15-2002 by
Ord. No. 7-2002]
Application for connection to the water distribution system shall be made
in writing to the Township Engineer on a form provided by the Township
Engineer and signed by the owner of the premises or by the owner's
A. The owner of any building or premises shall be liable for the payment of
the price, rent or other charges fixed herein for the use or consumption
of water services, connections, appurtenances, appliances or parts and
renewals thereof, heretofore or hereafter furnished, installed or made
by the Department in or upon such building or premises or connecting
with such building or premises, together with interest and penalties
charged thereon.
B. Any necessary changes in piping, valves or connections from the point
of connection at the curb stop to the meter, resulting from corrosion or
otherwise, and all material and labor used to increase or improve the
water supply or efficiency thereof must be made by the owner of
premises at its own expense. All changes and improvements shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the Township Engineer.
§ 146-3 VERONA CODE § 146-7
146:510
authorized agent. The water connection fee provided in this chapter and in
Chapter A175, Fees, shall be paid at the time the application is made.
§ 146-7.1. Water connection fees. [Added 7-15-2002 by Ord. No.
7-2002]
A. There shall be a connection fee payable to the Township of Verona for
all buildings, structures or premises which shall hereafter be connected
to the Township water distribution system. The amount of the
connection fee for any building, structure or premises shall be equal to
the number of equivalent meter connections assigned to the building,
structure or premises to be connected, multiplied by the water
connection fee per equivalent meter connection as set forth in Chapter
A175. The Township Engineer shall determine the number of equivalent
meter connections based upon meter size and in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) Single-family detached residential buildings having a meter size of
5/8 inch to 3/4 inch: one equivalent meter connection.
(2) All other buildings: Equivalent meter connections shall be
determined by the Township Engineer based upon the following
meter sizes:
Meter Size Equivalent Meter
Connections
1 inch 1.4
1 and 1/2 inch 1.8
2 inch 2.9
2 inch compound 2.9
3 inch 11.0
3 inch turbo 11.0
4 inch 14.0
6 inch 21.0
B. In the event of a change in meter size or the installation of an additional
service connection for any building, structure or premises resulting in
increased number of equivalent meter connections, there shall be an
additional connection fee payable to the Township equal to the increase
in equivalent meter connections multiplied by the water connection fee
per equivalent meter connection as set forth in Chapter A175.
C. In the event of a replacement of an existing service connection for any
building, structure or premises, there shall be a fee payable to the
Township for installation of water services from main to curb in the
amount set forth in Chapter A175.
§ 146-7 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-8
146:511
§ 146-8. Connections by Department only.
The water connection, including the making of the tap in the main, the
corporation stop, the curb stop, the curb box and the installation of the
service line from main to curb shall be made only by the Department under
authority of the Township Engineer.
§ 146-9. Notice to Department required.
At least 48 hours' notice shall be given to the Department before any water
connection is to be made.
§ 146-10. Water for building construction.
Any person who desires the use of water for building construction shall
make application in the manner prescribed under §§ 146-6 and 146-7
hereof. Under no circumstances shall water for building construction be
taken from the fire hydrants of the Township.
§ 146-11. Service lines.
A. Excavating work and the furnishing, installation and maintenance of
the service line from the curb stop to the meter shall be performed by a
duly licensed plumber. Such excavating and installation shall be at the
cost and expense of the owner of the premises.
B. All domestic service lines shall be three-fourths-inch Type K copper
tubing. One joint made with a copper-to-copper coupling, if necessary,
will be allowed between the curb stop and the meter. All service lines
for commercial buildings, garages, etc., or for large or multifamily
residential buildings shall be of a size and material designated by the
Township Engineer. Service lines of up to and including two inches shall
be of extra-heavy copper tubing. Larger service lines shall be of cast
iron.
C. All trenches for service pipes shall be at least four feet in depth and at
right angles to the curbline, unless special permission in writing is
granted by the Township Engineer for a variation from this
requirement. A trench shall be at a different level and shall be
separated by at least two feet from sewer and other pipes. The
completed line shall remain open until inspected and approved by the
Township Engineer. At least 24 hours' notice shall be given to the
Department for the purpose of inspecting such work. The owner shall
pay a fee as set forth in Chapter A175, Fees, for each and every
inspection.
D. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the service line
between the curb stop and the meter. The owner shall keep the same in
good repair and protect it from damage due to frost or other causes and
shall be liable for damage or loss of water resulting from failure to do
so.
§ 146-8 VERONA CODE § 146-11
146:512
§ 146-12. Control of water at curb stop.
No person, except an employee of the Department, shall turn water on or
off at a curb stop unless an emergency exists, in which case the Department
shall be advised immediately of the action taken.
§ 146-13. Multiple connections.
Permission will not be granted to supply two or more dwellings, business
premises or other premises from a single tap, except upon a special permit
which must be obtained from the Township Engineer. In all cases, separate
and distinct curb stops and curb boxes for each tenant or building must be
provided.
§ 146-14. Meter regulations.
E. All leaks in service lines shall be reported promptly to the Department
and repaired by the owner at the owner's expense. If repairs are not
made when required, the water shall be shut off by the Department and
shall not be turned on again until the line is put in serviceable condition
and all charges for damage or for loss of water have been paid.
A. All service connections shall be metered. If it is determined that any
premises has been supplied by water without a meter, then the owner of
such premises shall be liable for payment for the water consumed or
supplied to such premises, as estimated by the Township Engineer, and
shall, in addition thereto, be subject to such penalties or other charges
as may be imposed under this chapter.
B. The location provided by the owner of the premises for a water meter
shall be readily accessible for reading and maintenance purposes and
shall be situated in a manner reasonably designed to protect such
meter from damage. Compression stops shall be provided by the owner
on each side of and directly adjacent to the meter.
C. No fixture of any kind from which water can be drawn shall be placed
on the street side of a meter. The meter shall not be installed unless the
location and facilities provided shall be approved by the Department.
D. Water from the mains of the Township shall not be turned on in any
building or premises until a suitable meter shall have been installed
therein by the owner.
E. Water for building or construction purposes shall be used only through
a meter which shall be installed upon application to and approval by the
Township Engineer. No meter shall be installed for building purposes
until a building permit has been issued to the owner of the premises.
F. If a consumer believes that the meter is not registering properly, the
consumer may file a written complaint with the Department,
whereupon the meter will be removed and tested by the Department. If
it is determined that the meter registers more than actual water use by
§ 146-11 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-14
146:513
§ 146-15. Establishment of rates and charges. [Amended 7-15-2002
by Ord. No. 7-2002]
Rates and charges payable to the Township of Verona for water
consumption, connection to or use of the Township water supply system
and for services provided pursuant to this chapter shall be as set forth in
Chapter A175, Fees, of the Verona Code. The Township governing body shall
annually review such rates and charges as provided by law.
§ 146-16. Rates for water used for construction purposes.
[Amended 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
A flat rate, depending upon the size and type of a building, will be charged
for water used in building construction. The minimum charge for any
building will be as provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, of the Verona Code.
The Township reserves the right to regulate the purposes for which water
may be used during construction and to determine or limit the duration
of any water service used for construction purposes. At its option, the
Township may require water to be metered.
§ 146-17. Fire service.
a margin of error of more than 3%, there will be no charge for
removing, repairing and resetting the meter. However, if it is
determined that the margin of error is less than 3%, the owner shall be
responsible for the charges set forth in Chapter A175, Fees, for such
testing. The Department shall have the right to make periodic tests of
all meters at no cost to the consumer or owner.
G. The Department shall have access at all reasonable hours to premises
connected to the water distribution system for the purpose of
inspecting and maintaining water meters and associated equipment.
The hours of between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. shall be considered
reasonable hours for this purpose.
H. All repairs to meters, when necessary, will be made by the Department
at no charge to the owner, except when a meter has been damaged by
the carelessness of the owner or occupant of the premises, in which
event the cost of such repairs shall be charged to the owner.
I. Water supplied for Township of Verona municipal purposes, other than
fire protection, shall be metered.
J. No person except an authorized employee of the Department shall
connect, disconnect, repair, adjust or tamper in any way with the seal or
the water meter.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B hereunder, no person shall take
water from any public fire hydrant or hose plug. No fire hydrant shall be
used for sprinkling the street, flushing sewers or gutters or for any
§ 146-14 VERONA CODE § 146-17
146:514
other purpose other than fire protection purposes without authorization
of the Township Engineer.
B. The Fire Department shall be authorized to use the fire hydrants for the
purpose of fire protection. In addition, the Chief of the Fire Department
may authorize reasonable use of water from fire hydrants for the
purpose of Fire Department training and tests.
C. An annual charge shall be paid by the Township to the Department for
fire hydrant rental. This annual charge shall be set by the Mayor and
Council.
D. When, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, it is practical, private
fire service mains may be allowed for hydrants, hose connections or
sprinkler systems, for which a flat rate or meter rate will be charged,
subject to special contract terms, rules or regulations governing such
service as may be determined by the Township Engineer. The following
fees shall apply: [Amended 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
(1) Except as provided below, there shall be a flat annual fee for
private fire service mains for sprinkler systems based upon the size
of the fire service main as shall be set forth in Chapter A175. The
fee shall be applicable to all existing private fire service mains and
to private service mains installed after the effective date of this
subsection. In the case of any sprinkler system required to be
installed in any residential health care facility pursuant to the
Health Care Facilities Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 26:2H-l et seq., or in
any rooming or boarding house pursuant to the Rooming and
Boarding House Act of 1979, N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq., mains for
sprinkler systems shall be metered and fees shall be based upon
actual use.
(2) For temporary connections, there shall be a minimum fee as set
forth in Chapter A175. In addition, the Township Engineer may
require that a bond be furnished in the amount of $500 in order to
indemnify the Township for use of water for purposes other than for
fire service as well as for all expenditures or damages incurred by
the Department.
(3) For private fire hydrants, there shall be an annual fee in the amount
set forth in Chapter A175.
(4) The Township Engineer reserves the right to order that a meter be
placed in any such connection.
E. No person shall use water from a private fire service main, private
hydrant, hose connection or sprinkler system for any purpose other
than for fire protection without the written approval of the Township
Engineer. [Added 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
§ 146-17 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-18
146:515
§ 146-18. Thawing of pipes and mains.
No person shall undertake the thawing of water service pipes or mains by
the use of electric current without authorization of the Department.
§ 146-19. Discontinuance of service.
§ 146-20. Right to limit use of water.
The Department reserves the right to decrease or limit the quantity of
water used whenever, in the judgment of the Department, it is necessary or
expedient to do so.
§ 146-21. Right to modify regulations.
The Township reserves the right to add to or modify its rules and regulations
at any time.
§ 146-22. Notification of vacant buildings by owner.
Owners of vacant buildings or of buildings that are to be vacated must give
notice in writing of such vacancy to the Department so that the meter may
be read and the water turned off. If the water is left on during the vacancy,
the owner shall continue to be liable for all charges payable under this
chapter.
A. Water service may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
(1) For the use of water for any other premises or for any purposes
other than that which is described in the application.
(2) For willful waste of water through improper or defective pipes,
fixtures or otherwise.
(3) For failure to properly maintain all other connections, service lines
or fixtures owned by the consumer.
(4) For molesting or tampering with any service pipe, curb stop or seal
or any other appliances of the Department.
(5) For refusing to permit the Department access to premises for
purposes of inspecting, reading, repairing or removing meters
during reasonable hours.
(6) For nonpayment of bills for water consumed or for services
rendered or for failure to pay any fines or penalties payable under
this chapter.
B. In no case shall the water be turned on until all required repairs have
been made, if applicable, and all bills, fines or penalties payable under
this chapter, along with fees payable to cover the cost of shutting off
and turning on the water, have been paid.
§ 146-18 VERONA CODE § 146-23
146:516
§ 146-23. Activation and discontinuance of water services; written
request required.
§ 146-24. Abandoned connections.
Where connections are abandoned, the owner of the premises or applicant
shall pay for having the same shut off and plugged at the curb stop or
corporation stop (at the option of the Department) before a new connection
will be installed to the premises.
A. When requested by the owner or its agent, the Department shall
discontinue service to a premises either temporarily or permanently.
The turnoff charge provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, shall be paid
when the request for discontinuance of service is made. The turn-on
charge provided for in Chapter A175, Fees, shall be paid when service
is restored. In no event shall water be turned on until all water charges
have been paid.
B. No adjustments of water charges due to failure of the Department to
discontinue or restore water service as requested by an owner shall be
made unless the request for discontinuance or restoration is in writing
duly filed with the Department.
§ 146-23 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-24
146:517

ARTICLE II
Emergency Water Shortages
§ 146-25. Declaration of emergency.
If it is determined by the Mayor and Council that an emergency exists in
the potable water supply resources of the Township water supply system,
and if it is determined that it is necessary to protect the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the Township, the
Mayor and Council may, by resolution, declare a water emergency, and the
provisions of this article shall thereupon take effect immediately.
§ 146-26. Means of notification; time of effect; termination.
§ 146-27. Notification of Township departments.
The Township Clerk shall also forthwith give notice of the emergency
resolution to the various departments of the Township to refrain from street
and gutter flushing, hydrant flushing, fire hose testing and other similar
practices, except to the extent that such practices are deemed necessary in
the interest of public health or safety and until such emergency is declared
to be terminated.
§ 146-28. General regulations.
A. Upon the adoption of a resolution declaring a water emergency, a copy
of the resolution shall be filed with and posted in the office of the
Township Clerk and a copy thereof shall be published at least once in
the Township's official newspaper or other newspaper circulated within
the Township.
B. In addition to filing, posting and publication, notice of the emergency
shall be delivered by ordinary mail or by hand delivery to each building
in the Township which is connected to the Township water supply
system.
C. All of the provisions of this article shall remain in effect until such time
as the Mayor and Council shall adopt a resolution declaring that the
water emergency shortage has terminated.
A. In the case of a water emergency, the Mayor and Council may, by
resolution, prescribe regulations to:
(1) Prohibit the use of water from the municipal supply for any purpose
not necessary to the health, safety and general welfare of the
public.
(2) Allocate and prorate the available water supply.
(3) Reduce consumption by users.
(4) Prevent waste during the emergency.
§ 146-25 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-28
146:519
§ 146-29. Elimination of leaks.
During the continuance of a water emergency, all consumers, occupants
or owners of buildings who receive water from the Township water supply
system shall eliminate all known water leaks in their building plumbing
systems and shall use all reasonable means to maintain the same free from
leaks. If, following tests and inspections by the Department, leaks in a
building plumbing system are reported to building occupants, such leaks
shall be eliminated by the consumer, occupant or building owner within 36
hours after the sending of such report.
§ 146-30. Prohibited uses.
During the continuance of a water emergency, no water from the Township
water supply system shall be used for lawns, gardens, shrubbery or other
sprinkling, spraying or watering or for car washing or other similar outside
or outdoor uses.
B. Such regulations as may be adopted by resolution of the Mayor and
Council shall be legally binding upon all consumers and owners who
receive water from the Township water supply system, and a violation
of any provision as such Resolution shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
§ 146-28 VERONA CODE § 146-30
146:520
ARTICLE III
Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning Systems
§ 146-31. Applicability to existing installations.
All existing installations of refrigeration equipment, air conditioning or
refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment installed on any premises and
requiring the use of water supplied by the Township water system or
derived from a well shall be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed
in this article.
§ 146-32. Permit to install required.
No new installation of refrigeration equipment, air-conditioning or
refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment requiring the use of water
supplied by the Township or derived from any well shall be installed on any
premises until a permit authorizing such installation has been issued by the
Township Engineer.
§ 146-33. Application procedure; fee.
Applications, in duplicate, on forms furnished by the Township Engineer
for permits for refrigeration, air-conditioning or refrigeration and airconditioning
equipment to be installed shall specify the information
requested on the application and shall be accompanied by the fee as
provided in Chapter A175, Fees. One approved copy of the application will
be returned to the applicant to serve as a permit.
§ 146-34. Specifications.
All installations of any individual or collective system of refrigeration
equipment, air-conditioning equipment or refrigeration and air-conditioning
equipment in any premises for a single consumer shall be installed under
the following specifications:
A. All new installations of any individual or collective system of
refrigeration equipment, air-conditioning equipment or refrigeration
and air-conditioning equipment of three tons and over shall be
equipped with a water conserving device, such as economizer,
evaporative condenser, water cooling tower or similar apparatus, which
device shall not consume, for makeup purposes, in excess of 5% of the
consumption of water that would normally be used without such device,
except as provided in § 146-37.
B. All new installations of refrigeration equipment, air-conditioning
equipment or refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment of under
three tons and not using recirculated water shall be provided with an
automatic water-supply regulating device so as to limit the flow of
water in relation to the condenser temperature reduction requirements
of the apparatus. In no case shall the equipment use in excess of 1 1/2
gallons per minute per ton capacity.
§ 146-31 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-34
146:521
§ 146-35. Vacuum breaker required.
Each direct water connection to a refrigeration unit, air-conditioning unit
or refrigeration and air-conditioning unit using water for cooling purposes
and which is connected with the Township water supply system shall be
equipped with a vacuum breaker, except in installations where the water
supply piping has no contact with refrigerant. This will be the case where
two substantial and independent wall thicknesses of metal separate the
refrigerant from the Township water supply system.
§ 146-36. Relief valves required.
Refrigerating units, air-conditioning units or refrigerating and airconditioning
units with a capacity of more than 20 pounds of refrigerant
shall be provided with a relief valve installed on the outlet side of the
vacuum breaker of the water supply connection, such relief valve being
set at five pounds above the maximum water pressure at the point of
installation.
§ 146-37. Water-conservation devices.
All installations of any individual or collective system of refrigeration
equipment, air-conditioning equipment or refrigeration and air-conditioning
equipment of three tons and over shall be equipped with a water conserving
device as provided in § 146-34. The Township Engineer may permit a
diffusion device which will return the water in pure and uncontaminated
condition, without loss or waste, back into the ground instead of the device
required under § 146-34. If permission is granted for such a diffusion
device, it shall be the responsibility of the building owner to ensure that
no water is wasted or contaminated thereby. No diffusion well or recharge
basin shall be permitted under this section unless it is assured that all water
used in such refrigeration or air-conditioning system will be effectively
returned in a pure and uncontaminated condition after use to the
subterranean sources from which the water is obtained. No connection to
storm or sanitary sewer shall be permitted under this section.
C. If two or more units, which in the aggregate total three tons or more,
are installed to serve the same building or premises, said units shall be
subject to the same requirements applicable to a unit or equipment of
three tons or more, as provided in this article.
§ 146-34 VERONA CODE § 146-37
146:522
ARTICLE IV
Sewers
§ 146-38. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the meanings of the following terms shall be as follows:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20º C. expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BRANCH CONNECTION — A T or W attached to or built in a public sewer
to a building sewer.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil and waste pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning at the
outside face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the branch
connection at the public sewer or other place of disposal, also known as the
"building lateral."
COLLECTOR OF SEWER FEES — The Collector-Treasurer as appointed by
the Mayor and Council of the Township of Verona or his duly authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer in which both surface runoff or stormwater
and sewage are received.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USER — Any business, industry, store,
restaurant or office, and shall include any single-family residential dwelling
having a business or business office located therein if both the residential
use and the business or office use are served by the same water meter.
EQUIVALENT CONNECTION — A standard unit of sewer use applicable to
a single-family residential user, as defined in this chapter, based upon the
averaged gallons per day (GPD) of metered water consumption for a singlefamily
residential dwelling and established as being 220 GPD.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of
foods and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
HEALTH OFFICER — The duly appointed Health Officer of the Township of
Verona.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes, trade,
businesses as distinguished from domestic or sanitary wastes.
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Any school, church, hospital or correctional
facility or building, whether publicly or privately owned, but shall not
include any facility or building owned or operated by the Township of
Verona.[Amended 4-6-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL USER — Any apartment building or
multifamily house or building, including buildings under cooperative or
§ 146-38 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-38
146:523
condominium form of ownership, in which more than one dwelling unit is
served by a single water meter.
OPERATOR — The licensed operator of the sewage treatment plant duly
appointed by the Mayor and Council of the Township of Verona.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of
solution.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sanitary sewer to which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights and which is controlled and maintained by a
governmental agency or public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and in which
stormwater, surface water and groundwaters are not permitted to enter and
flow.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from any buildings
or structures; also referred to as "wastewater."
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of mechanical,
biological or chemical devices or structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USER — Any single-family residence,
house, dwelling, condominium unit or townhouse unit which is served by a
single separate water meter.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation and/or adversely
affects the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater
treatment plant.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A pipe or conduit for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Sewage Treatment Plant,
duly appointed by the Mayor and Council of the Township of Verona.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The duly appointed Engineer of the Township of
Verona.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continually or intermittently.
§ 146-38 VERONA CODE § 146-39
146:524
§ 146-39. Connection required.
The owners of all houses, buildings, public buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment or recreation or other purposes, situated
within the Township and abutting on, or having a permanent right of access
to, any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in
the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the Township, are hereby
required at their expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, within 60 days after the date of the
official notice from the Township of Verona to do so, provided that said
public sewer is within 100 feet of any property line or right of access. The
sewer service charge for the use of the sewer shall begin 30 days after the
date of the official notice as set forth above.
§ 146-40. Permits; rules.
A. It shall be unlawful to install any building sewer or to make any
connection to the public sewer without first obtaining a building sewer
permit, and such installations and connections shall be made under the
direction and supervision of the Township Engineer in the manner
hereinafter set forth.
B. The fee for all building sewer permits shall be as set forth in Chapter
A175, Fees. [Amended 4-6-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
C. The owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by
the Township. The permit applications shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Township Engineer or required by state law.
D. Permits will expire four weeks after date of issue but will be subject to
renewal for a further period of four weeks.
E. Where the building sewer has been extended by the Township from
main or lateral to the curb or property line, the following rules shall
apply:
(1) After securing the building sewer permit, the applicant shall notify
the Township Engineer when the excavation is made and the pipe is
installed and connected. No backfill is to be placed without the
written permission of the Township Engineer.
F. Where the building sewer has not been extended by the Township from
main or lateral to the curb or property line, the following rules shall
apply:
(1) The applicant shall secure a building sewer permit and pay the
required fee.
(2) The applicant shall do all of the excavation required, supply all of
the materials and do all of the work.
§ 146-39 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-40
146:525
(3) The applicant shall notify the Township Engineer 24 hours before
the excavation is ready for the installation of the branch
connection.
(4) After the inspection by the Township Engineer, the work shall be
completed by the applicant.
(5) The street opening fee, backfilling and repaving shall be as
required under Chapter 125, Streets and Sidewalks.
G. The joint made between the building sewer and the building drain shall
be secure and watertight. Standard fittings, approved by the Township
Engineer and/or the Plumbing Inspector, shall be used for this joint.
H. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard.
I. It shall be the duty of the Township Engineer when notified to inspect
the installation of any branch connection or building sewer, to
determine whether the same complies with all of the provisions hereof
and any other ordinances, the enforcement of which is within his
jurisdiction. When he is satisfied that the installation complies with the
aforesaid requirements, he shall evidence his written approval on the
permit.
J. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Township of Verona from any loss or damage that may indirectly or
directly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. In order
to guarantee and protect the Township of Verona for any loss or damage
that may indirectly or directly occur by the installation of said building
sewer from the main to the curb or property line or the excavation for
the installation of any branch connection or any other work, the owner
or his agent shall post with the Township of Verona a performance bond
in the amount of $5,000 to guarantee the payment of any damage which
may occur to the property of the Township of Verona; such performance
bond shall be written by a surety company authorized to do business in
the State of New Jersey and approved by the Mayor and Council of the
Township of Verona and shall be posted with the Township of Verona
prior to the issuance of the building sewer permit.
K. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and the rear building is an accessory use as established
under Chapter 150, Zoning, and while both buildings remain under the
same ownership.
L. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Township
Engineer and/or Plumbing Inspector, to meet all the requirements of
this chapter.
§ 146-40 VERONA CODE § 146-40
146:526
§ 146-41. Meters and measuring devices.
All meters or other measuring devices installed or required to be used under
the provisions of this chapter shall be under the control of the Township
and of a type specified by the Township and shall be installed by the owner
at the owner's expense. The owner of the property upon which any such
measuring device is installed shall be responsible for its maintenance and
safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made at the owner's cost,
whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or
other causes. Costs for such repairs, if made by the Township, shall be due
and payable at the same time, collected in the same manner and be subject
to the same penalties as are the charges for sewer use.
§ 146-42. Tampering with system equipment.
No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the Township of
Verona sewage disposal system.
§ 146-43. Use restrictions.
M. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by
a sewage ejector.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
swimming pool or pond water or cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewer:
(1) Explosive wastes. Wastes which create fire or explosive hazard to
the treatment plant, collection system or the operation of the
system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene and ethers.
Materials that flash below 90º using the Pensky-Martens closed
tester (ASTM-D93-80) are prohibited.
(2) Corrosive wastes. Wastes which will cause corrosion or
deterioration of the treatment plant or collection system. All wastes
shall have a pH not less than five point five (5.5) or greater than
9.5.
(3) Solids and viscous wastes. Solids or viscous wastes in amounts
which would cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or otherwise
interfere with the proper operation of the treatment plant.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, uncomminuted
garbage, bones, hides or fleshings, cinders, sand, glass, ashes,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, rags, feathers, offal, plastics, wood,
§ 146-40 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-43
146:527
paunch manure, hair, entrails, lime residues, beet or distillery
slops, chemical slops, chemical residues, paint or ink residues,
cannery waste bulk solids, antibiotic wastes, free mineral acid,
concentrated pickling wastes or plating solutions or any other solid
or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow or
other interference with the proper operation of the Township of
Verona's sewerage treatment plant system.
(4) (Reserved)182
(5) Noxious materials. Noxious or malodorous compounds which,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are or may be
sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance or
repair.
(6) Radioactive wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders
issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use
and which will, or may, cause damage or hazards to the treatment
plant or personnel operating the system.
(7) Interference. Any waste, including oxygen-demanding wastes,
released at a flow rate or concentration which will cause
interference with the Verona treatment plant or with disposal of the
sludge resulting from the treatment process.
(8) Excessive discharge rate. Industrial wastes discharged in a slug of
adequate volume or strength to cause a treatment process upset or
loss of treatment plant efficiency.
(9) Heat. Any discharge which contains heat in amounts which could
inhibit biological activity in the treatment process or cause loss of
treatment efficiency or cause the temperature of the influent to the
Verona treatment plant to exceed 104º C.
(10) Unpolluted wastes. Any unpolluted water, including but not limited
to cooling water or uncontaminated stormwater, which will
increase the hydraulic load on the treatment plant.
(11) Dilution water. Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes
which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration
limits.
(12) Violations. Wastes which cause the Verona Treatment Plant to
violate its New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit, applicable receiving water standards, permit regulating
sludge disposal or any other permit issued to the Township of
Verona sewerage treatment plant.
182. Editor's Note: Former § 146-43B(4), Garbage or refuse, was repealed 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 12-96.
§ 146-43 VERONA CODE § 146-43
146:528
(13) Extremely hazardous wastes. Those wastes designated by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency as sufficiently
toxic that they shall not be discharged to a sanitary sewer in any
concentration.
(14) Septic tank or cesspool wastes will not be accepted.
(15) Slug. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the
average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation and/or may adversely affect the collection system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
(16) Any wastewater which contains total dissolved sulfides in excess
of:
(a) Two-tenths milligrams per liter where the discharge's point of
connection to the system is a gravity sewer line; or
(b) Four-tenths milligrams per liter where the discharge's point of
connection to the system is a pressure of force main.
(17) Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances in
such concentration either singly or by interaction with other wastes
as to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to interfere with
any sewage treatment process, or to create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(18) Any high strength waste or special waste.
(19) Any water or waste which may contain soluble oil or grease or any
water containing floatable fats, oils, greases or other substances in
sufficient concentrations that might solidify and/or cause to solidify
or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F. and 150º F. (0º
C. and 65º C.).
(20) Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions or other
wastes which are highly colored or wastes which are of usual
volume, concentration of solids or composition that may create
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the system or the quality of the effluent from
the system.
(21) Concentration and characteristics.
(a) Any waters containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual provision, attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment
plant.
§ 146-43 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-43
146:529
Characteristics Item Limitation
Temperature Maximum 110º
ph Allowable
range
5.5 to 9.0
Biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD)
5-day maximum 220 mg/l
Suspended solids Maximum 220 mg/l
Color Maximum 220 co. pt. units
Nitrogen Maximum 40 ppm
Phosphorus Maximum 15 ppm
(b) The above listed concentrations and characteristics may be
altered by the Township of Verona's sewage treatment plant as
required by regulatory agencies, treatment or reuse
requirements or in the event of cumulative overload of the
system.
(c) Maximum allowable concentrations. Users not subject to
categorical standards shall not exceed following limits:
Item Mg/l
Acetylene generation sludge None
Arsenic 1.0
Barium 4.2
Cadmium 0.1
Chromium (total) 8.0
Copper 8.0
Cyanide 0.1
Iron (total) 5.0
Lead 0.5
Mercury 0.1
Mineral acid (free) None
Nickel 1.0
Nitrous oxide 10.0 10.0
Oils, minerals 15.0
Selenium 0.05
Silver 0.03
Sulphur dioxide 0.4
Zinc 8.0
C. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
§ 146-43 VERONA CODE § 146-43
146:530
§ 146-44. Sewer extensions.
§ 146-45. Power and authority of inspectors.
The Township Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the
Township bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter in and upon all buildings, structures and properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 146-46. Sewer connection fees.
(1) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when necessary,
in the opinion of the Township Engineer, for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients. Grease and
oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight
and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in
place, shall be gastight and watertight.
(2) Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
A. Extensions of the public sewer lines shall be by and at the expense of
the person making the extension. He shall submit complete plans and
specifications prepared by a qualified licensed professional engineer, of
the extension that is contemplated, to the Township Engineer, along
with an application for a sewer extension permit, the fee for which shall
be $100, to be paid to the Township of Verona when the application is
made.
B. The applicant shall proceed with the construction of the sewer
extension as shown on the approved plans, and all of his work shall be
subject to the inspection and approval of the Township Engineer. No
work shall be covered or backfilled without the approval of the
Township Engineer.
C. In addition to the sewer extension permit fee provided for in this
section, the applicant or the user of the sewer shall secure a building
sewer permit for each connection to the extension and shall pay the fee
provided for under this chapter.
D. Any permit for sewer extension shall expire at the end of six months
from the date of issue. Such permit may be extended by the Township
Engineer for an additional six months if, in his opinion, such an
extension is in the interest of the Township.
A. Fee established.
§ 146-43 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-46
146:531
§ 146-47. Sewer user charges.
There is hereby established an annual sewer user charge for use of the
public sanitary sewer of the Township of Verona. Such annual charges
shall be payable to the Township by the owner of any building or premises
connected to the Township sanitary sewer and shall be payable in the
amount and in the manner prescribed hereunder.
(1) There shall be a connection fee payable to the Township of Verona
for all buildings, structures or premises which shall hereafter be
connected to the Township sanitary sewer system. The amount of
the connection fee for any building, structure or premises shall be
determined by the number of equivalent connections assigned to
the building, structure or premises to be connected, in accordance
with the following standards:
(a) Single-family detached residential buildings: one equivalent
connection.
(b) 183All other buildings: Equivalent connections shall be
determined by the Township Engineer based upon projected
daily sewer use flows by applying design flow standards
promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, as amended and supplemented. The projected daily
sewer use flow shall be divided by 220 gallons, and the
resulting quotient shall be the number of equivalent
connections assigned to the building, structure or premises.
(2) The fee for each equivalent connection shall be as set forth in
Chapter A175, Fees, of the Verona Code as may be from time to
time amended by the Verona governing body.
B. Connection fees shall be due and payable to the Township at such time
as a building sewer permit is issued for connection to the sanitary
sewer system. [Amended 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
C. In the event of a change in the use of any building, structure or
premises resulting in an increase in projected daily sewer use flows, the
Township Engineer shall determine the increase in the equivalent
connections assigned to such building, structure or premises and there
shall be an additional connection fee payable to the Township equal to
the increase in equivalent connections multiplied by the fee for each
sewer connection fee per equivalent connection as set forth in Chapter
A175. [Added 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
A. Single-family residential users. The annual charge for a single-family
residential user shall be equal to the charge for one equivalent
connection as set forth in Chapter A175, Fees, of the Verona Code.
183. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(b), regarding other residential buildings, was
repealed 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation
of former Subsection A(1)(c) as A(1)(b).
§ 146-46 VERONA CODE § 146-47
146:532
§ 146-47.1. Establishment of rates and charges. [Added 7-15-2002
by Ord. No. 7-2002]
Rates and charges payable to the Township of Verona for sewer connection
fees, sewer user charges, and for services provided pursuant to this chapter
shall be as set forth in Chapter A175, Fees, of the Verona Code. The
Township governing body shall annually review such fees and charges as
provided by law.
B. Institutional users. The annual charge for institutional users of the
Township sanitary sewer shall be an amount equal to the fee for one
equivalent connection as established under Chapter A175, Fees, of the
Verona Code multiplied by the number of equivalent connections
chargeable to the sewer user as determined by the Township Engineer
in accordance with the method prescribed under Subsection D hereof.
[Amended 4-6-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
C. All other users. The annual charge for all other users of the Township
sanitary sewer, including but not limited to multifamily residential,
commercial and industrial users, shall be an amount equal to the fee for
one equivalent connection as established under Chapter A175, Fees, of
the Verona Code multiplied by the number of equivalent connections
chargeable to the sewer user as determined by the Township Engineer
in accordance with the method prescribed under Subsection D hereof.
[Added 4-6-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
D. For all users of the Township sanitary sewer, except single-family
residential users, the Township Engineer shall determine the average
gallons per day of metered water consumed by the sewer user by using
a base year period as established by the Township Engineer. The base
year shall be reviewed annually and may be changed as necessary to
provide equitable computations of equivalent connections. [Note:
Gallons per day (gpd) for billing purposes is based upon metered
consumption for the previous year.] The Township Engineer shall then
divide averaged gallons per day (user gpd) by 220 gallons per day. The
resulting quotient rounded to the nearest whole number shall
constitute the number of equivalent connections. In no event shall the
number of equivalent connections chargeable to such user be less than
one equivalent connection. [Added 4-6-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
§ 146-47 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-47.1
146:533

ARTICLE V
Billing; Enforcement
§ 146-48. Combined water and sewer billing.
There shall be a combination water and sewer billing in order that charges
for water use and consumption and annual sewer user charges shall be
billed by the Township in quarterly installments. All bills shall be payable
to the Township within 30 days from the date such bills are mailed by the
Township.
§ 146-49. Reduced sewer user charge for certain senior citizens and
disabled persons. [Added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 6-98184]
A. There shall be a reduction in the annual sewer user charge which is
charged to or collected from any person residing in the Township of
Verona who is of the age of 65 or more years, or less than 65 years of
age and is permanently and totally disabled according to the provisions
of the federal Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C, § 301 et seq., or disabled
under any federal law administered by the United States Department of
Veterans Affairs if the disability is rated as 60% or higher, and the
person either is annually eligible to receive assistance under the
Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and Disabled (PAAD) program,
P.L. 1975, c. 194 (N.J.S.A. 30:4D-20 et seq.), or has a total income not in
excess of $10,000 per year exclusive of benefits under any one of the
following:
(1) The federal Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq., and all
amendments and supplements thereto;
(2) Any other program of the federal government or pursuant to any
other federal law which provides benefits in whole or in part in lieu
of benefits referred to in, or for persons excluded from coverage
under, Subsection A(1) of this section, including but not limited to
the federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974, 45 U.S.C. § 231 et
seq., and federal pension, disability and retirement programs, or
(3) Pension, disability or retirement programs of any state or its
political subdivisions, or agencies thereof, for persons not covered
under Subsection A(1) of this section, except that the total amount
of benefits to be allowed exclusion by any owner under Subsection
A(2) or (3) of this section shall not be in excess of the maximum
amount of benefits payable to, and allowable for exclusion by, an
owner in similar circumstances under Subsection A(1) of this
section.
184. Editor's Note: This ordinnce also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 146-49
through 146-52 as §§ 146-50 through 146-53, respectively.
§ 146-48 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-49
146:535
§ 146-50. Fees and charges to be a lien.
All charges payable to the Township for connection to or use of the
Township water supply system, consumption of water or otherwise payable
under this chapter and all charges for connection with and use of the
Township sewers and drains shall draw the same interest from the time they
become due as taxes upon real estate in the Township and shall be a lien
upon the premises connected until paid, and the Township shall have the
same remedies for collection thereof, with interest, costs and penalties, as
it has by law for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
§ 146-51. Service shut off for nonpayment.
In the event that payment of said combination water and sewer bill or
any part thereof is not made when such payment shall become due, the
Township shall have the right, upon due notice in accordance with law, to
cause the water supply to be shut off from such house, building or other
premises so supplied and to not turn on the same again until all arrears,
with interest and penalties, shall be fully paid.
§ 146-52. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any of the provisions
of this chapter, other than for nonpayment of charges due under this
chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 and may be imprisoned in the county jail for a term of not more
than 90 days. Each day for which a violation of this chapter shall continue
to exist shall constitute a separate violation hereunder.
B. The amount of the reduced sewer user charge available to eligible
persons under this section shall be as set forth in Chapter A175, Fees,
of the Verona Code.
C. Any person who claims to be eligible for a reduction under this section
shall complete and sign an application for reduction on forms to be
made available by the Township. Applications shall be filed in the office
of the Township Treasurer by not later than December 31 of the year in
which a reduction is claimed. In order to qualify for a reduction, the
applicant must establish that the applicant was eligible for the
reduction as of December 31 of the year preceding the year in which a
reduction is claimed. The Township shall have the right to require such
information as may be reasonably necessary to support an applicant's
claim for a reduction and to disallow any claim based upon an
incomplete application. In addition, the Township shall have the right to
require an applicant to annually update information in order to support
such applicant's continued claim for eligibility under this section.
Updated information shall be on forms provided by the Township and
shall be filed with the office of the Township Treasurer by not later than
June 1 of each year.
§ 146-49 VERONA CODE § 146-53
146:536
§ 146-53. Severability.
The invalidity or unconstitutionality of any section, clause, sentence or
provision of this chapter shall not affect or impair the validity of any other
part of this chapter which can be given effect without such invalid part or
parts.
§ 146-53 WATER AND SEWERS § 146-53
146:537
Chapter 148
YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 148-1. Findings.
The township governing body finds that it should establish a Youth Advisory
Committee in order to familiarize township youth with policy, planning
and procedures utilized by the township governing body in formulating
governmental decisions; to promote positive interaction between township
youth and all segments of the township; to provide a forum for township
youth and to provide them with an opportunity to offer meaningful and
significant ideas and solutions to the problems and dilemmas confronting
the township; to provide a forum for township youth to provide them with
an opportunity to voice their concerns and needs to the township governing
body; and to provide an opportunity whereby the youth of the Township of
Verona can earn a stake in township affairs and to otherwise foster and
promote respect for and commitment to the community of Verona and its
government.
§ 148-2. Committee established.
There is hereby established a Youth Advisory Committee in the Township of
Verona.
§ 148-3. Membership.
Membership on the Committee shall consist of eight youths representing
a cross section of the high-school-aged population in the township, two
youths of college age, two adult advisors and one member of the township
governing body. All members shall be residents of the Township of Verona.
All members shall be voting members.
§ 148-4. Appointment; terms; vacancies.
A. Appointment. All members of the Committee shall be appointed by the
township governing body.
B. Terms. The one member from the township governing body shall serve
at the pleasure of the governing body. The terms for all other members
shall be two years, except that of the initial members appointed; the
terms of four high-school-aged members, one college-aged member and
one adult member shall expire June 30, 1998, and the terms of all
remaining members shall expire June 30, 1999.
C. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur in the membership of the Committee
by reason of the resignation, incapacity or death of a member or if the
township governing body has declared that a vacancy exists because
the governing body has determined that a member has been absent for
50% or more of regularly scheduled meetings in any twelve-month
period, then the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 146-53 VERONA CODE § 148-5
148:538
§ 148-5. Organization; officers; meetings; minutes.
§ 148-6. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Committee shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
A. The Committee shall organize and shall adopt and maintain bylaws.
B. The Committee shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Treasurer
and Secretary from among its members. The terms of officers shall be
one year.
C. The Committee shall establish a calendar of regular meeting dates and
shall meet accordingly.
D. The Secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings of the Committee.
Copies of the minutes and copies of official correspondence of the
Committee shall be kept on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
E. Standing and ad hoc committees may be established as needed.
A. Holding monthly meetings to plan and evaluate organized activities and
programs at the Verona Community Center and elsewhere within the
township.
B. Holding monthly meetings to discuss and assess the needs and
concerns of the youth within the township.
C. Holding monthly meetings to review the policy, planning and
procedures utilized by the township governing body in formulating
governmental decisions.
D. Keeping abreast and knowledgeable about the issues which confront
the citizens of the township, both young and old.
E. Keeping abreast and knowledgeable about issues which confront the
township governing body.
F. Providing a forum for the cultivation and discussion of meaningful and
significant ideas and solutions to the problems and dilemmas
confronting the township as a whole.
G. Seeking to foster respect for and commitment to the township.
H. Reporting to the township governing body on a quarterly basis as to the
Committee's assessments and recommendations; as to the township's
organized activities and programs; as to the township governing body's
policies, planning and procedures; and as to the concerns and needs of
the youth within the township.
§ 148-5 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 148-6
148:539
Chapter 150
ZONING
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 152
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 148-6 VERONA CODE § 148-6
152:540
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 6-8-1981]
§ 152-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Verona of a general and permanent nature, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp. and consisting of Chapters 152 through 164, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the Code of the Borough of Verona,
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 152-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 152-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 152-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of
the Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public and final action is taken on this ordinance. If this
ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 152-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code, so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Verona" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. When
such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted,
they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in
the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and supplements
thereto.
§ 152-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in
§ 152-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 152-6
152:541
a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 152-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary or someone authorized and directed by
him to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 152-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than five
dollars ($5.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.).
§ 152-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 152-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 152-11. Repealer.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 152-6 VERONA CODE § 152-12
152:542
§ 152-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 152-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 152-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to December
12, 1979.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing duties therefor
which are not provided for in the Code hereby adopted and which are
not in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
H. Any ordinance establishing standards for the control of air pollution.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one (1) or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of
Health that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
Chapter and section-number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.
(1) Penalties. Penalty provisions are hereby added to certain
ordinances of the Borough of Verona, as enumerated below, to
provide for penalties of not less two dollars ($2.) nor more than five
§ 152-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 152-13
152:543
hundred dollars ($500.) for each violation; each day a violation
continuing constituting a separate offense.
(a) Section 157.8 (to the provisions of an ordinance adopted
12-11-1941, by the Board of Health, as codified and readopted
8-20-1963 by the Mayor and Council).
(b) Section 162.12 (to the provisions of an ordinance adopted
7-8-1943 by the Board of Health, as codified and readopted
8-20-1963 by the Mayor and Council).
(c) Section 164-3 (to the provisions of an ordinance adopted
12-13-1929 by the Board of Health, as codified and readopted
8-20-1963 by the Mayor and Council).
§ 152-13 VERONA CODE § 152-13
152:544
Chapter 155
AIR POLLUTION
Chapter 157
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 68. Noise — See Ch. 96.
§ 157-1. Keeping of animals restricted.
No rabbits, goats, guinea pigs, pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese or other fowl
shall be kept within the borough except under the conditions prescribed in
the following sections.
§ 157-2. Permit required; revocation; annual renewal; fee.
A permit shall be required from the Board of Health for the keeping of
the animals described in § 157-1, which permit shall be revocable at the
pleasure of the Board, and must be renewed annually. A fee of one dollar
($1.) shall be paid by the person receiving such permit.
§ 157-3. Keeping in tenements prohibited.
Under no condition shall any of the animals or fowl described in § 157-1 be
kept or maintained in tenement houses or tenement house yards.
§ 157-4. Running at large.
Animals described in § 157-1 shall under no circumstances be allowed to
run at large but shall be kept confined in a suitable house or coop with an
enclosed runway.
§ 157-5. Floors required in coops and houses.
Any house or coop for animals designated in § 157-1 shall be floored with
cement or other approved flooring, but the runway shall not be floored.
§ 157-6. Coops and houses to be kept clean.
Any house for animals designated in § 157-1 must be kept thoroughly clean
at all times and shall be cleaned at least once in every week and more often
if the Health Officer shall so require.
§ 152-13 AIR POLLUTION § 157-7
155:545
§ 157-7. Location of coops and houses.
No part of any house or runway for animals designated in § 157-1 shall
be less than thirty (30) feet from the doors or windows of any dwelling
occupied by human beings, whether for dwelling or business purposes.
§ 157-8. Violations and penalties.185
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not
less than two dollars ($2.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for
each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 162
HORSEFLESH
§ 162-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
HORSEMEAT or HORSEFLESH — The flesh of the equine animal family
when same is offered for sale in the borough, and either or both shall be
deemed correct within the meaning of this chapter.
§ 162-2. Permit required for storage, sale or distribution.
No person shall store, hold, sell or offer for sale or expose for sale or in
anywise aid in the selling or offering or exposing for sale or distribute or aid
in the distribution of any horseflesh for any purpose, without first having
obtained a written permit therefor from the Board of Health of the borough,
upon written application made for such permit.
§ 162-3. Permit required for wholesale meat dealing.
No wholesale dealer in meats shall hold or store or sell or offer for sale
to any person any horse meat, unless such person shall first obtain a
written permit of authority issued by the Board of Health of the borough to
purchase horseflesh.
§ 162-4. Conspicuous marking of packages.
No person shall store, hold, sell or offer or expose for sale or in anywise
aid in the selling or offering or exposing for sale any horseflesh unless
every carcass, piece, parcel, package and container thereof shall have
conspicuously attached thereto a label or tag not less than three (3) inches
185. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 152, General Provisions Board of
Health, Art. I).
§ 157-7 VERONA CODE § 162-4
162:546
wide and four (4) inches long, on which shall be printed or stamped, in
letters not less than one (1) inch in height, the word "horseflesh."
§ 162-5. Regulations on the manufacture of provisions; permit
required.
No provision manufacturer shall manufacture provisions from horseflesh
while manufacturing provisions from other food animals. No manufacturer
shall use the flesh of horses and other food animals in the manufacture
of their product. No manufacturer shall manufacture provisions from
horseflesh without first having obtained a written permit therefor from the
Board of Health of the borough, upon written application made for such
permit. Every manufacturer whose product is made of horseflesh shall have
conspicuously attached to such product a label or tag not less than three (3)
inches wide and four (4) inches long, on which shall be printed or stamped,
in letters not less than one (1) inch in height, the words "horseflesh."
Every manufacturer of provisions manufactured from horseflesh shall, in
all advertising, state conspicuously that the product is manufactured from
horseflesh.
§ 162-6. Conspicuous display of signs and labels; defacing
prohibited.
§ 162-7. Inspection required.
No horseflesh shall be permitted to be held, stored, sold or offered for sale
in the borough except from a slaughterhouse inspected and passed by the
Board of Health of the borough or where such slaughtering is done under
federal inspection and the meat is so branded.
§ 162-8. General regulations for preparation, storage and
transportation.
A. There shall be conspicuously displayed in every shop or store selling
horseflesh in any shape, manner or form a sign at least eight (8) feet
long and two (2) feet wide, upon which shall be printed, in letters not
less than six (6) inches in height and four (4) inches in width, the words
"Horseflesh sold here."
B. Wherever horseflesh is held, stored, sold or offered for sale in any box
or case, counter or block, all tags or stamped surfaces shall be so
displayed as to be easily read by the public.
C. No person shall erase, cancel, obliterate, deface, cover, remove or alter
any brand, tag, label or other marking required by any provision of this
chapter to be attached or affixed to any carcass, piece, parcel, package
or container.
A. In any place or establishment where both horseflesh and other food
animal flesh shall be sold, the horseflesh shall be hung or racked on one
§ 162-4 HORSEFLESH § 162-8
162:547
§ 162-9. Notification of customers in restaurants.
The operator of any restaurant or other food-handling establishment
serving cooked or prepared horseflesh or products containing horseflesh
for consumption on the premises shall cause at least one (1) sign to be
prominently displayed in each portion of such premises where such foods
are served, containing the words, in letters not less than four (4) inches
high, "Horseflesh served here," and, if menu cards are used in such
establishment, any food containing horseflesh must be so designated on
such menu.
§ 162-10. Nonapplicability to animal food.
This chapter shall not apply to the sale of horseflesh in sealed containers as
food for animals where such containers are labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations of the state and federal government.
§ 162-11. Revocation of permits.
The Board of Health of the borough may, after hearing held by them,
suspend or revoke the permit mentioned in § 162-2 for failure of the
permittee or agent of the permittee to abide by or comply with, or in the
(1) side of the icebox, and no other animal flesh shall be hung or racked
on the same side with such horseflesh.
B. A display case used for horseflesh and other food animal flesh display
shall have a separating partition so that a separate section shall only be
used for the display of horseflesh.
C. A separate block or hardwood countertop shall be provided for the
cutting of horseflesh, which countertop may be placed on top of the
regular counter or block for the cutting or chopping of horseflesh.
D. Separate knives, saws, steels, implements and chopping machine shall
be used for horseflesh.
E. Paper shall first be placed on any scale plate and used when weighing
or using such scale for horseflesh.
F. Horseflesh and the flesh of other food animals shall not be ground
together, except upon the request of the buyer, and grinding of the
same shall be done in a machine used only for grinding horse meat.
G. No person shall transport horseflesh in the same vehicle while
transporting other animal flesh.
H. Horseflesh prepared for use as dog food or as food for other animals
must be packed in separate containers and shall not be kept, stored or
offered for sale from cases, counters, iceboxes, machines or other
implements maintained or used for horseflesh for sale for human
consumption.
§ 162-8 VERONA CODE § 162-11
162:548
case where there has been a violation of, any of the provisions of this
chapter, provided that the permittee be given at least five (5) days' notice of
the hearing so as to afford such permittee an opportunity to be heard prior
to such suspension or revocation.
§ 162-12. Violations and penalties.186
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not
less than two dollars ($2.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for
each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 164
ICE, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 143.
§ 164-1. License required; application; revocation.
No person shall engage in the sale of ice within the borough until a license
for that purpose has been granted by the Health Officer. Application for
such license shall be made in writing, and the fee shall be one dollar
($1.). Such application must be made annually, on or before the first day
of January, and any license may be revoked for failure to comply with the
regulations.
§ 164-2. Disclosure of source.
The applicant for a license required by the preceding section shall file
with the Health Officer, on or before the first day of January each year,
a complete list of the original sources of supply of the ice sold and shall
promptly notify the Health Officer of any changes in the supply. No ice shall
be used or sold in the borough, the source of supply of which is polluted or
contaminated or which is so situated that it may become so polluted.
§ 164-3. Violations and penalties.187
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under
this chapter shall upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not
less than two dollars ($2.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for
186. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 152, General Provisions Board of
Health, Art. I).
187. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 162-11 ICE, SALE OF § 164-3
164:549
each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Part IV: Shade Tree Commission Legislation
Chapter 170
GENERAL PROVISIONS, SHADE TREE COMMISSION
Chapter 171
SHADE TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 44.
Flood control — See Ch. 77.
Park rules and regulations — See Ch. 100.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 107.
Trees — See Ch. 136.
§ 171-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Every person, firm, association, partnership, corporation and
individual.
SHADE TREE — Shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located or
which may hereafter be planted in any public highway, park or parkway or
area between sidewalk and curbs of public streets in the Township, except
those located or planted on county highways, parks and parkways and state
highways.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the
Township of Verona and its duly authorized representatives.
STREET — All streets, roads, roadways, public highways, parks or
parkways, public alleys, public places in the Township, except county parks,
parkways and highways and state highways.
§ 171-2. Permission required for certain acts.
A. No person, firm, corporation or individual connected with such firm or
corporation shall do or cause to be done by others to any tree, shrub or
plant on a public highway or place, either purposely, carelessly or
negligently, without the permission of the Shade Tree Commission, any
of the following acts:
(1) Cut, prune, climb with spikes, break, damage or remove.
§ 164-3 VERONA CODE § 171-2
170:550
§ 171-3. Open space required at base of tree.
§ 171-4. Placement of substances injurious to trees.
§ 171-5. Construction of sidewalks and streets in conflict with trees.
No person, firm or corporation is permitted to lay any sidewalk along or to
open, construct, curb or pave any street or do any like act so as to interfere
with or do injury to any highway shade tree without the consent of the
Shade Tree Commission.
§ 171-6. General construction and excavation regulations.
(2) Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root.
(3) Spray with any chemical.
(4) Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device.
(5) Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree
or shrub.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent any governmental agency from tying a
public notice upon a tree in connection with administering
governmental affairs.
A. No person or corporation shall, without the permission of the Shade
Tree Commission, place or maintain or cause to be placed or
maintained upon the ground in any public highway or place any stone,
cement or other sidewalks or any stone, cement or other substance
which shall impede the free access of air and water to the roots of any
tree or shrub in any public highway or place.
B. An open space of not less than two feet outside the trunks of trees at
their bases on all sides must be maintained on all trees on public
highways except where limited by curb and/or sidewalk.
A. No person shall place salt, brine, oil or other substances injurious to
plant growth in any public highway or place in such a manner as to
injure any tree or shrub growing thereon.
B. No person shall build any fire or station any tar kettle, road roller or
other engine in any public highway in such a manner that the heat
vapors or fumes therefrom may injure any tree or shrub growing
thereon.
A. In the erection, altering or repairing of any building or structure, the
owner or contractor thereof shall place such guards around all nearby
trees in public highways or places as will effectually prevent injury to
such trees.
§ 171-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS, SHADE TREE § 171-6
170:551
§ 171-7. Written approval required for removal; determination of
cost; deposit.
Any person requesting the removal or transplanting of any shade tree must
obtain written approval from the Shade Tree Commission, which removal
or transplanting, in the opinion of the Commission, is of no advantage to
the general public but to said person requesting the work, then such person
shall pay the cost of such work, said costs to be determined by the Shade
Tree Commission. Said cost of removal or transplanting of a shade tree shall
be based upon the size and condition of the tree. A deposit sufficient to
cover the cost of said work shall be made before the work is started.
§ 171-8. Removal of dangerous trees; notification of owner.
The Shade Tree Commission may move or require the removal of any tree or
part thereof dangerous to public safety at the expense of the owner of such
tree, upon first serving written notice to the owner of said tree that same
will be removed unless the owner removes same within one week from the
date of said notice.
§ 171-9. Planting in public highways.
No shade or ornamental tree or shrub shall be planted by anyone but a
representative of the Shade Tree Commission in any of the public highways
of this Township.
§ 171-10. Plantings: written request; replacements; type and
selection.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall do any excavating within two feet
of any tree or shrub without the permission of the Shade Tree
Commission.
C. Shovels and all other implements, machines and tools shall be used or
operated in such a manner as not to damage or destroy any tree, shrub
or plant in any public highway place.
D. Where in authorized excavations it becomes necessary to expose or cut
roots more than one inch in diameter, it shall be the duty of the
contractor to protect such roots under advice from the Shade Tree
Commission.
A. The Shade Tree Commission, in its discretion, will plant a tree for the
property owner upon written request, provided that there is sufficient
distance for the future growth of said tree.
B. Trees replacing trees heretofore planted by the Shade Tree
Commission that have been removed because of disease, storm
damage, accidents or natural causes will, at the discretion of the
Commission, be replaced by the Shade Tree Commission at no charge
to the property owner, provided that there is a minimum width of 50
§ 171-6 VERONA CODE § 171-10
170:552
§ 171-11. Noninterference with Commission.
No person shall prevent, delay or in any manner interfere with the Shade
Tree Commission or its authorized agents or representatives in the
performance of their lawful duties.
§ 171-12. Statutory powers.
In addition to the foregoing powers, the Shade Tree Commission shall have
any and all such powers granted to it by N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 through 40:64-14.
§ 171-13. Electric and telephone wires.
§ 171-14. Application for permission.
Where the permission, consent or approval of the Shade Tree Commission
is required by the provisions of this chapter, any person, firm or corporation
required to obtain such permission, consent or approval shall first make
application therefor to the Shade Tree Commission, Township of Verona,
County of Essex.
feet between the trunks of standing trees on the same side of the street
and a minimum width of two feet for the planting strip which is the
distance between the sidewalk and the curb. [Amended 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 1-12]
C. The type and selection of trees to be planted will be determined by the
Shade Tree Commission.
A. Every person, firm or corporation having or maintaining any electric,
telephone, telegraph or other wires running through a public highway
shall securely fasten and maintain such wires in such a manner as will
safeguard the trees and shrubs against any damage therefrom and shall
make periodical adjustments whenever necessary to prevent damage to
trees and shrubs growing in any public highway or place.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall, without permission of the Shade
Tree Commission, attach or fasten any wire, insulator or other device
for holding any wire to any tree or shrub in any public highway or place.
C. Any public utility or its agents may upon receiving permission from the
Shade Tree Commission at least 24 hours prior to the start of work,
prune or remove trees for line clearance of utility wires in nonemergency
situations pursuant to a line clearance program. [Amended
4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 1-12]
D. Any public utility or its agent may undertake emergency tree work to
restore electrical service or spot work to prevent an interruption of
electrical, telephone, telegraph or other wire services. In such an event,
the utility will notify the Verona Department of Public Works and the
Shade Tree Commission of the nature and location of said work within
24 hours of its beginning. [Added 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 1-12]
§ 171-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS, SHADE TREE § 171-15
170:553
§ 171-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-2-2012 by Ord. No.
1-12]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who fails to
comply with the terms and provisions of any permit issued pursuant hereto
shall, upon conviction in municipal court thereof, pay a fine of not less than
$200 or a fine not to exceed $1,500 at the discretion of the court. Each day
that a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 171-16. Restitution. [Added 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 1-12]
In addition to the penalties authorized by § 171-15 of this chapter, the Shade
Tree Commission may require a person who removes or otherwise destroys
a tree in violation of a municipal ordinance to pay a replacement assessment
to the municipality. The replacement assessment shall be the value of the
tree as determined by the appraisal of a trained forester or certified tree
expert retained by the Shade Tree Commission for that purpose. In lieu of
an appraisal, the Commission may adopt a formula and schedule based upon
the number of square inches contained in a cross section of the trunk of
the tree multiplied by a predetermined value per square inch, not to exceed
$27 per square inch. The square inch cross section shall be calculated from
the diameter at breast height and, if there is a multiple stem tree, then
each trunk shall be measured and an average shall be determined for the
tree. For purposes of this chapter, “diameter at breast height” shall mean
the diameter of the tree taken at a point 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
The Shade Tree Commission shall modify the value of the tree based upon
its species, variety, location and its condition at the time of removal or
destruction.
Appendix
Chapter A174
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims — See Ch. 10.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 30.
Shade Tree Commission — See ch. 44.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
Streets and sidewalks — See Cb. 125.
Zoning — See Ch. 150.
§ A174-1. Purpose.
The township hereby grants to Comcast Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc.,
renewal of its nonexclusive municipal consent to place in, upon, along,
across, above, over and under highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
§ 171-15 VERONA CODE § A174-1
A174:554
easements, public ways and public places in the township poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors,
fixtures, apparatus and equipment as may be necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance in the township of a cable
television and communications system.
§ A174-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 USC Section 521 et seq.,
as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall
in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal or state
definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"Comcast Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc."
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
MUNICIPALITY or TOWNSHIP — The Township of Verona, County of Essex,
State of New Jersey.
OFFICE — The Office of Cable Television (OCTV) of the Board of Public
Utilities.
§ A174-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the township concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, including
the hearing on the application held on November 18, 1996, having been
fully open to the public and the township having received at said public
hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company to
receive this renewal of municipal consent, the township hereby finds that
the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial
and other qualifications and that the company's operating and construction
arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A174-1 CABLE TELEVISION § A174-4
A174:555
§ A174-4. Duration of franchise.
The nonexclusive consent granted herein shall expire 12 years from the
date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval as issued by the
Board of Public Utilities.
§ A174-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
township 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature
of subscription fees paid by subscribers to its cable television reception
service in the township or any higher amount permitted by the Cable
Television Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
A. The performance of the company with regard to its obligations under
this ordinance shall be reviewable by the township by the end of the
sixth year of its term. Said review shall be conducted during the period
beginning on the fifth anniversary date of the adoption of this renewal
municipal consent ordinance and ending six months before the sixth
anniversary of the ordinance.
B. The company shall provide written notification to the Township
Manager and Township Clerk of the township's right to review the
company's performance under this ordinance and shall provide such
reasonable and appropriate information as the township may request.
C. Any review of the company's performance under this section shall be
completed within six months of the initiating letter sent by the
company. Upon expiration of the six-month period, without a written
determination by the Township Council provided to the company and
the Office of Cable Television, the municipal consent described herein
shall continue in full force and effect for the complete twelve-year term.
D. Any determination by the Township Council that the company has failed
to substantially comply with the material terms and conditions
contained herein shall occur only after reasonable written notice has
been provided to the company, adequate public hearings have been
held and the company has been afforded reasonable opportunity to cure
any asserted failures. Any such finding by the Township Council shall
contain full documentation and supporting evidence thereof.
E. Upon issuing any such findings of noncompliance, the township shall
have the ability to petition the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities,
Office of Cable Television, for sanctions up to and including revocation
of the franchise. The review of this ordinance as described herein shall
be in accordance with all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations, and neither the township nor the company waives any
rights granted to them under state or federal statutes or regulations.
§ A174-4 VERONA CODE § A174-6
A174:556
§ A174-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the township and any property subsequently
annexed thereto.
§ A174-7. Extension of service.
Comcast shall be required to proffer service along any public right-of-way
to any person's residence or business located in all areas of the franchise
territory as described herein, at tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard
installations.
§ A174-8. System upgrade.
Comcast shall complete an upgrade of the cable television distribution
system serving the township by no later than December 31, 1998. The
upgraded system shall be a hybrid fiber optic/coaxial cable system following
a fiber to the node architecture. The upgraded system shall provide
improved picture quality, enhanced signal reliability and increased channel
capacity.
§ A174-9. Construction requirements.
§ A174-10. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, Comcast shall comply with N.J.A.C.
14:18 and all applicable state and federal statutes and regulations. Comcast
shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary company and industry standards
in the delivery of customer service and shall be prepared to report on same
to the community upon written request of the Township Manager or Clerk.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surface in
the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense, restore
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, relay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain
property clearance for the company's wires and cables.
§ A174-6 CABLE TELEVISION § A174-11
A174:557
§ A174-11. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township of Verona pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints
shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by township customers from the OCTV.
§ A174-12. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during normal business hours and in no event less than
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. The local business office
shall be located within 10 miles of the township's municipal boundaries.
Telephone response for such purposes as mentioned herein will be provided
by the company's employees, representatives or agents 24 hours per day.
The telephone number and address of the local office shall be listed in
applicable telephone directories and in correspondence from the company
to the customer. The telephone number for the local office shall utilize an
exchange which is a nontoll call for township residents.
§ A174-13. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to ensure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A174-14. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A174-15. Public, educational and governmental access.
A. The company shall continue to provide one dedicated educational and
governmental (P.E.G.) access channel to be utilized by the Township of
Verona and one system-wide public access channel.
B. The company shall provide the township with a one-time grant in the
amount of $30,000 within 12 months of receipt of a renewal COA for the
purchase of video production equipment or to be otherwise used in
support of the access programming or as the township deems
appropriate.
C. Within 12 months of receipt of a renewal COA, the company shall
construct, at no cost to the township, a dedicated return line for the
§ A174-11 VERONA CODE § A174-15
A174:558
§ A174-16. Commitments by the company.
§ A174-17. Two-way services and interconnection.
In the event that the township determines that it is necessary and feasible
for it to contract with the company for the purpose of providing two-way
or interconnection services, the company shall be required to apply to the
BPU for approval to enter into and establish the terms and conditions of
such contract. All costs for such application to the BPU shall be borne by
the township.
§ A174-18. Emergency uses.
Upon activation of the state's emergency alert system ("EAS"), the company
shall be required to have the capability to override at the head end a
portion of the system in order to permit the cablecasting of emergency
messages. The company's participation in the EAS shall be in compliance
with applicable state and federal statutes and regulations. The company
shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the municipality or
any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason the municipality
purpose of transporting local access programming from the Township
Community Center to be televised on the township's access channel.
A. The company shall provide free standard installation and expanded
basic service monthly on up to 10 outlets in each school in the township,
public and private elementary, intermediate and secondary. Each
additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for by the school
requesting service on a material plus labor basis. Monthly service
charges shall be billed at the regular tariffed rates for additional
outlets.
B. The company shall provide free standard installation and expanded
basic service monthly on one outlet to each police, fire, first aid,
emergency management facility, public library in the township as well
as the Public Works Department and the Community Center, at no
charge. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for by the
township on a materials plus labor basis. Monthly service charges shall
be billed at the regular tariffed rates for additional outlets.
C. Company representatives shall appear at least once annually, upon
written request of the township, at a public meeting of the governing
body, to discuss matters pertaining to the provision of cable service to
residents of the township and other related issues as the township and
company may see fit.
D. The company shall make every effort to deploy advanced technology in
the township as the technology becomes commercially available and
economically feasible. That technology shall include but not be limited
to video on demand, digital video compression, internet access, high
speed cable modems and interactive program guides.
§ A174-15 CABLE TELEVISION § A174-18
A174:559
is unable to make full use of the cable television system as contemplated
herein. The municipality, along with the company, shall establish reasonable
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A174-19. Liability insurance.
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent sufficient liability
insurance naming the municipality as an insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to one person and
$100,000 for property damage resulting from one accident.
§ A174-20. Incorporation of the application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted in writing to the municipality by the
company, except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as
terms and conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant
writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part
hereof by reference as long as it does not conflict with state or federal law.
§ A174-21. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ A174-22. When effective.
This ordinance and the franchise renewal shall take effect immediately
upon issuance of a renewal certificate of approval from the Board of Public
Utilities.
§ A174-23. Rights reserved to the borough.
Subject to the provisions contained in N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., Cable
Television Act, the following rights are reserved to the Township of Verona:
A. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect in any
way, to any extent, the right of the borough to acquire the property of a
grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of
eminent domain, at a fair and just value, and nothing herein contained
shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a
term or in perpetuity, the borough's right of eminent domain.
B. There is hereby reserved to the borough every right and power which is
required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance of the
§ A174-18 VERONA CODE § A174-23
A174:560
§ A174-24. Violations.
borough, and a grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to
be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the
borough in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter
enacted or established.
C. There is hereby reserved to the borough the power to amend any
section or part of this ordinance after a public hearing so as to require
reasonable additional or greater standards of construction, operation,
maintenance, or otherwise, on the part of the grantee. Any amendments
shall be feasible and reasonable and within the economic limitations of
the grantee.
D. The company at all times shall, during the life of this contract, be
subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the borough and to
such regulations as the borough shall hereafter by resolution or
ordinance provide.
E. Upon expiration of the contract or by virtue of prior termination
revocation in accordance with terms of this ordinance, the borough
shall have the right to purchase and take over the property of the
company in its entirety upon the exercise of an option which the
borough is hereby determined to process. The borough shall pay the
reasonable market value of the physical facilities within the Borough of
Verona, and service of an official notice shall be made on the company
to that effect, and the company shall immediately effect such deeds or
bills of sale or any or all instruments as shall be necessary to convey to
the borough title to all such property in fee simple, free from any liens
or encumbrances. Reasonable market value is arrived at after its
determination by a consensus of at least three certified public
accounting firms.
F. In the event the contract shall be terminated or revoked by the Council
at any time under the terms of this ordinance, the borough shall have
the right to determine whether the company shall be permitted to
continue to operate and maintain its distributing system and to
determine the future maintenance and operation within the system of
the borough.
G. Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall
constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or
power of the borough.
A. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful
for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of
distributing to any persons in this borough any television or radio
broadcast signals by means of a community cable television system
unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of this ordinance and unless such franchise is in full force
§ A174-23 CABLE TELEVISION § A174-24
A174:561
§ A174-25. (Reserved)
§ A174-26. Cable Television Committee.
and effect. This subsection shall apply to all closed-circuit television
systems intended for general public distribution.
B. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful
for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street
in the borough or any privately owned area within the borough which
has not yet become a public street on any tentative subdivision
approved by the borough any equipment or facilities for distributing
any television signals or radio signals through a community cable
television system unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street
or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of
this ordinance and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established a Cable Television Advisory
Committee.
B. Membership. The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall consist of
11 members, all of whom shall be residents of the Township of Verona.
Membership shall consist of:
(1) The Township Manager, who shall serve as an ex officio member.
(2) One member of the Township Council, who shall serve as an ex
officio member.
(3) Seven regular members, one of whom shall be representative of the
Verona Public Library, one of whom shall be representative of
educational interests, one of whom shall be representative of senior
citizens' interests, one of whom shall be representative of disabled
citizens' interests, one of whom shall be representative of the local
business community, one of whom shall be representative of local
service organizations and one of whom shall be representative of
the community at large.
(4) Two youth members representative of youth interests in the
community.
C. Appointment. All members of the Cable Television Advisory Committee
shall be appointed by the Township Council and shall serve without
compensation.
D. Terms of office. The term of office of the Township Manager shall be
indefinite and shall be concurrent with his office as Township Manager.
The term of office for the Council member shall be for one year. Regular
members shall serve for terms of three years, except that of the initial
members appointed, two members shall serve until June 30, 1994, two
members shall serve until June 30, 1995, and three members shall serve
until June 30, 1996. The term of office for youth members shall be for
§ A174-24 VERONA CODE § A174-26
A174:562
Chapter A175
FEES
one year. If a vacancy in membership shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of a term, then such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired
term thereof in the same manner as the original appointment. All
members shall be voting members.
E. Duties. The duties of the Cable Television Advisory Committee shall
include:
(1) Collecting information regarding cable television and acting as an
advisory body to the Township Council.
(2) Monitoring the performance of the cable provider.
(3) Reporting citizen complaints regarding cable television to the
Township Council.
(4) Providing community information with respect to the availability of
the cable provider facilities and equipment.
(5) Assisting community organizations in order to maximize
opportunities offered by Suburban Cablevision.
(6) Acting as a liaison between the Township Council and the cable
provider.
(7) Making recommendations to the Township Council with regard to
rules and regulations concerning the use and operation of Verona's
local cable television access channel (Channel 35).
F. Operation and use of the local cable television access channel.
Operation and use of Verona's local cable television access channel
(Channel 35) shall be under the administrative control of the Township
Manager and shall be subject to the rules and regulations concerning
the operation and use of the local cable television access channel as
may be from time to time adopted by resolution of the Township
Council.
§ A174-26 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-1
A174:563
§ A175-1. Schedule of fees.
Type Fee
Initial Escrow for
Professional Review
Ch. 30, Land Use
Procedures [Amended
4-5-1999 by Ord. No.
1-99; 3-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 1-2005]
Fee for furnishing list of
property owners
$10.00
Applications requiring
court reporter
$250.00 per
meeting
Planning Board fees
Zoning change request $500.00 $250.00
Conditional Use
Application
$500.00 $1,000.00
Site Plan Application
Residential -
preliminary
Minimum $400.00 $750.00
Residential
apartment,
townhouse or
condominium
$50.00 per unit $200.00 per unit
Commercial
preliminary
Minimum $400.00 $750.00
0 to 1,000 square
feet of gross floor
area
$400.00 $750.00
1,000 to 2,500
square feet of gross
floor area
$500.00 $1,000.00
2,501 to 5,000
square feet of gross
floor area
$700.00 $1,500.00
Over 5,001 square
feet of gross floor
area
$1,000.00 $2,000.00
Residential and
commercial - final
1/2 preliminary 1/2 preliminary
Major subdivision
§ A175-1 VERONA CODE § A175-1
A174:564
Type Fee
Initial Escrow for
Professional Review
Minimum $550.00 $1,000.00
Plus $150.00 per lot $550.00 per lot
Minor subdivision
(one-family residential)
No new lot created $250.00 none
1 to 3 lots $500.00 $1,000.00
Minor subdivision
(other, residential or
commercial)
1 to 3 lots $250.00 per lot $1,000.00
Special meeting
request for applicant
$800.00
Zoning Board of
Adjustment fees
Administrative appeals
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a
$100.00 $100.00
Interpretation of
zoning regulation
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b
$200.00 $100.00
Bulk variance
applications (onefamily
pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c)
$150.00 $500.00
Bulk variance
applications (other)
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c
$550.00 $1,000.00
Use variances
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d
$750.00 $1,000.00
Sign $200.00 $100.00
Site plan application
Residential -
preliminary
Minimum $400.00 $750.00
Apartment,
townhouse or
condominium
$50.00 per unit $200.00 per unit
§ A175-1 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-1
A174:565
Type Fee
Initial Escrow for
Professional Review
Commercial
preliminary
Minimum $400.00 $750.00
0 to 1,000
square feet of
gross floor area
$400.00 $750.00
1,001 to 2,500
square fret of
gross floor area
$500.00 $1,000.00
2,501 to 5,000
square fret of
gross floor area
$700.00 $1,500.00
Over 5,001
square feet of
gross floor area
$1,000.00 $2,000.00
Residential and
commercial - final
1/2 preliminary 1/2 preliminary
Major subdivision
Minimum $550.00 $1,000.00
Plus $150.00 per lot $550.00 per lot
Minor subdivision
(one-family residential)
No new lot created $250.00 None
1 to 3 lots $500.00 $1,000.00
Minor subdivision
(other, residential or
commercial)
1 to 3 lots $250.00 per lot $1,000.00
Special meeting at
request of applicant
$800.00
Type Fee
Ch. 54, Alcoholic Beverages [Amended
4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99]
Plenary retail consumption license $1,400.00
Plenary retail distribution license $900.00
Limited retail distribution license $60.00
Ch. 57, Amusements [Amended 4-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-99]
Carnival license, per day $250.00
§ A175-1 VERONA CODE § A175-1
A174:566
Type Fee
License for poolroom, billiard room and
bowling alley, for each billiard table, pool
table or bowling alley, per annum
$50.00
License for coin-operated music machine,
per annum, per machine
$60.00
License for mechanical amusement device,
per annum, per machine
First 2 $180.00
Next 5 $150.00
All additional $125.00
Ch. 60, Automobile Sales Lots
Annual license fee [Amended 4-5-1999
by Ord. No. 1-99]
$500.00
For license granted after August 1 60% of the above amount
Ch. 61A, Cats [Added 7-16-1990 by Ord. No.
9-90]
License fee for each unneutered cat
[Amended 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99]
$8.00
License fee for each neutered cat
[Amended 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99]
$6.00
Fee for each duplicate license $0.50
Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform (see
§ A175-6)
Ch. 65, Conversion of Rental Dwelling Units
[Amended 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99]
Conversion fee, per unit $150.00
Ch. 68, Dogs [Amended 4-5-1999 by Ord.
No. 1-99; 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2-2001;
11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 9-12188]
License fee $8.80
Registration tag fee $1.00
Pilot clinic fee $0.20
Kennel license
10 or fewer dogs $10.00
More than 10 dogs $25.00
Pet shop license $10.00
188. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2013.
§ A175-1 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-1
A174:567
Type Fee
Fee for keeping impounded dogs, per day,
per dog
$15.00
Fee for duplicate license $0.50
Ch. 70, Filming [Added 10-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 13-98]
Basic filming fee $75.00
Basic filming permit with expedited
processing
$125.00
Daily filming fee, per day $500.00
Basic filming permit, nonprofit/educational $25.00
Ch. 74, Fire Prevention [Added 3-3-1997 by
Ord. No. 3-97; amended 3-18-2002 by Ord.
No. 5-2002]
Carbon monoxide and smoke detector
inspections, combined fee per dwelling unit
$50.00
Ch. 83, Garage Sales
License fee $10.00
Ch. 88, Gasoline Stations [Amended
4-15-1996 by Ord. No. 2-96; 10-22-2007 by
Ord. No. 14-07]
License fee for each location $50.00
Ch. 104, Peddlers and Solicitors
Peddler license fees
1 day $25.00
1 week $75.00
1 month $150.00
Over 1 month and any additional time
not exceeding
$250.00
6 months
1 year $400.00
Transient merchant license fee
180 days $750.00
Additional charge of the applicable
amount under "peddler license fee"
Ch. 107, Property Maintenance
Reinspection fee $50.00
Inspection fee for dwelling of 3 or fewer
dwelling units
$50.00
§ A175-1 VERONA CODE § A175-1
A174:568
Type Fee
Each additional unit over 3 $10.00
Status report fee $10.00
Ch. 114, Retail Food Establishments [Added
8-3-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92; amended
4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99; 10-22-2007 by
Ord. No. 14-07; 11-5-2007 by Res. No.
112189]
Temporary food handling permits:
One day $10.00
Two days or more, maximum 10 days $10.00 per day
Retail food establishments:
Type I $100.00
Type II $200.00
Type III $300.00
Type IV $400.00
Vending machines $10.00
Reinspection fees Same as original license
fee
Food handler's certificate At Health Department
cost
Verona Health Department course of
general instruction for food handler's
certificate
At Health Department
cost
Type Fee
Initial Escrow
for Professional
Review
Ch. 118, Site Plan Review (see
Chapter 30, Land Use Fees)
[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No.
1-2005; 8-13-2012 by Res. No. 74]
Site plan application
Residential - preliminary
Minimum $400.00 $750.00
Apartment, townhouse or
condominium
$50.00 per
unit
$200.00 per unit
Commercial - preliminary
189. Editor's Note: This resolution also provided that license fees shall accompany the
application for the license and that category and type designations shall be determined by
the Health Officer in accordance with New Jersey State Health Department guidelines.
§ A175-1 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-1
A174:569
Type Fee
Initial Escrow
for Professional
Review
Minimum $400.00 $750.00
0 to 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
$400.00 $750.00
1,001 to 2,500 square feet of
gross floor area
$500.00 $1,000.00
2,501 to 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area
$700.00 $1,500.00
Over 5,001 square feet of gross
floor area
$1,000.00 $2,000.00
Residential and commercial -
final
1/2
preliminary
1/2 preliminary
Fees for copies of ordinances and
Master Plan
Site Plan Review Ordinance,
Chapter 118
$10.00
Subdivision Ordinance, Chapter
127
$10.00
Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 150 $30.00
Re-examination report $20.00
Master Plan $150.00
NOTE: Any site plan processed by the Planning Board requiring variances
(other than use variance) and any use variance processed by the Board
of Adjustment requiring site plan and/or subdivision approval shall pay a
filing fee that equals the collective fee listed above for the application.
Type Fee
Ch. 121, Soil Removal
Application fee $100.00
Ch. 125, Streets and Sidewalks
Fees for road opening and storage permit:
Bituminous pavement $50.00
Bituminous pavement on concrete base
and reinforced concrete pavement, per
square yard
$75.00
Minimum charge $100.00
Earth shoulder opening $25.00
Construction of new driveway apron $15.00
New curb and sidewalk construction $15.00
§ A175-1 VERONA CODE § A175-1
A174:570
Type Fee
Major repairs to sidewalk, curbing and
driveway apron
$15.00
Ch. 127, Subdivision of Land
Fee to accompany submission of
preliminary plat of major subdivision
$500.00, plus $100.00 per
lot
Minor subdivision $250.00
Final 1/2 preliminary
Ch. 129, Swimming Pools, Private [Amended
3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-2002; 10-22-2007
by Ord. No. 14-07]
Permanent pool/in-ground
Permit (includes fence) $100.00
Certificate of occupancy $50.00
Portable pool plus electrical permit $50.00
Ch. 132, Taxicabs
Taxicab owner's license fee, each $30.00
Fleet owner's license fee
Minimum $175.00
Additional fee for each taxicab in excess
of 6 authorized to engage in the taxicab
business in the Township
$50.00
Taxicab driver's license fee, each $15.00
License transfer fees
Transfer of taxicab owner's license from
one vehicle to another
$7.00
Transfer of taxicab owner's license from
one owner to another
$15.00
Transfer of fleet owner's license from one
vehicle to another [Amended 4-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-99]
$10.00
Ch. 140, Vehicles and Traffic [Added
2-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1-94; amended
4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99; 3-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 1-2005]
Parking meter rates $0.25 per hour
Overnight parking permit, quarterly $75.00
Overnight parking permit, semiannual $130.00
Overnight parking permit, annual $250.00
Overnight parking permit, transfer application $15.00
§ A175-1 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-1
A174:571
Type Fee
Overnight parking permit, replace lost or
destroyed permit
$15.00
Ch. 143, Vending Machines, Food and
Beverage
License fee, per machine, per year $75.00
Ch. 146, Water and Sewers [Amended
11-19-1990 by Ord. No. 13-90; 12-18-1995
by Ord. No. 4-95]
Ch. 143, Vending Machines, Food and
Beverage
License fee, per machine, per year $75.00
Ch. 146, Water and Sewers Amended
11-19-1990 by Ord. No. 13-90; 12-18-1995
by Ord. No. 4-95]
Inspection of service line $25.00
Minimum charge for test to determine
accuracy of water meter
$20.00
Basic rate for each 1,000 gallons of water
consumed [Amended 8-5-1996 by Ord.
No. 9-96190 3-18-2002 by Ord. No.
5-2002; 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]]
$4.39
Minimum rate for water for any purpose on
water consumed less than 3,000 gallons
per quarter [Amended 7-15-2002 by
Ord. No. 7-2002]
$15.00
Installation of water services from main to
curb (Township roads; additional cost for
county or state highways based on time
and material):
Size (inches)
3/4 $600.00
1 $700.00
1 1/2 $800.00
2 $1,000.00
Furnishing and installing meter other than
for 1- or 2-family dwellings [Amended
10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07]
Size (inches)
190. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the rates established shall be effective
July 1, 1996 to September 30, 1996.
§ A175-1 VERONA CODE § A175-1
A174:572
Type Fee
5/8 x 3/4 $250.00
1 $350.00
1 1/2 $550.00
2 $850.00
Servicing of water meter
Minimum charge for all repairs $25.00
Relocation of service line
Cost of new service, plus specified
amount for discontinuance of existing
service
$150.00
Water used for construction purposes
Minimum charge [Amended 7-15-2002
by Ord. No. 7-2002]
$100.00
Use of nonmetered fire plug and hydrant,
annually, per hydrant [Amended 4-2-2001
by Ord. No. 2-2001]
$500.00
Cost of shutting off and turning on water as
Township action
$20.00
Cost of shutting off and turning on at
request of owner
$20.00
Application for installation of refrigeration
and air-conditioning system
$15.00
Final reading $10.00
Building sewer permit $50.00
Sewer extension permit $100.00
Annual sewer user charge for all users,
excluding institutional users, per
equivalent connection (billed in quarterly
installments) [Added 4-6-1998 by Ord.
No. 5-98191; amended 7-15-2002 by
Ord. No. 7-2002]
$500.00
Quarterly sewer user charge, per
equivalent connection, for persons entitled
to reduction under § 146-49 [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 6-98]
$87.50
191. Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted the fee for quarterly sewer user charge per
equivalent unit.
§ A175-1 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-1
A174:573
Type Fee
Annual sewer user charge for institutional
users, per equivalent connection (billed in
quarterly installments) [Added 4-6-1998
by Ord. No. 5-98]
Based on first 100,000 gpd* use $350.00
Based on second 100,000 gpd use $300.00
Based on third 100,000 gpd use $250.00
Based on fourth 100,000 gpd use $225.00
Based on fifth or subsequent 100,000
gpd use
$200.00
Water connection fee per equivalent
connection [Amended 4-6-1998 by Ord.
No. 5-98; amended 7-15-2002 by Ord.
No. 7-2002]
$2,750.00
Sewer connection fee per equivalent
connection [Amended 7-15-2002 by Ord.
No. 7-2002]
$2,750.00
Cost of shutting off and turning on water as
Township action due to nonpayment
[Added 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99;
amended 7-15-2002 by Ord. No.
7-2002]
$40.00 plus postage costs
for notices
Nonmetered private fire service main for
sprinkler system, annually, based on size
(billed in quarterly installments): [Added
7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
Size (inches)
2 $82.50
4 $330.00
6 $750.00
8 $1,335.00
Nonmetered temporary hose connection
for private fire service [Added 7-15-2002
by Ord. No. 7-2002]
Minimum charge $100.00
Use of nonmetered private fire hydrant,
annually [Added 7-15-2002 by Ord. No.
7-2002]
$750.00
*NOTE: "gpd" is defined in § 146-47D.
§ A175-1 VERONA CODE § A175-1
A174:574
Type Fee
Disposal fees [Added 12-15-2003 by Ord.
No. 19-2003; amended 5-16-2005 by
Ord. No. 10-2005]
Dumpster permit $15.00
Landscaper's permit (leaf dump) $25.00/truckload up to 4
cubic yards
Tires (disposal of passenger car tires) $5.00
Tires (disposal of truck tires) $10.00
Propane tanks (disposal) $5.00
Leaf bags $0.30
Recycling containers $5.00
§ A175-2. Police Department fees. [Amended 4-5-1999 by Ord. No.
1-99; 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2-2005; 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07]
Police Department fees are as follows:
Type Fee
Personal fingerprints, per card $8.00
Firearms ID card $5.00
Firearms pistol-purchase permit $2.00
Firearms gun-carrying permit $20.00
Records check; character letters (nonlaw
enforcement; nongovernment
agencies)
$10.00
Incident report
Pages 1-10 $0.75 each page
Pages 11- 20 $0.50 each page
Pages 21 and up $0.25 each page
Accident report
Pick up $1.50
Mail $5.00 first three pages, $1.00 for
each additional page
Photograph
Standard copy paper $1.00
Standard, other $2.00
Black and white $2.00
Copy of videotape or disc $25.00 per disc
Photograph of discs $25.00 per disc
§ A175-1 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-2
A174:575
Type Fee
Audio tape $25.00
Township resident ID card $10.00
§ A175-3. Administrative and other fees. 192 [Added 4-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-99; amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 5-2005]
Administrative and other fees are as follows:
Type Fee
Tax Map $5.00
Township Map $1.00
Reproduction
Pages 1-10 $0.75 each page
Pages 11-20 $0.50 each page
Pages 21 and up $0.25 each page
Flood hazard area determination
certification
$20.00
Duplicate tax bill $3.00
Copy of tax history $3.00
Copy of water history $3.00
Returned check (all Township
departments)
$25.00
Public improvement projects with
specifications, per set
$50.00
Public improvements projects with
plans and specifications, per set
$75.00
§ A175-4. Health Department fees. [Amended 4-5-1999 by Ord. No.
1-99; 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-2002; 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07]
Health Department fees (other than retail food establishments) are as
follows:
Vital Statistics:
Certified copies $10.00 per copy
Birth
Death
Marriage
Domestic partnerships
192. Editor's Note: Former § A175-3, Elevator inspection fees, was repealed 4-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 2-96.
§ A175-2 VERONA CODE § A175-4
A174:576
Vital Statistics:
All other copies $0.50 per page
Marriage licenses $28.00 (state law)
Domestic partnerships $28.00 (state law)
Civil unions $28.00
Corrections to vital records $20.00
Burial permits $1.00
Abstract certifications $5.00
Flu immunizations $20.00
Seniors 65+
Medicare billed
SMAC
Prostate screening $30.00
Cholesteral screening $30.00
Bone density $12.00/$8.00 for senior citizens
Mammography $10.00/$8.00 for senior citizens
Medical transport: $79.00
In-town ride $3.00 round trip
Out-of-town ride $5.00 round trip
One-way ride $3.00
Food and Milk License
Milk/ice cream delivery trucks Discontinued fee. Exclusive of
vending
Milk/ice cream delivery trucks $25.00; e.g., Good Humor, etc.
Trucks selling food from the truck $40.00
Milk license fee charged to
restaurants and nonvending delivery
trucks
Discontinued fee. See § A175-4
Trucks delivering to food
establishments
Discontinued fee. See § A175-4
§ A175-5. Recreation Department and Community Center fees.
[Amended 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99; 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-2002;
4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2-2001; 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 3-2003;
10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07; 10-6-2008 by Res. No. 99;
11-18-2013 by Res. No. 132; 9-15-2014 by Res. No. 99]
Type Fee
Sports Recreation Department
West Essex basketball $85.00
§ A175-4 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-5
A174:577
Type Fee
Suburban basketball $85.00
Basketball 3-6 $50.00
Get-Ready basketball clinics $25.00
Kinderhoops $50.00
L'il Dunkers $50.00
Allstars $50.00
Hoopstars $50.00
3 x 3 middle school basketball $40.00
Men's basketball $350.00 per team
Men's summer basketball $200.00 per team
Softball clinics $10.00
Men's softball $350.00 per team
Flag football K-5 $30.00
Striders K-3 $40.00
Striders 4-8 $50.00
Tiny track $40.00
Fall cross country track $30.00
Cross country race $5.00
Tennis clinic 1-6 $40.00
Round robin tennis $40.00
Summer tennis $30.00/$45.00 if on team as
well
Soccer 3-4 $60.00
Small fry soccer $60.00
West Essex soccer 5-8 $50.00
Suburban soccer $75.00
Kinderkickers $70.00
First grade soccer $70.00
Second grade soccer $70.00
Men’s fall softball $200.00 per team
Kinetic Kids $70.00
Children’s dance class $70.00
Tennis Tots $65.00
T-Ball clinic $65.00
Future Hoops $75.00
Karate $70.00
§ A175-5 VERONA CODE § A175-5
A174:578
Type Fee
In-House 5-8 Grade $60.00
Girls' volleyball clinic $40.00
Girls suburban volleyball $85.00
Summer Playgrounds
Summer playground $150.00 per child
Maximum family rate: 2+ children $300.00
Summer art $85.00/$50.00 for second
class
Fundamentals of art $65.00 (beginners);
$75.00 (intermediate)
Fun art $40.00
Just arts and crafts $50.00
Clinic package (summer program) $50.00
Camp package (summer program) $75.00
Clinic package and camp package
combined
$75.00
Civilian safety
$5.00/person under 15 $10.00 per mother and
daughter
$5.00 per person under 15
Men's volleyball $300.00 per team
Golf Tournament:
Golf package/per golfer $150.00
Dinner only $75.00
Dinner sponsor $1,000.00
Snack stand $250.00
Golf balls sponsor $375.00
Hole sponsor $100.00
What Am I Gonna Do Today $5.00 per child per day
Teacher's convention $5.00 per child per day
Open gym/dance $5.00
Instructional clinics $20.00 to $50.00
High school league entry fee $75.00 per team
Special event/program $10.00 to $50.00
After-school drop-in No charge
§ A175-5 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-5
A174:579
Type Fee
NOTE: Unless otherwise indicated, all of
above fees are per person.
Uniform non-return fee $25.00
Administrative fee for refunds 20%
Administrative fee for all Verona
Community Center events
Forfeit fees
Summer basketball $30.00 to $100.00 depending
on sport
Men's volleyball $80.00
Men's basketball $40.00
Men's softball $80.00
Men's fall softball $80.00
Late fee for summer playgrounds as of 4/06 $60.00
Late fee - programs $15.00 or $25.00 flat fee per
family
Late Fee - teams $10.00
$25.00
Camps
Rental of gym - up to 6 hr./day $150.00
Over 6 hours $50.00 per hour
Use gym in conjunction w/other $250.00 per week
Rentals and based on availability gym
and party room rental one month prior to
existing contracted rental
$350.00 per week
Fields
Rentals up to 4 hours per day $150.00
Rentals up to 8 hours per day $250.00
Maintenance fee/inside access per day
per activity
$25.00
Flat fee for full week rental plus
maintenance fee per day (if applicable)
$700.00
Birthday Parties
2-hour rental of gym and 2nd floor $200.00 flat fee
Party room (no kitchen)
Maintenance fee $25.00
Additional fee for extra hours $100.00 per hour
Security Deposit (refundable)
§ A175-5 VERONA CODE § A175-5
A174:580
Type Fee
Community Center
Room rental $60.00 per hour
Maintenance fee (if applicable) $15.00 per rental
Off-hour rate* $30.00 per hour
Large room (Ballroom)
Township residents $65.00 per hour
Maintenance fee $75.00
Nonresidents $100.00 per hour
plus maintenance fee $75.00
Small room (firemen's room)
Township residents $50.00 per hour + $50.00
maintenance fee
Nonresidents $65.00 per hour + $50.00
maintenance fee
Small activities room $25.00 per hour
Conference room $25.00 per hour
Gym
Township residents (no equipment
rental)
$75.00 per hour
Nonresidents (no equipment rental) $100.00 per hour
Verona Schools $70.00 per hour
Non-Verona schools $100.00 per hour
Off-hour* rate $40.00 per hour
Annex
Room rental $60.00 per hour
Maintenance fee $15.00
Off-hour rate* $30.00
*Off-hour is defined as hours between 9:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on weekdays when
building is open
§ A175-6. Uniform construction codes fees. [Added 4-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-99; amended 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-2002; 9-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 8-2002; 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 4-2005]
A. General.
(1) The fee for plan review, computed as a percentage of the fee for a
construction permit, shall be paid at the time of submission of an
application for a permit. The amount of this fee shall be deducted
§ A175-5 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-6
A174:581
from the amount of the fee due for a construction permit when the
permit is issued.
(2) The fee to be charged for a construction permit will be the sum of
the basic fee computed in accordance with Subsection C below,
plus any applicable special fees such as elevator or sign fees. This
fee shall be paid before a permit is issued.
(3) The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be in
addition to the construction permit fee and shall be paid before a
certificate is issued.
(4) The fee for an annual construction fee shall be as provided in
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.18(a)4 and 5.
B. Plan review fees. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to
be charged for a new construction permit. For projects which do not
require plan review for all subcodes, the fee shall be 20% of the
subcode fee, which is applicable.
C. Basic construction fees.
(1) The basic construction fee shall be computed on the basis of the
volume of the building or, in the case of alterations, the estimated
construction cost, and the number of types of plumbing, electrical
and fire protection fixtures or devices as herein provided.
(a) Fees for new construction shall be based on the volume of the
structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fees shall be in the
amount of $0.05 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and
structures of all use groups and type of construction. There
shall be a minimum fee of $50. [Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 11-10]
(b) Fees for renovation, alteration and repairs on site construction
associated with premanufactured construction, and the
external utility connection for premanufactured construction,
shall be based on the estimated cost of work. The fee shall be
$50 for the first $1,000 of estimated cost and $15 for each
additional $1,000 or part thereof. [Amended 11-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 11-10]
(c) Fees for an addition shall be computed on the same basis as for
new construction for the added portion.
(d) Fees for roofing and siding shall be flat fees of $75 for
residential structures and $125 for commercial structures.
[Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 11-10]
(e) The fee for the installation of central air conditioning shall be
$50, plus the applicable electrical and plumbing fees.
§ A175-6 VERONA CODE § A175-6
A174:582
[Amended 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07; 11-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 11-10]
(f) Fees for a combination of renovation and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees of the addition and alteration
computed separately.
(g) The fee for a permit to install, decommission or remove a
heating fuel storage tank, whether aboveground or belowground,
shall be $75 for a one- or two-family residential
structure and $150 for all other structures. [Amended
11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 11-10]
(h) The fee for a permit to install or replace a gasoline, oil or other
fuel storage tank, other than a heating fuel storage tank, shall
be $150.
(i) The fee to install carpeting shall be $50 (plus DCA). [Added
10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07]
(j) The fee for a partial permit release to begin construction shall
be $50. [Added 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07]
(k) The fee for asbestos removal shall be $50 for residential
properties and $100 for commercial properties. [Added
10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07]
(2) Plumbing fixtures and equipment. The fees shall be as follows:
(a) The minimum fee shall be $75 for a commercial structure and
$60 for a residential structure, to include the first fixture or the
installation of gas piping. [Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord. No.
11-10]
(b) The fee shall be $10 per fixture connected to the plumbing
system for all fixtures, except as listed below.
(c) For special devices, which include but are not limited to grease
traps, oil separators, lawn sprinkler systems, water-cooled
machines, interior roof drains, backflow preventors and sewer
ejectors, the fee shall be $50.
(d) The fee for the installation of any heating unit shall be $50 per
unit.
(e) Each separate unit for occupancy in a multiple dwelling shall
require a separate plumbing permit.
(3) Electrical fixture and devices. The minimum fee shall be $60. The
fee shall be based upon the number of electrical fixtures and
devices to be installed as follows: [Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 11-10]
§ A175-6 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-6
A174:583
(a) For the first block consisting of up to and including one to 50
receptacles, fixtures or devices, the fee shall be $50.
(b) For each additional block consisting of up to and including 25
receptacles, fixtures or devices, the fee shall be $10.
(c) For all other electrical items, fees shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20iii(1) through (12) and any contractual or
administrative arrangements into which the Township may
enter.
(4) Fire protection fees shall be charged as follows:
(a) For the installation of sprinkler systems:
[1] For the first 20 heads: $50.
[2] For 21 to 100 heads: $100.
[3] For 101 to 200 heads: $195.
[4] For 201 to 400 heads: $475.
[5] For more than 400 heads: $850.
(b) For the installation of standpipes: $100.
(c) For the installation of automatic fire alarms and smoke and
heat detectors:
[1] For the first 20 units: $50.
[2] For 21 to 100 units: $100.
[3] For 101 to 200 units: $150.
[4] For 201 to 400 units: $200.
[5] For more than 400 units: $300.
(d) For the installation of commercial cooking suppression
systems: $50 per unit.
(e) For the installation of manual fire alarms, the fee for each
manual fire alarm pull station shall be $25, with a minimum fee
of $50.
(f) For the installation of audible/visible hornstrobes, $25 per unit,
with a minimum fee of $50.
(g) For the installation of exit signs, $25 for up to 10 signs and $50
if over 10 signs.
(h) For the installation of emergency lighting, $25 for up to 10
lights and $50 if over 10 lights.
§ A175-6 VERONA CODE § A175-6
A174:584
§ A175-7. Verona Community Pool; membership and other fees.
[Added 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2-2001; amended 3-18-2002 by Ord.
No. 5-2002]
Type Fee
Membership fees and all other fees
Fee
As established by resolution of the
Township Governing Body
(i) For the installation of exit signs/emergency lighting packs, $25
for up to 10 packs and $50 if over 10 packs.
(j) For the installation of Knox box rapid entry boxes, $25 per unit.
D. Demolition permit fee. Permit fees for demolition of a building or
structure shall be $50 for an accessory structure; $100 for a one- or
two-family residential structure; and $200 for all other structures.
E. A sign permit fee. The fee for a permit to construct or erect a sign shall
be $2 per square foot, with a minimum fee of $50 per sign.
F. Certificate fees.
(1) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for new construction shall be
10% of the building permit or a minimum fee of $50.
(2) The fee for certificate of continued occupancy, for certificate of
occupancy granted pursuant to a change of use and for multiple
certificates of occupancy shall be $100.
(3) The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy for a multifamily
dwelling or commercial use shall be $100. A temporary certificate
of occupancy shall expire 90 days from the date issued. An
extension may be applied for and, if granted, there shall be an
additional fee of $100 charged.
(4) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $100.
G. Elevator fees shall be as follows:
(1) The fee for a permit to install an elevator device shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.
(2) The fee for inspection and witnessing of test for an elevator,
escalator, moving walk, dumbwaiter or other elevator device shall
be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.
H. State permit fees. In order to provide for training and certification and
technical support programs required by the Uniform Construction
Code, the Township shall collect a surcharge fee for new construction
within the municipality. The fee shall be established by and determined
in accordance with the N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19, as may be hereafter amended
or supplemented.
§ A175-6 CABLE TELEVISION § A175-8
A174:585
§ A175-8. Senior citizens. [Added 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07]
Type Fee
Dancing $20.00
Splashercize $20.00
Ballroom dancing $2.00
Tai chi exercise $15.00 - $25.00
Crafts $5.00 - $25.00
Share - food co-op $14.00/unit
Out-of-town/state trips (day) $5.00 - $60.00
Out-of-town/state trips (overnight) $25.00 - $2,000.00
Exercise $10.00 - $40.00
Variety and drama classes $20.00 - $150.00
S/C event parties $3.00 Residents/$5.00 Nonresidents
Holiday, Picnic, Oktoberfest
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-05 3-21-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A175
2-05 3-21-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A175
3-05 3-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
4-05 3-21-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A175
5-05 3-21-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A175
6-05 5-16-2005 Exceeding budget
appropriation limits
NCM
7-05 4-18-2005 Officers and employees
amendment; Police
Department amendment
Chs. 34 and 38
8-05 6-20-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 150
9-05 Not adopted
10-05 5-16-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A175
§ A175-8 VERONA CODE § DL-1
A174:586
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-05 6-20-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 150
12-05 Salary Not adopted
13-05 Salary Not adopted
14-05 8-22-2005 Changing boundary line
between Borough of
North Caldwell and
Township of Verona
NCM
15-05 9-26-2005 Hilltop Property
Redevelopment Plan:
zoning requirements
Ch.150, Art. XVI
16-05 Zoning amendment Ch. 150
17-05 10-17-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
18-05 Bond NCM
19-05 Bond NCM
20-05 Bond NCM
21-05 Did not pass
22-05 12-19-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 150
23-05 11-21-2005 Stormwater management Ch. 123, Art. II
Res. No. 51 3-20-2006 Enforcement of fire
safety standards
(amending Ord. No.
10-2003)
Ch. 74, Art. II
1-06 5-15-2006 Establishing CAP bank NCM
2-06 Bond NCM
3-06 6-19-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 150
4-06 5-15-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 150, Art. XII
5-06 Bond NCM
6-06 Bond NCM
7-06 Bond NCM
8-06 Bond NCM
9-06 9-5-2006 Salaries NCM
10-06 9-5-2006 Salaries NCM
11-06 9-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
12-06 Bond NCM
13-06 10-30-2006 Property acquisition NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION § DL-1
A174:587
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-06 12-18-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
15-06 Salaries NCM
1-07 3-5-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 150
2-07 3-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 150
3-07 2-20-2007 Financial agreement NCM
4-07 2-20-2007 Financial agreement NCM
5-07 5-21-2007 Exceeding budget: cap
bank
NCM
6-07 4-16-2007 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 123
7-07 5-7-2007 Flood control Ch. 77
8-07 Cap ordinance NCM
9-07 Cap ordinance NCM
10-07 Cap ordinance NCM
11-07 Cap ordinance NCM
12-07 Salaries NCM
13-07 Salaries NCM
14-07 10-22-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A175
Res. No. 112 11-5-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A175
1-08 Bond NCM
2-08 Capital ordinance NCM
3-08 Index rate NCM
4-08 6-2-2008 Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 17 (footnote
only)
5-08 Bond NCM
6-08 Bond NCM
7-08 Bond NCM
8-08 Bond NCM
9-08 7-14-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
10-08 7-14-2008 Business establishments
amendment
Ch. 61
Res. No. 99 10-6-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A175
11-08 Salaries NCM
12-08 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 VERONA CODE § DL-1
A174:588
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-08 10-20-2008 Criminal history record
background check
Ch. 66
14-08 10-20-2008 Business establishments
amendment
Ch. 61
15-08 12-1-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
16-08 12-15-2008 Peace and good order:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 102, Art. I
17-08 12-15-2008 Business establishments
amendment
Ch. 61
1-09 Bond NCM
2-09 Withdrawn
3-09 Capital ordinance NCM
4-09 Index rate NCM
5-09 Bond NCM
6-09 Bond NCM
7-09 Bond NCM
8-09 Bond NCM
9-09 7-20-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
10-09 9-17-2009 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 107
11-09 Salaries NCM
12-09 Salaries NCM
13-09 Franchise agreement NCM
1-10 Bond NCM
2-10 Bond NCM
3-10 5-3-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 150
4-10 5-3-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
5-10 Index rate NCM
6-10 Bond NCM
7-10 Bond NCM
8-10 Bond NCM
9-10 Bond NCM
10-10 8-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION § DL-1
A174:589
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-10 11-1-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A175
12-10 Salaries NCM
13-10 Salaries NCM
1-11 2-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
2-11 3-7-2011 Salaries NCM
3-11 3-7-2011 Bond NCM
4-11 3-21-2011 Appropriation NCM
5-11 6-6-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
6-11 8-15-2011 Zoning See Ch. 150
7-11 Bond NCM
8-11 Bond NCM
9-11 Bond NCM
10-11 Bond NCM
11-11 Tax exemption
agreement with CenRose
Hilltop Urban Renewal II
LLC
NCM
12-11 9-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
13-11 10-17-2011 Salaries NCM
14-11 10-17-2011 Salaries NCM
15-11 Bond NCM
16-11 11-21-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
1-12 4-2-2012 Shade trees and shrubs
amendment
Ch. 171
2-12 5-7-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3-12 5-21-2012 Bond NCM
4-12 8-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
Res. No. 74 8-13-2012 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 118
5-12 10-15-2012 Stormwater
management: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 123, Art. I
6-12 Tabled
§ DL-1 VERONA CODE § DL-1
A174:590
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-12 Tabled
8-12 Tabled
9-12 11-19-2012 Fees amendment Ch. A175
10-12 12-17-2012 Salaries NCM
11-12 12-17-2012 Salaries NCM
1-13 Bond NCM
2-13 Bond NCM
3-13 Bond NCM
4-13 6-3-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
5-13 Bond NCM
6-13 Zoning amendment See Ch. 150
7-13 Salaries NCM
8-13 Salaries NCM
Res. No. 132 11-18-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A175
1-14 2-18-2014 Designation of Township
as redeveloper for
Hilltop Redevelopment
Area
NCM
2-14 4-7-2014 Bond NCM
3-14 6-2-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
4-14 Defeated
5-14 7-14-2014 Bond NCM
6-14 7-14-2014 Bond NCM
7-14 7-14-2014 Bond NCM
8-14 9-2-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
Res. No. 99 9-15-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A175
1-15 6-15-2015 Zoning amendment See Ch. 150
2-15 2-17-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3-15 2-17-2015 Taxicabs and limousines:
limousines
Ch. 132, Art. II
4-15 3-2-2015 Capital improvements NCM
5-15 6-1-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
6-15 7-20-2015 Appropriation NCM
7-15 9-9-2015 Financial agreement NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION § DL-1
A174:591
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-15 9-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 140
§ DL-1 VERONA CODE § DL-1
A174:592

ZONING ORDINANCE AND MAP
CHAPTER 150
TOWNSHIP OF VERONA
PREPARED BY:
GREGORY MASCERA, ESQ.
BANNON, RAWDING, MCDONALD & MASCERA, PA
&
JASON L. KASLER, ACIP, PP
KASLER ASSOCIATES
PREPARED FOR:
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
TOWNSHIP OF VERONA
First Reading: July 11, 2011
Consistency Review: July 28, 2011
Second Reading: August 15, 2011
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I TITLE AND PURPOSE ....................................................................................................................1
150-1.1. SHORT TITLE. ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1
150-1.2 PURPOSES. ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1
150-1.3 CONFLICT BETWEEN TWO OR MORE REGULATIONS. ............................................................................ 1
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE ............................................................................................2
150-2.1 WORD USAGE. .......................................................................................................................................................................... 2
150-2.2 INTERPRETATIONS. ............................................................................................................................................................. 3
150-2.3 DEFINITIONS. ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4
ARTICLE III ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES; ZONING MAP .......................................................................52
150-3.1 ZONES DESIGNATED. ....................................................................................................................................................... 52
150-3.2 ZONING MAP. .......................................................................................................................................................................... 52
150-3.3 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES. ................................................................................................................... 53
ARTICLE IV ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS ........................................................................................54
150-4.1 SCHEDULES OF REGULATIONS. .............................................................................................................................. 54
150-4.2 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS. .......................................................................................................................... 54
150-4.3 PROHIBITED USES IN ALL ZONE DISTRICTS IN THE TOWNSHIP OF VERONA. ................. 55
ARTICLE V SUPPLEMENTARY LOT, HEIGHT AND YARD REGULATIONS .........................................58
150-5.1 LOT REGULATIONS. .......................................................................................................................................................... 58
150-5.2 HEIGHT REGULATIONS. ................................................................................................................................................. 59
150-5.3 YARD REGULATIONS. ...................................................................................................................................................... 60
150-5.4 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE. ...................................................................................................................................... 64
ARTICLE VI SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN PERMITTED USES ..65
150-6.1 ANIMAL HOSPITALS AND ANIMAL KENNELS. ............................................................................................ 65
150-6.2 COMMUNITY BUILDINGS, CLUBS, SOCIAL HALLS, LODGES, FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS & SIMILAR USES. ...65
150-6.3 COMMUNITY RESIDENCES. ......................................................................................................................................... 65
ARTICLE VII REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN ACCESSORY USES ...........................................66
150-7.1 ACCESSORY USE & STRUCTURE REGULATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. ............... 66
150-7.2 ACCESSORY USE & STRUCTURE REGULATIONS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. ... 67
150-7.3 FENCES. ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 67
150-7.4 OUTDOOR DISPLAYS. ....................................................................................................................................................... 70
150-7.5 PERMANENT AND PORTABLE SWIMMING POOLS. .................................................................................. 70
150-7.6 PRIVATE GARAGES. .......................................................................................................................................................... 70
150-7.7 TENNIS AND BASKETBALL COURTS. .................................................................................................................. 71
150-7.8 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. ................................................................. 71
150-7.9 SIGNS…………... .................................................................................................................................................................... 72
150-7.10 VENDING MACHINES. ...................................................................................................................................................... 81
150-7.11 SATELLITE OR DISH ANTENNAS. ........................................................................................................................... 82
150-7.12 RETAINING WALLS. ........................................................................................................................................................... 83
150-7.13 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT ......................................................................................................................................... 83
150-7.14 GREENHOUSES. ..................................................................................................................................................................... 83
150-7.15 DUMPSTERS. ............................................................................................................................................................................ 85
150-7.16 SHOPPING CART CORRALS. ........................................................................................................................................ 85
150-7.17 UTILITY BOXES. ................................................................................................................................................................... 86
150-7.18 SIDEWALKS, NON RESIDENTIAL ............................................................................................................................ 86
150-7.19 STREET FURNITURE (EXCEPT FOR SIDEWALK CAFES). ...................................................................... 87
150-7.20 SHEDS. .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 88
150-7.21 DECKS........................................................................................................................................................................................... 88
150-7.22 SIDEWALK CAFÉS. .............................................................................................................................................................. 88
150-7.23 OUTDOOR RESTAURANT SEATING. ..................................................................................................................... 91
ARTICLE VIII REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN CONDITIONAL USES ......................................93
150-8.1 CONDITIONAL USES. ........................................................................................................................................................ 93
150-8.2 APPLICATION PROCEDURE. ........................................................................................................................................ 93
150-8.3 MIXED USES . .......................................................................................................................................................................... 94
150-8.4 AUTOMOBILE SALES ........................................................................................................................................................ 95
150-8.5 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS ....................................................................................................................... 95
150-8.6 BUSINESS PROVIDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT .......................................................................................... 96
150-8.7 ESSENTIAL SERVICES. ..................................................................................................................................................... 97
150-8.8 HOME OCCUPATIONS. ..................................................................................................................................................... 98
150-8.9 DONATION DROP BOX. ................................................................................................................................................... 99
150-8.10 CABANAS. ................................................................................................................................................................................ 103
150-8.11 MASSAGE PARLORS, MASSEURS AND MASSEUSES ............................................................................. 103
ARTICLE IX REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN TEMPORARY USES ........................................106
150-9.1 MOBILE TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS. ....................................................................................... 106
150-9.2 MOBILE TEMPORARY TOILET FACILITIES. .................................................................................................. 106
150-9.3 DUMPSTERS. .......................................................................................................................................................................... 106
ARTICLE X REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN INHERENTLY BENEFICIAL USES .................107
150-10.1 SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY STRUCTURES. ........................................................................... 107
ARTICLE XI BUFFER AND GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS .........................................108
150-11.1 BUFFER ZONE REQUIREMENTS. ............................................................................................................................ 108
150-11.2 GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS. ................................................................................................ 109
150-11.3 LOCATION, SHAPE AND CONTENT OF AREAS. ......................................................................................... 111
150-11.4 USE OF AREAS RESTRICTED. ................................................................................................................................... 111
150-11.5 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS. ................................................................................................................................. 112
150-11.6 DESIGN CRITERIA. ............................................................................................................................................................ 112
150-11.7 PLANT SELECTION AND PLACEMENT. ............................................................................................................ 113
ARTICLE XII OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING & PERFORMANCE STANDARDS & DESIGN CRITERIA .120
150-12.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. ...................................................................................................................................... 120
150-12.2 SIZE OF PARKING SPACES. ........................................................................................................................................ 121
150-12.3 ACCESS. ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 121
150-12.4 ACCESS WIDTH. .................................................................................................................................................................. 121
150-12.5 OFF STREET LOADING ................................................................................................................................................... 123
150-12.6 OFF STREET PARKING ................................................................................................................................................... 123
150-12.7 PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES. .............................................................................. 126
150-12.8 ADDITIONAL OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS. ......................................................................... 128
150-12.9 DESIGN CRITERIA. ............................................................................................................................................................ 130
ARTICLE XIII NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES ...............................................................132
150-13.1 CONTINUATION OF USE. ............................................................................................................................................. 132
150-13.2 PARTIAL DESTRUCTION OF NONCONFORMING USE: RESTORATION OR REPAIR. ..... 132
150-13.3 DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT. ....................................................................................................... 133
150-13.4 MODERNIZATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES. .................................................................. 133
150-13.5 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS LAWFULLY UNDER CONSTRUCTION. ................................. 134
ARTICLE XIV PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ...........................................................................................135
150-14.1 AIR QUALITY. ....................................................................................................................................................................... 135
150-14.2 ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE. ............................................................................................................. 135
150-14.3 FIRE PROTECTION. ........................................................................................................................................................... 135
150-14.4 HUMIDITY, HEAT AND GLARE. .............................................................................................................................. 135
150-14.5 NOISE CONTROL – METHOD OF MEASUREMENT. .................................................................................. 135
150-14.6 RADIATION. ............................................................................................................................................................................ 136
150-14.7 VIBRATION. ............................................................................................................................................................................ 136
ARTICLE XV BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ....................................................................................................137
150-15.1 CONTINUANCE OF ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. ...................................................................... 137
ARTICLE XVI ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT .......................................................................138
150-16.1 ENFORCING OFFICER. .................................................................................................................................................... 138
150-16.2 BUILDING PERMIT, CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY & CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL. . 138
150-16.3 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. ............................................................................................................................ 138
150-16.4 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES. ............................................................................................. 139
150-16.5 NOTICE OF DENIAL TO PERMIT A CERTIFICATE. .................................................................................... 139
150-16.6 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. ............................................................................................................................... 140
150-16.7 AMENDMENTS. .................................................................................................................................................................... 141
150-16.8 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS. .................................................................................................................... 141
ARTICLE XVII SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ............................................................................................. 142
150-17.1 R-100 (VERY LOW DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT ................................................... 142
150-17.2 R-70 (LOW DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT ..................................................................... 144
150-17.3 R-60 (MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT ........................................................... 146
150-17.4 R-50B (MEDIUM/HIGH DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT ......................................... 148
150-17.5 R-50 (HIGH DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT .................................................................... 150
150-17.6 R-40 (VERY HIGH DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT .................................................... 152
150-17.7 A-1 (MULTI FAMILY - LOW RISE) ZONE DISTRICT ................................................................................. 154
150-17.8 A-1R (MULTI FAMILY-LOW RISE-REDEVELOPMENT) ZONE DISTRICT ................................. 155
150-17.9 A-2 (MULTI FAMILY - HIGH RISE) ZONE DISTRICT ................................................................................ 155
150-17.10 A-3 (RESIDENTIAL - TOWNHOUSE) ZONE DISTRICT ............................................................................. 156
150-17.11 C-2 (PROFESSIONAL OFFICE AND BUSINESS) ZONE DISTRICT .................................................... 159
150-17.12 R-CMO (RESIDENTIAL - CONDITIONAL MIXED OFFICE) ZONE DISTRICT ........................... 161
150-17.13 MR (MIXED RETAIL) ZONE DISTRICT ............................................................................................................... 163
150-17.14 TC (TOWN CENTER) ZONE DISTRICT ................................................................................................................. 165
150-17.15 ETC (EXTENDED TOWN CENTER) ZONE DISTRICT ................................................................................ 169
150-17.16 RR (REGIONAL RETAIL) ZONE DISTRICT ....................................................................................................... 169
150-17.17 P (PUBLIC) ZONE DISTRICT ....................................................................................................................................... 171
150-17.18 SP (SEMI PUBLIC) ZONE DISTRICT ...................................................................................................................... 172
150-17.19 T (TRANSPORTATION) ZONE DISTRICT ........................................................................................................... 173
ARTICLE XIIX HILLTOP PROPERTY REDEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS .......................................174
150-18.1 PREAMBLE .............................................................................................................................................................................. 174
150-18.2 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT ONE........ 175
150-18.3 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT TWO ...... 182
150-18.4 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT THREE ............... 185
150-18.5 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT FOUR .... 189
150-18.6 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT FIVE ....... 191
150-18.7 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT SIX .......... 192
150-18.8 GENERAL REGULATIONS ........................................................................................................................................... 193
ARTICLE XIX AFFORDABLE HOUSING .....................................................................................................197
150-19.1 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................................................................... 197
150-19.2 ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON POSITION AND COMPENSATION; POWERS AND DUTIES .. 197
ARTICLE XX APPLICATION FOR A ZONE CHANGE ...............................................................................201
150-20.1 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................................................................... 201
150-20.2 PLANNING BOARD REVIEW ...................................................................................................................................... 201
150-20.3 NOTICE TO THE GOVERNING BODY .................................................................................................................. 201
150-20.4 DUTIES OF THE PLANNING BOARD .................................................................................................................... 201
150-20.5 REPORT TO THE GOVERNING BODY ................................................................................................................. 202
150-20.6 RIGHT TO APPEAL ............................................................................................................................................................ 202
ARTICLE XXI DEVELOPMENT FEE ............................................................................................................203
150-21.1 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................................................................... 203
150-21.2 BASIC REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................................................................................. 203
150-21.3 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEES .................................................................................................................. 203
150-21.4 NON RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEES ..................................................................................................... 204
150-21.5 ELIGIBLE EXACTIONS; INELIGIBLE EXACTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS ..................................... 204
150-21.6 COLLECTION OF FEES ................................................................................................................................................... 205
150-21.7 CONTESTED FEES .............................................................................................................................................................. 205
150-21.8 AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND ............................................................................................................. 205
150-21.9 USE OF FUNDS ...................................................................................................................................................................... 206
150-21.10 ONGOING COLLECTION OF FEES .......................................................................................................................... 207
Page 1
ARTICLE I TITLE AND PURPOSE
150-1.1. SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Verona.”
150-1.2 PURPOSES.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Among other purposes, those provisions are intended to provide for adequate light, air and convenience of access; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire and other dangers; to avoid undue concentration of population by regulating and limiting the use of land and the height and bulk of buildings wherever erected; to limit and determine the size of yards, courts and other open spaces and to regulate the density of population, all with reasonable consideration to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of property and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Township of Verona.
B. It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically or impliedly repealed in this chapter, or any private restrictions placed on property by covenant, deed or other private agreement unless repugnant thereto. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage or requires greater lot areas or larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance, or by such rules and regulations of law or ordinance, or by such rules, regulations, permits or by such private restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall control.
150-1.3 CONFLICT BETWEEN TWO OR MORE REGULATIONS.
A. If any two or more regulations contained within the zoning ordinance appear to, or do conflict, the most restrictive regulation shall apply.
Page 2
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE
150-2.1 WORD USAGE.
A. Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this Chapter.
1. The word "person" includes firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
2. The present tense includes the future tense.
3. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
4. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
5. The words "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied."
6. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel."
B. Any word or term not defined in this Chapter shall be used with a meaning of standard usage for the context in which the word is used or shall be as defined in the Municipal Land Use Law.
C. Definitions set forth herein are intended for reference to words and phrases that are customarily used in municipal land use matters. The inclusion of a word or phrase in section 150-2.2 shall not be construed to mean that such defined word or phrase is permitted in any zoning district.
Page 3
150-2.2 INTERPRETATIONS.
A. When two structures (other than buildings) are less than three feet apart measured horizontally from one another they shall be considered one structure.
B. A retaining wall is not a fence.
3 FT
Height
Height
Height
Page 4
150-2.3 DEFINITIONS.
Certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined for the purposes hereof as follows:
ABANDONMENT
The relinquishment of property, or a cessation of the use of property, by the owner, with the intention neither of transferring rights of the property to another owner or of resuming the use of the property.
AIR CONDITIONING COMPRESSOR
A mechanical unit that performs the process of treating air so as to control simultaneously its temperature, humidity, cleanliness, and distribution within an interior space such as a room or building.
ARCADE
A continuous passageway parallel to and open to a street, open space, or building usually covered by a canopy or permanent roofing and accessible and open to the public.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or structure, that is located on the same lot as the main building or structure.
ACCESSORY USE
A use subordinate to the principal use located on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use.
ACRE
A measure of land equal to 43,560 square feet.
ADDITION
An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT, AFFORDABLE HOUSING The entity responsible for administering the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program for Verona to ensure that the restricted units under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
Page 5
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE
An establishment primarily engaged in management and general administrative functions such as executive, personnel, finance and sales activities performed centrally for other facilities of the same company.
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER
A structure used to accommodate a community based program designed to meet the needs of functionally or cognitively impaired adults over the age of 21 through an individual plan of care structured to provide a variety of health, social and related support services in a protective setting during any part of a day but less than 24 hours.
ADVERTISING, INFLATABLE
Any advertising that requires a portable fan to inflate a temporary figure that displays, reproduces or includes any letter, word, name, number, model, insignia, emblem, design, device or representation used to advertise any trade, business, profession, industry, service or other activity; product or item. These inflatable advertisements include, but are not limited to: dancing figures, inflatable tubes, blimps, balloons, and inflatable animals.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
A development included in the Township housing and fair share plan including but not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a one-hundred-percent affordable development.
AGE RESTRICTED HOUSING
Housing of any type that is occupied by households having at least one member aged 55 years or older and with no children under the age of 19 years, except as specifically provided in the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, and applicable rules and regulations of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
ALTERATION
As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the means of egress; or an enlargement, whether by extending a side or by increasing the height; or the moving of the building or structure from one location or position to another.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE
Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
Page 6
AMUSEMENT GAME
A machine or device, whether automatic or coin operated, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, which shall be ready for play by insertion of a coin or may otherwise be operated by the public for a charge for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, including pinball machines or any device which utilizes a video tube to reproduce symbolic figures and lines to be representative of real games or activities, the object of playing of which is to achieve a score.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE, OTHER
Any automatic or mechanical machine or device or entertainment or music vending machine, except an amusement game machine, which is or are operated or set in motion by the deposit therein of any coin or coins, tokens or slugs or the like thereof purchased for cash.
ANIMAL DAYCARE
Any building, structure or premises that temporarily provides shelter and services for household pets.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL
A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment.
ANIMAL KENNEL
Any building, structure or premises in which animals are kept, boarded or trained for commercial gain.
ANTENNA
Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals) wireless telecommunication signals or other communication signals.
APARTMENT
One or more rooms where a person or family lives independent of the other occupants of the same building and where each suite is used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
APARTMENT HOUSE
Any house or building which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is occupied as the home or residence of three or more families living in separate apartments.
ASSEMBLAGE
The merger of separate properties into a single tract of land.
Page 7
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE
A facility which is licensed by the Department of Health, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:36, to provide housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed, to four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor. Apartment units offer, at a minimum, one furnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette, and a lockable door on the unit entrance.
ATTIC
The space between the ceiling beams of the top story of a structure and the roof rafters of such structure.
AUTOMATIC COIN OPERATED LAUNDERETTES
A self-service facility where clothes are washed and dried.
AUTOMOBILE SALES
The display of new or used automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles for sale or lease.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION
A building or place of business where gasoline, fuel, oil and grease and/or batteries, tires and automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to the motor vehicle trade; including establishments that may not provide gasoline but provides "quick oil changes."
AWNING
A roof like cover projecting from any part of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the weather.
AVERAGE GROUND ELEVATION
The average ground elevation shall be determined by averaging the measurement of the elevations taken at all building corners and at ten-foot foot intervals around the full perimeter of the foundation. Where soil or rock removal lowers the ground elevation around the perimeter of the foundation, the building height shall be based upon the lowered elevation. Where fill raises the ground elevation around the perimeter of the foundation, building height shall be based on the elevation as it existed prior to the use of fill.
Page 8
BACKHAUL NETWORK The lines that connect a providers tower site to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and or long distance providers or the public switched telephone network.
BAKED GOODS STORE
Any establishment primarily engaged in retailing baked goods not for immediate consumption and not made on the premises.
BALCONY
A platform that projects from the wall of a building and is enclosed by a parapet or railing.
BANNER
Any temporary sign applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind attached to a structure or above a public right-of-way.
BAR, ALCOHOLIC
A structure or part of a structure used primarily for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages by the drink.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
The highest elevation, expressed in feet above sea level, of the level of flood waters occurring in the regulatory base flood.
BASEMENT
That portion of a building located partly below ground with at least half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the average grade at the building line around the full perimeter of the building.
BASKETBALL COURT
An improved area used for playing basketball. The use of a driveway for temporary recreational uses such as basketball does constitute a basketball court.
BEDROOM
A private room planned and intended for sleeping containing an egress window separated from other rooms by a door.
BELFRY
A tower or part of a tower where a bell or set of bells hangs.
Page 9
BILLBOARD
Any sign erected or maintained for the purpose of displaying outdoor advertising for products or services provided off-premises.
BOARDER
An individual other than a member of the family or household occupying a dwelling unit or a part thereof who, for a consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations and who may be furnished meals or other services as part of the consideration.
BOARDING HOUSE
Any dwelling or part of any dwelling which has space that is let by the owner or operator to more than three persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, sister or brother of the owner or operator; provided, however, that such roomers and/or boarders shall not include convalescents or chronically sick or mentally deficient or physically incompetent or aged, infirm or similar boarders and/or similar roomers who require medical attention and supervision and are usually housed in hospitals, sanatoriums, homes for the aged, nursing homes and similar institutions.
BODY MODIFICATION ESTABLISHMENTS
A personal service establishment that deliberately alters the human body for aesthetic or non-medical purpose, such as sexual enhancement, a rite of passage, denoting affiliation, trust and loyalty, religious reasons, shock value, and self-expression.
BOLLARD
A short vertical posts used to control pedestrian and vehicular traffic, protect critical infrastructure, provide perimeter highlights, or to define a pathway.
BUFFER ZONE or STRIP
Land area made up of sufficiently dense shrubs and trees, and which may include berms and/or fencing, to visibly separate one use from another, and to assist in shielding or blocking noise, lights or other nuisances.
BUILDABLE AREA, BUILDING ENVELOPE
The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard, open space and other limiting regulations established in the zoning ordinance or dictated by Federal or State regulations have been met.
Page 10
BUILDING AREA
The area included within surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of vent shafts and courts and all space if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.
BUILDING COVERAGE
See Lot Coverage.
BUILDING HEIGHT
See Height, Building.
BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT
The mechanical, electrical and elevator equipment including piping, wiring, fixtures and other accessories, which provides sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, firefighting and transportation facilities essential for the habitable occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use and occupancy.
BUSINESS SERVICES
Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, specifically advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment service; management and consulting services; protective services; commercial research; development and testing; photo finishing; copying and reproduction services and personal supply services.
CABANA
An accessory structure erected for swimming pools and utilized as a bathhouse or for pool accessory storage and may include bathroom, shower and outdoor kitchen facilities.
CAFÉ PLAN
A collection of forms and plats that contains required data to ensure the proper utilization of a portion of a public right-of-way for outdoor dining.
CAFETERIA
Any establishment, or portion of an establishment, that is primarily engaged in preparing and serving meals for immediate consumption using serving equipment, such as a steam table, a refrigerated area, and self-service nonalcoholic beverage dispensing equipment. Patrons select from food and drink items on display in a continuous serving line. Cafeterias also include buffet eating places.
CAMPUS
The grounds and buildings of a public or private college, university, hospital or school.
Page 11
CANOPY
Any structure, supported or unsupported, other than an awning, made of cloth or metal with metal frames attached to a building or structure and carried by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk.
CARPORT
A structure used to offer limited protection to vehicles, primarily domestic cars from the elements. The structure can either be free standing or attached to a wall and contains no more than three sides.
CATERER, OFF-SITE
Any establishment primarily engaged in providing single event-based food services prepared on site and transported to an event for off-site consumption.
CATERER, ON-SITE
Any establishment primarily engaged in providing on-site single-event-based food services that may include buffet or waitress/waiter service and may also include the serving of nonalcoholic and alcoholic beverages as part of the event.
CELLAR
A story partly above grade level, having more than one-half its floor to ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA)
The document issued by the Landmarks Preservation Commission which is required before any work may be commenced on any historic/landmark or any building, structure, site, object or improvement located within an historic district.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (CO)
The certificate issued by the construction official which permits the use of a building or land in accordance with approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building in its several parts together with any special stipulations or conditions of the construction permit.
CHANGE OF USE
Any change in the use of a building or portion thereof which requires a different parking standard than that which was required for the preceding use of the space in accordance with the standards set forth in section 150-12 of this chapter or which is substantially different in function from the prior use.
Page 12
CHARITABLE USE
Property used by a nonprofit or eleemosynary organization that provides a service beneficial to the general public or to a significant portion of the public for a fee or at a fee recognized as being less than that charged by profit making organizations.
CHIMNEY
A structure containing one or more flues for drawing off emissions from stationary sources of combustion.
CHURCH or HOUSE OF WORSHIP
A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are intended for the conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses associated therewith, but not including missions, district offices or regional headquarters of a religious group.
CLUB
A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and a constitution and by-laws.
COAH
The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE
A licensed motor vehicle manufactured as a truck, bus, taxi, tractor or trailer, other than a recreational vehicle, which meets any of the following criteria:
A. The vehicle is licensed for commercial purposes.
B. The vehicle contains a sign, advertisement or other graphics indicating that its use is for commercial purposes.
C. The vehicle has a gross weight in excess of three fourths of a ton.
D. A van type vehicle not having windows of at least two square feet in area in both rear side panels. A pickup type truck with a cap not having windows of at least two square feet in area in both sides of such cap.
COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION
A homeowners association or organization designed to own, maintain, and operate common facilities and to enhance and protect the common interests.
Page 13
COMMUNITY CENTER
A building used for recreational, social, educational and cultural activities, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency.
CONDOMINIUM
A structure or structures being and in accordance with the terms of a master deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units of improvements together with an undivided interest in common elements appurtenant to each such unit.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION
The entity responsible for the administration of a condominium, which entity may be incorporated or unincorporated.
CONFECTIONERY AND NUT STORE
Any establishment primarily engaged in retailing candy and other confections, nuts, and popcorn not for immediate consumption and not made on the premises.
CONFORMING USE or CONFORMING STRUCTURE
A use or structure which conforms to the regulations of this Chapter for the district in which such structure or use is located.
CONGREGATE HOUSING
A dwelling providing shelter and services for the elderly which may include meals, housekeeping, and personal care assistance.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT
A document signed by the Construction Official, which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of the Municipal Zoning Ordinance or variance there from duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY or IMPROVEMENT
A building, structure, designated object, or site that adds to the Landmark architectural qualities, Landmark associations, or archeological values for which a property or District is because a) it was present during the period of significance, and possesses Landmark integrity reflecting its character at that time or is capable of yielding important information about the period, or b) it independently meets the National Register criteria for significance [National Register Bulletin No 14, “Guidelines for Counting Contributing and Non-contributing Resources for National Register Documentation” as revised].
Page 14
COURT, COURTYARD
An open, uncovered and unoccupied space on the same lot as a building where such space is enclosed wholly or partly by buildings, walls or other enclosing devices.
CRITICAL AREA
An area with one or more of the following characteristics (1) slopes in excess of 25 percent; (2) flood plains; (3) soils classified as having a high water table; (4) soils classified as highly erodible, subject to erosion or highly acidic; (5) land incapable of meeting percolation requirements; (6) land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous industrial use; (7) fault areas; (8) stream corridors; (9) areas designated as potential reservoir sites; (10) estuaries; (11) mature stands of native vegetation; (12) aquifer recharge and discharge areas; (13) wetland and wetland buffer areas, (14) areas designated in the Register of Natural Areas of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, and (15) natural habitats which protect and preserve endangered and threatened plant and animal species.
DECIBEL A unit of measure of intensity of sound (the sound-pressure level).
DECK
An above ground flat floored roofless area.
DEMOLITION The razing of any improvement or the obliteration of any natural feature.
DETENTION BASIN
An impoundment area made by constructing an embankment or excavating a pit or both, for the purpose of temporarily storing storm water.
DEVELOPMENT FEE
Funds paid by any person, partnership, association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as permitted in COAH's rules.
DIGITAL DISPLAY SIGN (DDS)
See sign, Digital Display.
Page 15
DISTURBANCE, LAND
The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
DOG RUN An enclosed area of space where a dog can stay without a leash; is usually gated and locked so that other animals cannot enter. DOME A vault, having a circular plan and usually in the form of a portion of a sphere, so constructed as to exert an equal thrust in all directions.
DONATION DROP BOX
Any receptacle used for the collection of used clothing, shoes, and small household items donated by the public for redistribution. DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT (ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE) Any establishment commonly known as a "bar" or "tavern," or a drinking place primarily engaged in preparing and or serving alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption. DRIVEWAY An open area of land, paved with bituminous concrete (blacktop), portland-cement concrete or other durable, hard, dust-free surfacing which will not wash into the public right-of-way, used as a means of ingress and egress to a property. A driveway shall not be considered an accessory structure.
DRUG STORE
A store where the primary business is the filling of medical prescriptions, providing medical devices and supplies, and nonprescription medicines and where nonmedical products are sold.
DRY CLEANING
Cleaning textiles, fabrics, garments or other articles by the use of solvents other than water, extracting the solvents there from and drying the same.
DUMPSTER
A large container used for the temporary storage of waste.
DUMPSTER, ROLL OFF
An open top dumpster characterized by a rectangular footprint, utilizing wheels to facilitate rolling the dumpster in place. The open top container is designed to be transported by special roll-off trucks.
Page 16
DWELLING
Any permanent building or portion thereof designed or used as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.
DWELLING, ATTACHED
A one family dwelling attached to one or more one family dwellings by common vertical walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED
A dwelling which is completely surrounded by permanent open spaces.
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY
A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY
A structure or building occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for more than two families or households, and provided with separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants of each unit.
DWELLING, ONE - FAMILY
A building occupied or intended for occupancy exclusively by one family or one household, and provided with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the use of the occupants of the unit. Also referred to as a "single family dwelling".
Page 17
DWELLING, TWO - FAMILY
A building occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for no more than two families or two households, and provided with separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants of each unit, which units are separated from each other by vertical walls to and through the roof or by horizontal floors.
DWELLING UNIT
One or more rooms, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by one family or household, provided that access is directly from the outside or through a common hall and that separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities are provided within the dwelling for the exclusive use of the occupants thereof.
EAVE
The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC)
See sign, electronic message center.
ELEEMOSYNARY or PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION
A private or non private organization which is not organized or operated for the purpose of carrying on a trade or business and no part of the net earnings of which are for the benefit of any individual.
EMERGENCY
Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger or hazard to person or property.
ENCROACHMENT
Any obstruction in a delineated floodway, right-of-way, minimum setback, or adjacent land.
ENLARGEMENT
An increase in the size of an existing structure.
ENVIRONMENT
The sum of all external conditions and influences affecting the life, development and, ultimately, the survival of an organism.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS)
A statement on the positive and negative effects of development proposals and other major actions which significantly affect the environment.
Page 18
ESSENTIAL SERVICE
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, light stations, telephone lines, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories herewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies for the public health, safety or general welfare.
EXISTING BUILDING
Any structure erected prior to the adoption of the appropriate code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
EXOTIC PETS
A rare or unusual animal pet, or an animal kept as a pet which is not commonly thought of as a pet. Exotic pets include, but are not limited to the following: Non human primates, Alligators, Foxes, Bears, Wolves, Wolf/Dog Hybrid, Lions, Tigers, Bears, Raccoons, Hedgehogs, Skunks, or Hyenas.
EXTENDED CARE FACILITIES
A long-term care facility or a distinct part of a facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for the aged or a governmental medical institution.
FAA
The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC
The Federal Communication Commission. FAÇADE The front, side, or rear vertical building planes visible from any adjoining street, sidewalk, property or parking areas, excluding any roof surface area. FAÇADE, HEIGHT
The vertical distance of any building facade plane measured from the average ground elevation of the existing natural grade along the facade plane to the facade's highest point, exclusive of any chimney, steeple, mechanical equipment or elevator tower, all of which may not exceed the highest point of the roof by 12 feet or exceed the maximum building height allowed in the particular zoning district by more than eight feet.
Page 19
FAMILY
A group of persons functioning as a single housekeeping unit and whose relationship is of a permanent, stable and domestic character as distinguished from non-familial institutional use, boarding homes, fraternities, sororities, clubs, associations, transient housing or other similar forms of housing . For the purpose of this Chapter, a "family" shall include foster children placed with a family in such dwelling by the New Jersey State Board of Child Welfare or a duly incorporated child care agency.
FAMILY DAY CARE CENTER
A private establishment enrolling no more than five children between two and six years of age and where tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the care of children is charged and which is licensed by the State of New Jersey and approved by the Township of Verona to operate as a day care center.
FENCE
An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FLAG POLE A pole used to display a flag or flags only.
FLOOD
The temporary overflowing of water onto land which is usually devoid of surface water.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA
That portion of the flood hazard area outside of the floodway based on the total area inundated during the regulatory base flood plus twenty-five percent of the regulatory base flood discharge.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA
That flood plain consisting of the floodway and the flood fringe area.
Page 20
FLOOD HAZARD DESIGN ELEVATION
The highest elevation, expressed in feet above sea level, of the level of floodwaters which delineates the flood fringe area.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP
The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk of premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD OF RECORD
A flood which has occurred for which there are accurate local records available.
FLOOD PLAIN
The channel and the relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural stream or river which has been or may be covered by floodwater.
FLOOD PROOFING
A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding for the reduction or elimination of flood damage to properties, water and sanitary facilities and other utilities, structures and the contents of buildings.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a natural stream, brook or river and portions of the flood plain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream, brook or river.
FLOOR
The structure formed of beams, girders, or any construction which divides a building horizontally into stories.
FLOOR AREA
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings including lofts but not including interior parking spaces, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height shall be less than seven feet six inches.
FLOOR AREA, NET
The actual occupied area, not including accessory unoccupied areas or thickness of walls.
FLUE A pipe, tube, or channel for conveying hot air, gas, steam, or smoke, as from a furnace or fireplace to a chimney.
Page 21
FREQUENCY The number of oscillations per second of a vibration.
FRONT YARD LOT COVERAGE
The percentage of land improved with manmade features found within the area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the principal building.
FUNERAL HOME
A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.
FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT Any establishment primarily engaged in providing food services to patrons who order and are served while seated (i.e., waiter/waitress service) and pay after eating. These establishments may provide this type of food services to patrons in combination with selling alcoholic beverages, providing carry-out services, or presenting live entertainment.
GARAGE, PRIVATE
An accessory structure or use to the principal building or use on the lot, designed for storage of one or more motor vehicle having solid exterior walls and roof and having all openings enclosed either with doors or windows, or both. A private garage shall have minimum dimensions of ten feet in width and 20 feet in depth.
GARAGE, PUBLIC
Any structure or part thereof other than a private garage in which a business or service connected with motor vehicles is conducted or rendered, including storage, rental, repair, servicing, adjusting or equipping automobiles or other motor vehicles. The term "public garage" shall not apply to an automobile salesroom for the exhibition of such vehicles.
GARDEN APARTMENTS
A low-rise multifamily building containing off-street parking, and open spaces and.
GAS MART
An automobile service station that has, as an accessory use to the sale of gasoline, a retail store that sells goods to the motoring public.
Page 22
GREENHOUSE
A building which roof and sides has made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out of season plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
GLARE
The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
GRADE
The reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining a principal building at all exterior walls or base of a structure. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, when the lot line is more than six feet from the building or structure, between the building and a point six feet from the building.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA
The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use of a tenant measured from the center lines of joint partitions to the outside of the tenant walls.
GROUND COVER
Grasses or other plants grown to keep soil from being eroded.
HABITABLE SPACE
Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking but not including bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar space, cellars, garage areas or any area, where the floor to ceiling height is less than standards found in the Uniform Construction Code (UCC).
HEALTH CARE FACILITY
A facility, institution, or medical center, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center, diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care facility, skilled nursing home, nursing home, intermediate care facility, tuberculosis hospital, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home health care agency, boarding home or other home for sheltered care, and bioanalytical laboratory or central services facility serving one or more such institutions but excluding institutions that provide healing solely by prayer.
Page 23
HEIGHT, OTHER
The distance measured from the base of a structure to the highest point of the structure. When calculating the height (other than building height) the base of the structure shall be considered to be at the natural grade where the base of the structure intersects the grade.
HEIGHT, BUILDING
The vertical distance measured from the average ground elevation of the existing natural grade at the building line around the full perimeter of the building, to the buildings highest point, exclusive of chimney, steeples, mechanical equipment, elevator tower and flagpole.
HEREAFTER
After the time this ordinance becomes effective.
HERETOFORE
Before the time this ordinance becomes effective.
HIGH-RISE
A building with ten or more stories. HISTORIC ADAPTIVE REUSE The conversion of any existing principal or accessory building identified by the Master Plan as historically significant into a new residential dwelling unit building elevator while maintaining the existing facade, roofline and building exterior and characteristics of the existing building.
HOME OCCUPATION
Any business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain or support within a residential building or an accessory structure thereto, which is incidental and secondary to the use of such a building for dwelling purposes and which does not change the essential residential character of such building.
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION
A community association, other than a condominium association, which is organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests in open space or facilities.
HORTICULTURE
The cultivation of a garden or orchard.
Page 24
HOSPITAL or MEDICAL CENTER
An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL
An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to animals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical conditions.
HOT TUB
A very large tub made of ceramic, acrylic, wood, or another substance and filled with hot water in which one or more bathers may soak.
HOTEL
A building consisting of at least two stories above ground level, which provides sleeping accommodations to the general public and which contains a central entrance leading to a common lobby.
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY
Multifamily housing designed for older persons, one of whom must be 62 years of age or older. (Also known as senior citizen housing)
IMPERMEABLE
Not permitting the passage of water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
Any structure, surface, or improvement that reduces or prevents absorption of storm water into land, and includes but not limited to porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or improvements and water features. IMPROVEMENT Any structure or part thereof constructed or installed upon any real property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the location of such construction or installation for a period of at least 60 days.
Page 25
IMPROVED LOT COVERAGE
The percentage of lot area which is improved with principal and accessory buildings and structures, including all impervious surface areas such as buildings, driveways, parking lots and garages and other man-made improvements, and swimming pools.
INCLUSIONARY ZONING
Regulations which increase housing choice by providing the opportunity to construct more affordable, diverse and economic housing to meet the needs of low and moderate income families.
INDOOR TENNIS FACILITY
A building or structure containing one or more roofed and enclosed tennis courts.
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING
A building in which persons are sheltered to receive medical, charitable or other care or treatment or in which persons are held or detained by reasons of public or civic duty or for correctional purposes, including, among others, hospitals, asylums, sanatoriums, firehouses, police stations and jails.
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY
A facility which provides, on a regular basis, health related care and services to individuals who do not require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital or skilled nursing facility is designed to provide.
INTEGRITY
The authenticity of the Landmark identity of a building, structure, site, designated object, or district evidenced by the survival of the physical characteristics that existed during its Landmark or pre-Landmark period.
JUNK YARD
An area of land, with or without buildings, used for or occupied by the deposit, collection or storage outside of a building of used and discarded materials including but not limited to wastepaper, rags or sheet metal, used building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof with or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or use or disposition of the same.
KIOSK
A free standing structure upon which temporary information and/or posters, notices and announcements are posted.
KITCHEN AREA
A portion of a dwelling unit designed or used for cooking.
Page 26
LAND DISTURBANCE
Any activity involving the cleaning, cutting, excavating, filling, or grading of land, or any other activity which alters land topography or vegetative cover.
LANDMARK Any historic site or historic district which has been designated by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.1 or which has been identified in any component of the Master Plan. As used in this chapter, "landmark" may be substituted for "historic," "historic preservation" and "historic site."
LAUNDROMAT or WET-WASH LAUNDRY
An establishment used primarily for the washing and drying of clothing brought in by the customer and in which such washing and drying is performed with the use of mechanical equipment and for which a fee is charged. LIGHTNING ROD A grounded metal rod placed high on a structure, in the ground or on a tree to prevent damage by conducting its current to the ground. LIMITED-SERVICE RESTAURANT Any establishment primarily engaged in providing food services (except snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars) where patrons generally order or select items and pay before eating. Food and drink may be consumed on the premises, taken out, or delivered to the consumer's location. Some establishments in this category may provide these food services in combination with selling alcoholic beverages.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
The provision of vocalized or instrumental music, or dancers, or standup comedy, or any similar entertainment to patrons for a fee, whether such fee shall be direct or indirect through a charge for other products or services. LIVESTOCK Animals that are typically found on a farm such as horses, mares, mules, jacks, jennies, colts, cows, calves, yearlings, bulls, oxen, sheep, goats, lambs, kids, hogs, shoats, pigs, hens, or roosters. LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used to accommodate the principal use on the land and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled.
Page 27
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY
An institution which is licensed or approved by the State of New Jersey to provide health care under medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to patients who are not related to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood or adoption.
LOT AREA
The computed areas contained within the lot lines, excluding any street rights-of-way. Where no lot line is designated on the tax map, the boundary of the public right-of-way shall determine the limits of the boundary of the lot.
LOT, CORNER
A parcel of land with at least two adjacent sides abutting upon streets.
LOT, INTERIOR
A parcel of land fronting upon one street.
LOT, FLAG
A tract of land having insufficient lot width along a road or at the minimum setback line but with sufficient area to meet all lot requirements further back on the lot. Flag lots are strictly prohibited.
LOT, THROUGH
A parcel of land which extends from front to back from one street to another.
LOT, THREE-SIDED
A parcel of land located at the junction of and abutting on three intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE (BUILDING COVERAGE)
That portion of a lot which is occupied by buildings and accessory buildings but not including other areas of impervious surfaces such as walkways, driveways, patios and open parking lots.
Page 28
LOT FRONTAGE
The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE
A line of record bounding the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT
The lot line separating the lot from the street right-of-way also referred to as a "street line."
LOT LINE, REAR
The lot line opposite from the front lot line. A parcel can have more than on rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE
Any single or multi-segmented lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF
The smallest lot area established by the zoning ordinance on which a use or structure may be located in a particular district.
LOT WIDTH
The shortest distance between the side lines of a lot measured from the front yard setback.
LOW RISE
A building with one or two stories.
LOW INCOME HOUSING
Housing that is designed for a household earning 50 percent or less of the median income of the area, adjusted by household size.
MAILBOX, PUBLIC
A public box in which mail is placed for pickup and delivery by the post office.
MAILBOX, PRIVATE
A private box, as at a home, into which mail is delivered by the mail carrier.
MANUFACTURE
The converting or processing of raw, unfinished or finished materials or products, into an article or articles or substance of a different character or for use for a different purpose.
Sample locations for measuring lot width.
Page 29
MAJOR LANDMARK APPLICATION Any application for a permit required by this article which involves demolition or removal of a landmark, addition to a landmark or construction of a new structure in an historical district and which will substantially affect the characteristics of the landmark or, in the case of a structure within an historic district, will substantially affect the characteristics of the district.
MARQUEE
Any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction which projects from a wall of a building usually above an entrance. MASSAGE PARLOR An establishment that offers therapeutic massage.
MEDICAL BUILDING
A building that contains establishments dispensing health services including same day treatment but not including any building that houses patient overnight.
MEZZANINE
An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than 33 percent of the floor area of the story in which the level or levels are located.
MID-RISE
A building with three to nine stories.
MINI - WAREHOUSE
A structure containing separate storage space of varying size leased or rented on an individual basis. MINOR LANDMARK APPLICATION Any application for a permit required under this article which does not involve demolition or removal of a landmark, addition to a landmark or construction of a new structure in an historic district and which will not substantially affect the landmark or historic district.
Page 30
MOBILE HOME
Any commercially manufactured vehicle, or combination thereof, used, designed or intended for use, for permanent occupancy as living quarters for one family or household, designed to be moved occasionally from one location to another by means of wheels affixed to an axle or carriage affixed to the vehicle, propelled by the power of another vehicle to which it may be attached, whether the axle or carriage to which the wheels may be affixed is detachable or detached.
MOBILE HOME PARK
One or more parcels of land under single ownership which have been planned for the placement of or is utilized for two or more mobile homes, appurtenant structures or additions.
MOBILE TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS Temporary or portable storage units that are transportable units designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building materials, household goods, personal items and other materials for use on a limited basis on residential property. A portable temporary toilet is not a mobile temporary storage container.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING
Housing that is designed for a household earning between 50 and 80 percent of the area median income as adjusted for household size.
MOTEL
A building or a group of detached, semi-attached or attached buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, each of which, or each pair of which, has a separate entrance leading directly to the outside of the building with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which are designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of motor vehicle transients, but not including hotels, boarding or rooming houses or trailer camps.
MOTION PICTURE THEATER
A place where motion pictures are shown to the public for a fee.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY REPAIR SHOP
A place of business within a principal building where the bodies of motor vehicles are repaired and or rehabilitated. Motor vehicles shall be limited to passenger cars, vans and small trucks not exceeding two tons in weight classification.
Page 31
MULTIPLE FAMILY HOUSING
Any building or structure of one or more stories and any land appurtenant thereto, and any portion thereof, in which three or more units of dwelling space are occupied, or are intended to be occupied by three or more persons who live independently of each other.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON The employee charged by the governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the affordable housing program for Verona.
NATIONAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION ACT
A 1966 federal law that established a National Register of Historic Places, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation and authorizing grants in aid for historic properties preservation.
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA
The established criteria for evaluating the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES
The official list, established by the National Historic Preservation Act, of sites, districts, buildings, structures and objects significant in the nation's history or whose artistic or architectural value is unique.
NET DENSITY
The total number of dwelling units divided by the total land area less major recreational facilities, streets, retention, detention, and water quality basins and public facilities within the parcel. The result is expressed as dwelling units per acre (du/ac).
NON-CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY
A building, structure, designated object, or site that does not add to the Landmark architectural qualities, Landmark associations, or archeological values for which a property or District is because a) it was not present during the period of significance; b) due to alterations, disturbances, additions, or other changes, it no longer possesses Landmark integrity reflecting its character at that time or is incapable of yielding important information about the period; or c) it does not independently meet the National Register criteria for significance. [National Register Bulletin No 14, “Guidelines for Counting Contributing and Non-contributing Resources for National Register Documentation” as revised]
NON-POINT RUNOFF
Surface water entering a channel from no definable discharge source.
NUISANCE
An interference with the enjoyment and use of property.
Page 32
NUISANCE ELEMENT
Any environmental pollutant, such as smoke, odors, liquid wastes, solid wastes, radiation, noise, vibration, glare or heat that exceeds performance standards.
NURSERY
Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs and plants for sale.
NURSING HOME
An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide fulltime convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves, but not to include mental patients or persons afflicted with contagious or infectious disease or liquor or drug addiction.
OCTAVE BAND A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch. OCTAVE-BAND FILTER An instrument, standardized by the American Standards Association, used in conjunction with a sound-level meter to take measurements in specific octave bands.
OFFICE BUILDING
A building used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity, but not for manufacture, storage or sale of goods except by sample. OFFICE, COMMERCIAL Any building housing a business which engages in activities other than producing or selling commodities or providing personal service. OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL Any office used for such services as are provided by medical practitioners, lawyers, architects, engineers and similar professions.
OFFICE PARK
A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE
A storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle, and which is not located within a street right-of-way.
Page 33
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE
A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle which is located within a street or right-of-way. OPEN SPACE, USABLE An area of a lot set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for the public or private use as active or passive recreation that has a minimum dimension of 50 feet in length and 50 feet in width as measured at right angles not including buffer areas or required distances between buildings. OUTDOOR CAFÉ An open-air seating area provided by a restaurant, where patrons can eat or drink. Outdoor cafés are not intended as the primary dining area but an extension of indoor seating, for use in affable weather. Food vending machines, food preparation equipment, and other equipment such as refrigerators, coffee machines and utensils are also not permitted in outdoor cafés.
OUTDOOR STORAGE
The keeping, in an unroofed area of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four hours.
OWNER
Any person having a right, title, or interest in any property so as to be legally entitled, upon obtaining such permits and other authorizations as may be required pursuant to law, to perform construction, alteration, removal, demolition, or other work with respect to such property.
PARAPET
The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.
PARCEL
A lot or tract of land.
PARKING AREA
Any public or private land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots, garages, private driveways and legally designated areas of public streets.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE
Any open area being part of the same lot or tract on which is erected a building or structure used for the temporary storage of automobiles and other vehicles for the private use solely by the occupants thereof to which such use is accessory.
Page 34
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC
Any open area other than a street or other public way used for the temporary storage of automobiles and other vehicles and available to the public, whether for a fee or without compensation, or as an accommodation for clients, customers or employees.
PARKING SPACE
A space available for the parking of one motor vehicle.
PATIO
An accessory structure at grade that is adapted for outdoor enjoyment.
PENTHOUSE
An enclosed structure above the roof of a building, other than a roof structure or bulkhead, occupying not more than 33 1/3 percent of the roof area.
PERMANENT
Lasting or intended to last indefinitely without change.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Standards adopted by this Chapter regulating noise level, glare, earthborn or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive and flammable matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may be reasonably required by the Township of Verona, or standards required by applicable Federal, state or interstate law or municipal ordinance.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT
An establishment providing non-medical services to individuals as a primary use. Examples of these uses include, but are not limited to: barber shops, beauty salons, day/health spa, hair salons, nail salons, tanning salons foot spas, massage parlors, aroma therapy or reflexology establishments. Tattooing and other body modifications establishments do not constitute beauty services.
PERMITTED USE
Any use allowed in a zoning district, subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
PLAN
The provisions for development of a planned development, including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, public or private streets, ways and parking facilities, open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the plan," when used in this Chapter, shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in the development.
Page 35
POOL HALL OR BILLIARD HALL
A structure containing more than two pool tables or billiard tables available for use by the public in the same place, location or premises other than structures that contain establishments that sell or displays for sale pool tables or billiard tables.
PRE-EXISTING TOWERS AND PRE-EXISTING ANTENNAS
Any tower or antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has be properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance including permitted towers or antenna that have not been constructed so long as each approval is correct and not expired.
POND
A body of standing water, either natural or man-made, that is usually smaller than a lake. A wide variety of man-made bodies of water are classified as ponds, including water gardens, water features and koi ponds; all designed for aesthetic ornamentation as landscape or architectural features.
PORCH
A roofed open area, which may be screened, attached to or part of and with direct access to or from a building.
PORTICO A porch or walkway with a roof supported by columns, often leading to the entrance of a building.
POOL HALL
An establishment where pool and/or billiards is played as a primary use.
PRIMARY STREET
The street faced by the main entrance of a principal building.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING
A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the site on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a "principal building" on the lot on which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE
The primary or predominant use of a lot.
PROHIBITED USE
A use that is not permitted in a zone district whether directly or by omission.
Page 36
PSYCHIC READER
A reader who advises by professing to tell past, present or future events through extraordinary spiritual insight or by perceiving another's thought. The term "psychic reader" includes the terms “tarot card reader", "crystal gazer" "fortuneteller", "mind reader", "palmist" and "tea-leaf reader."
PSYCHIC STUDIO OR ROOM
A room used primarily for conducting the business of psychic reading.
PUBLIC WAY
Any street, alley or other parcel of land open to the outside air leading to a public street, which has been deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
REAR YARD AREA, NON CORNER LOTS
The area defined by the total square footage bounded by the entire rear of the principle building to the rear property line extending from side lot line to side lot line without regard to the minimum rear yard setback requirements.
RECHARGE
The process of renewing underground water by infiltration during wet seasons.
RECORDING STUDIO
A facility for sound recording which generally consists of two rooms, the studio or live room, and the control room, where the sound from the studio is recorded and manipulated. They are designed so that they have good acoustics and so that there is good isolation between the two rooms.
Page 37
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL
A recreation facility operated as a business and open to the public for a fee. A Commercial Recreational Facility may include, but is not limited to the following uses: Health clubs, Day Spas, Gyms, and Fitness Centers.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PERSONAL
A recreation facility provided as an accessory use on the same lot as the principal permitted use and designed to be used primarily by the occupants of the principal use and their guests.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PRIVATE
A recreation facility operated by a organization, and open only to bona fide members and guests of such organization.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PUBLIC
A recreation facility operated by a governmental agency and open to the general public.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A transportation structure, self propelled or capable of being towed by a passenger car, small pickup truck or panel truck, of such size and weight not to require any special highway movement permits and primarily designed or constructed to provide temporary, movable, living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, but not while so parked, stored and not for any commercial purposes or for profit. The term "recreational vehicle" shall be limited to the following:
A. Travel trailers or fifth-wheel trailers which are defined as portable structures built on a chassis with wheels as an integral part to make them mobile and intended to be towed by passenger cars and/or light pickup trucks or panel trucks, but not including truck tractors of any type.
B. Camping trailers which are trailers, the walls of which are so constricted as to be collapsible and made of either canvas or similar cloth or rigid material such as fiber glass, plastic or metal. Camping trailers are mounted on wheels and designed for travel and recreation use.
C. Pickup campers or truck caps which are recreational structures designed to be mounted in the bed of light pickup trucks and are designed for travel, storage or recreational use.
D. Motor homes which are constructed with a truck or motor van chassis and incapable of being separated there from.
Page 38
E. A boat or snowmobile trailer is a vehicle on which a boat or snowmobile may be transported and which is towable by a passenger car, light pickup or panel truck or mobile home. REPAIR Any work performed on an improvement which is not an addition to the improvement and which does not change the appearance of the exterior surface of the improvement. REPLACEMENT A repair or reconstruction to any improvement for which a building permit is ordinarily required. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY A scientific or research laboratory devoted to research, design and/or experimentation and processing and fabricating incidental thereto, but not including structures where materials or finished products are manufactured, processed or fabricated for sale.
RESTAURANT
A building or structure designed, used or intended for use in which food and beverage are sold and consumed primarily within the confines of an enclosed structure on the site, with seating and serving capacity for not less than 30 persons and with public floor area of not less than 600 square feet. A "restaurant" shall not include refreshment stands commonly called snack or dairy bars where consumption takes place outside of the structure or in automobiles parked upon the premises, whether brought to said automobile by the customer or by employees of the establishment. A "restaurant" shall also include pickup or delivery services wherein food is prepared on the premises for off premises consumption. Cafes, coffeehouses and cyber cafes, which provide internet access, are restaurants.
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT
An establishment which by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared ready to eat foods intended to be consumed off the premises, and where the consumption of food in vehicles on the premises is not permitted.
RESTORATION
The replication or reconstruction of a building's original architectural features. RETAIL BAKERY Any establishment primarily engaged in retailing bread and other bakery products not for immediate consumption made on the premises from flour, and not from prepared dough.
Page 39
RETAIL STORE
A store where goods are sold directly to the consumer for personal or household use, with or without incidental processing on the premises including any establishment which requires a club membership or fee payment to permit entry to the establishment for the sale of goods or services whether or not the words "wholesale or warehouse" appear in the name of the establishment.
RETAIL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT
A store that sells services such as drug store, opticians, travel agencies, real estate offices, jewelry repair, photographic studios and dry cleaners, shoe repair facilities, tailors, seamstresses.
RETAINING WALL
A structure constructed to hold back or support an earthen bank. A retaining wall shall not be considered a fence.
RETENTION BASIN
A facility that provides permanent storage of excessive surface runoff, such as a pond, pool or basin.
REVIEWING BOARD
Either the Planning Board of the Township of Verona or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, depending upon which agency has jurisdiction over the application under consideration.
RHYTHM
A harmonious sequence or pattern of masses alternating with voids of light, with shade, colors, material or styles.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar use.
ROOF
The outside top covering of a building.
Page 40
ROOF DECK
A flat floored roofless area adjoining a multifamily structure and supported by a roof below for the limited use of a single dwelling unit and not to be utilized for common space.
SATELLITE DISH or ANTENNA
A reflective dish structure which is designed for the purpose of receiving television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals and serves as an accessory structure to a principal permitted structure or use.
SCHOOL, NON COMMERCIAL
Public and parochial institutions of learning for any grade between kindergarten and 12th grade.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL
An institution offering specialized instruction in a skill or business.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR’S STANDARDS
The publication issued by the U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, entitled: “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties,” 36 CFR 68, issued in 1992 and revised and supplemented from time to time.
SEASONAL
Pertaining to, dependent on, or accompanying the seasons of the year or some particular season.
SETBACK
The distance between a lot line and any part of the building.
Page 41
SETBACK LINE
The line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within which the principal building must be erected or placed.
SHED
An accessory building with a single story; used for storage.
SHOPPING CART CORRAL
Any enclosure for confining or storing shopping carts outside of the principal structure.
SHOPPING CENTER
A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site with provision for goods delivery separated from customer access.
SIDEWALK
A paved, surfaced or leveled area used as a pedestrian travel way.
SIDEWALK CAFÉ
A full service restaurant, snack and non alcoholic beverage bar, or limited service restaurant that serves food and/or drink to be consumed by the public at tables located outdoors between a building façade and the curb line of an abutting street and within the public right of way area.
SIGHT TRIANGLE
A triangular shaped portion of land established at street intersections or intersections of driveways and streets in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
Page 42
SIGN
Any device, either freestanding or attached to a building or structure or erected, painted or represented or reproduced upon or in (to the extent provided herein) any building or structure which displays, reproduces or includes any letter, word, name, number, model, insignia, emblem, design, device or representation used to identify the premises or occupant or owner of the premises, to advertise any trade, business, profession, industry, service or other activity; to advertise any product or item; to advertise the sale or rental or use of all or part of the premises, including that upon which it is displayed, to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic, other than state, county or municipal highway and roadway markers, including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or any representation used to advertise or intended to advertise or promote the interests of any person.
Freestanding
Signs
SIGN, ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD)
Any sign which directs attention to an individual, business, product or service conducted, sold, leased or offered elsewhere than on the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, AREA OF
The area within the frame or edge of the sign. Where the sign has no such frame or edge, the area shall be the minimum area which can be defined by an enclosed foursided (straight side) geometric shape which most clearly outlines the said sign.
SIGN, BANNER
A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind.
Page 43
SIGN, BUSINESS
A sign used to identify either the trade, business, industry, or profession being conducted on the premises.
SIGN, CLOSED
A sign in which more than 50 percent of the entire area is solid or tightly enclosed or covered.
SIGN, DIGITAL DISPLAY
A display device that has the ability to display dynamic advertising.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL or INFORMATIONAL
A non advertising sign that directs attention to vehicular or pedestrian entrances or exits, parking areas, reserved parking spaces or similar site elements and is intended only for the safety and convenience of employees, patrons or visitors.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC)
A digital sign that is designed or intended to display text in a digital format and is sometime referred to as a reader board. EMC signs include “time and temperature signs”.
SIGN, FACING or SURFACE
The surface of a sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illuminated on the sign.
SIGN, FLAG
A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support, made of cloth, canvas, fabric or like material designed or intended to advertise, identify or attract attention to a business organization, service or event.
SIGN, FLASHING
A flashing sign is an illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.
SIGN, FREE-STANDING
A sign having not more than two display sides which is attached to or part of a completely self-supporting structure that is set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or structure whether portable or stationary.
SIGN, FLEX BLADE
A flexible sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support, made of cloth, canvas, fabric or like material designed or intended to advertise, identify or attract attention to a business organization, service or event and has a shape that resembles a feather.
Page 44
SIGN, GROUND
A sign supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground surface.
SIGN, HEIGHT
The measurement from the ground surface beneath the sign to the highest point of the sign.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION
A sign used to identify a common area containing a group of structures, or a single structure on a minimum site of five acres, such as residential subdivisions, apartment complexes, industrial parks, mobile home parks, or shopping centers; located at the entrance or entrances of the area, and including but not limited to a fence, wall, archway, post or column, with the letters or symbols affixed thereto.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED
Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper. Signs utilizing neon gases are illuminated signs.
SIGN, MARQUEE
A sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy or other covered structure, projecting from and supported by the building and extending beyond the building wall, building line or street lot line.
SIGN, MOVING
A sign which rotates or shifts, or appears to rotate or shift position.
SIGN, OPEN
A sign in which at least 50 percent of the enclosed area is uncovered or open to the transmission of wind.
SIGN, POLITICAL
A containing a statement about or endorsement of, any public issue or candidate(s) for public office.
SIGN, PORTABLE
A sign of a temporary nature, not securely anchored to the ground or to a building or structure and which obtains some or all of its structural stability with respect to wind or other normally applied forces by means of its geometry or character.
SIGN, PROJECTION
A device that utilizes any form of projection to cause any form of advertisement to be displayed on any surface other than the surface of said device.
Page 45
SIGN, PROJECTING
A display sign which is attached directly to the building wall, and which extends more than six inches from the face of the wall.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE
A sign placed upon a property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of the property placed thereon.
SIGN, ROOF
A sign which is erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of a building, with the principal support on the roof structure.
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD A self-supporting A-shaped freestanding temporary signs with only two visible sides that are situated adjacent to a business, typically on a sidewalk, that contains commercial speech.
SIGN, SIDEWALK
Any form of advertising placed or projected upon a sidewalk.
SIGN, TEMPORARY
A sign constructed of cloth, fabric or other lightweight temporary material with or without a structural frame intended for a limited period of display including decoration displays for holidays or public demonstrations.
SIGN, WALL
All flat signs of solid-face construction which are placed against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building or other structure so that the display surface is parallel with the plane of the wall including signs painted on an exterior or a wall.
SITE
Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land.
SLOPE
The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees.
Page 46
SLOPE, STEEP
Any slope equal to or greater than 25 percent as measured over any minimum run of ten feet. Steep slopes are determined based on contour intervals of two feet or less.
SMOKE
Solid particles generated as a result of the incomplete combustion of materials containing carbon. SNACK AND NONALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BAR Any establishment primarily engaged in preparing and/or serving a specialty snack, such as ice cream, frozen yogurt, cookies, baked goods, or popcorn and/or serving nonalcoholic beverages, such as coffee, tea, juices, or sodas for consumption at or near the premises. These establishments may carry and sell a combination of snack, nonalcoholic beverages, and other related products (e.g., coffee, beans, tea, mugs, and coffee makers) but generally promote and sell a unique snack or nonalcoholic beverage.
SOIL
All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock and can be readily excavated. SOUND-LEVEL METER An instrument, standardized by the American Standards Association, used for measurement of the intensity of sound and calibrated in decibels.
SPENDING PLAN A plan adopted by the Township to spend development fees in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1 (c). SPIRE A tall, narrow, pointed structure on the top of a building. STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE Standards adopted by ordinance regulating noise levels, glare, earth-borne or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may be reasonably required by the Township or standards required by applicable federal or state laws or municipal ordinances.
STORM WATER DETENTION
Any storm drainage technique that retards or detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin, porous pavement, dry wells or any combination thereof.
Page 47
STORY
That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor above or roof.
STORY, ABOVE GRADE
Any story having its floor surface entirely above grade except that a basement shall be considered as a story above grade when the distance from grade to the finished surface of the floor above the basement is more than six feet for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or more than 12 feet at any point.
STORY, FIRST
The lowest story or the ground story of any building, the floor of which is not more than 12 inches below the average contact ground level at the exterior walls of the building.
STORY, HALF
A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story.
STREET LINE
The dividing line between a street right-of-way and a lot. STREET FURNITURE A collective term for objects and pieces of equipment installed on streets and roads for various purposes, including: traffic barriers, benches, bollards, post boxes, phone boxes, streetlamps, traffic lights, traffic signs, bus stops, fountains memorials, and waste receptacles. STRUCTURAL ALTERATION Any changes in the supporting members of a building or structures, such as walls, columns, beams or girders.
SUPERMARKET
A retail establishment primarily selling food as well as other convenience and household goods.
SWIMMING POOL
Any structure having a depth greater than two feet and a water surface area in excess of 250 square feet which is used for swimming, bathing or wading purposes.
TEMPORARY USE
A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
Page 48
TENNIS COURT
An improved area used for playing tennis.
THEATER
A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performances.
TOILET, PORTABLE
A portable self contained outhouse manufactured of molded plastic and often used as a temporary toilet for construction site or large gatherings and events.
TOPOGRAPHY
The configuration of a surface area showing relative elevations.
TOWER, COMMUNICATION
Any structure that is designed and constructed primary for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes including self-supporting lattices, towers, guyed towers or monopole towers including radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures.
TOWER, WATER
A tower with a large container for storing water that is utilized when normal water pressure is inadequate.
TOWNHOUSE
A building or structure designed for or occupied by no more than one family or household and attached to other similar buildings or structures by not more than two party walls extending from the foundation to the roof and providing two direct means of access from the outside containing cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the use of each family or household of the townhouse including a building or structure in a fee simple, condominium, cooperative or leasehold ownership or any combination thereof.
UNDEVELOPED or UNIMPROVED LAND
Land in its natural state before development.
UNIQUE NATURAL FEATURES
That part of the natural environment which is rare or not duplicated in the community or region.
Page 49
USE
The specific purpose for which land or a building, structure or facilities is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VEGETATIVE PROTECTION
Stabilization of erosive or sediment producing areas by covering the soil with permanent or short-term seeding, mulching, or sodding.
VENDING MACHINE
A coin or bill operated machine that dispenses merchandise.
VIDEO GAME ARCADE
An establishment that as its primary use contains a collection of videogames that can be played by a customer for a fee.
WADING POOL
An above ground or in ground structure containing less than 24 inches of water.
WAREHOUSE
A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
WAREHOUSING
Terminal facilities for handling and storing freight without the maintenance of vehicles.
WATER FEATURES
One or more landscaping items from a range of fountains, pools, ponds, cascades, waterfalls, and streams.
WEATHERVANE
A mechanical device attached to an elevated structure; rotates freely to show the direction of the wind.
WIND TURBINE
A structure that use moving air to generate electricity through the use of blades that are easily turned by the wind. This rotating motion is translated inside the turbine into an electric current, which is then interconnected via cables to a nearby electric grid.
WINDOW
Any opening in the exterior wall or roof of any structure for the purpose of admitting air or light, whether or not covered with glass, plastic or other covering.
Page 50
WINDOW SPACE
The aggregate square footage of all windows on any given story of any structure, regardless of the angle or angles at which they are set including all portions of any door which contains a window.
YARD
An open space which lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground.
YARD, FRONT
A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specified elsewhere in this Chapter. The depth of the front yard shall be measured parallel to and at right angles to the front lot line.
YARD, REAR
A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured parallel to and at right angles to the rear property line. If a lot has two side lot lines converging on a single point, the rear yard shall be measured radially from said point.
YARD, SIDE
An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building extending from the front to the rear yard. The width of the side yard shall be measured parallel to the side line of the lot. The minimum side yard setback on a corner lot shall be at least 1.5 times the minimum yard requirement.
ZERO LOT LINE
The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the buildings side rests directly on a lot line.
Page 51
ZONE
A specifically delineated area or district in the municipality within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.
ZONING
The division of the municipality into districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings within such district.
ZONING BOARD
The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Township of Verona.
ZONING MAP
The Zoning Map of the Township of Verona, New Jersey.
Page 52
ARTICLE III ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES; ZONING MAP
150-3.1 ZONES DESIGNATED.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Verona is hereby divided into the following types of zones, differentiated according to use, area and bulk regulations, designated as follows:
ZONE DESIGNATIONS
ZONE DESCRIPTION
R-100
R-70
R-60
R-50B
Very Low Density Single Family Residential
Low Density Single Family Residential
Medium Density Single Family Residential
Medium/High Density Single Family Residential
R-50
High Density Single Family Residential
R-40
Very High Density Single Family Residential
A-1
Multi Family Residential - Low Rise
A-1A
Multi Family Residential - Low Rise (club type)
A-2
Multi Family Residential - High Rise
A-3
Residential - Townhouse
C-2
Professional Office and Business
MO
Mixed Office
MR
Mixed Retail
TC
Town Center
ETC
Extended Town Center
RR
Regional Retail
P
Public
SP
Semi Public
T
Transportation / Street Furniture
150-3.2 ZONING MAP.
The location and boundaries of said districts are hereby established on the Zoning Map of the Township of Verona, as may be amended or supplemented, which is hereby made a part of this Chapter. Said map or maps and all notations, references and designations shown thereon shall be, as such, a part of this Chapter as if the same were all fully described and set forth herein.
Page 53
150-3.3 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES.
A. Designation of zone boundaries. The zone boundary lines are intended generally to follow the existing lot lines; the center lines of rivers, streams and other waterways; and municipal boundary lines. When a district boundary line does not follow such a line, its position shall be shown on the Zoning Map by a specific dimension expressing its distance, in feet, from a street line or other boundary line as indicated.
B. Determination of doubtful lines. In cases of uncertainty or disagreement as to the true location of any zone boundary line, the determination thereof shall lie with the jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. Where a district boundary line is shown as approximately parallel to a street or highway, such boundary shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance from the nearest right-of-way line as indicated on the Zoning Map.
Page 54
ARTICLE IV ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
150-4.1 SCHEDULES OF REGULATIONS.
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each zone district are set forth in the attached schedules, which are supplemented by other sections of this Chapter.
150-4.2 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided:
A. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as specified among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the district in which such building or land is located.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in which such building is located.
C. No building or structure shall be erected, no existing building or structure shall be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open space is located.
D. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
E. No minimum off-street parking area or loading or unloading area shall be considered as providing off-street parking, loading or unloading for a use or structure on any other lot or parcel than the principal use to which it is ancillary, except as provided herein.
Page 55
F. No commercial trailers, or vehicles used or intended for conveyance upon public highways either under their own power or by attachment to a motor vehicle or through other means of transportation, shall be used for the storage of any type of goods or materials on any premises in any zoning district within the Township of Verona. Any commercial trailers or vehicles described in the preceding sentence shall be deemed to be used for storage purposes if the trailer or vehicle remains on the premises in excess of seven days.
G. Number of Principal Residential Structures per Lot Restricted.
Every residential building or residential structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and in no event, except in the case of garden apartments, apartment buildings and planned developments, shall more than one principal building or structure and its accessory buildings be located on one lot.
H. General Use Restriction.
Any use not specifically designated as a principal permitted use, an accessory use or a conditional use is specifically prohibited from any zone district in the Township of Verona.
150-4.3 PROHIBITED USES IN ALL ZONE DISTRICTS IN THE TOWNSHIP OF VERONA.
A. The following uses are not permitted, accessory or conditional uses and are prohibited in all zone districts in the Township of Verona. This list is not exhaustive of all uses that are prohibited.
Uses Specifically Prohibited
Acetylene gas manufacture or storage.
Alcohol manufacture.
Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
Arsenals, storage or manufacture of gun powder, ammunition and blasting material.
Asphalt manufacture or refining.
Auction rooms; flea markets.
Auto laundries (car washes) , except when operated in conjunction with a duly authorized new car agency and when located on the same property.
Automobile junkyards or wrecking yards.
Boarding Houses or Rooming Housing.
Bingo halls or bingo parlors or similar types of amusement establishments, except in halls owned and operated by churches and similar charitable organizations.
Page 56
Blast furnace, forge plants, rolling mills, foundry.
Body Modification Establishments.
Boiler works.
Brick, pottery, tile or terra-cotta manufacture.
Carrousels (Permanent), ferris wheel, merry-go-rounds, roller coasters, miniature and practice golf courses, shooting galleries.
Cellular communication towers, cells and antennas.
Celluloid or film manufacture or extraction of products there from
Chemical manufacture or storage of chemicals having a flammable, explosive or toxic base or which have an odor.
Cement, cinder block, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture.
Coke ovens.
Community drop-in centers or rehabilitation centers for those afflicted with drug abuse alcoholism, diseased, or mental illness.
Cotton oil manufacture.
Disinfectant, insecticide or poison manufacture.
Distillation of coal, petroleum, refuse, grain, wood or bone.
Dog pounds or animal shelters.
Dormitories, Fraternity or Sorority Houses.
Dye manufacture.
Emery cloth and sandpaper manufacture.
Establishments for the distribution of free food, toiletries, clothes, household goods, etc. including soup kitchens.
Explosives or fireworks manufacture and storage.
Fat-rendering plant.
Fertilizer manufacture.
Fish and meat: wholesale smoking or curing.
Freak shows or wax museums.
Glue, size, adhesive or gelatin manufacture.
Grain drying or food manufacture from refuse, marsh or grain.
Harboring or keeping of exotic pets.
House-wreckers yard or secondhand lumberyard.
Incineration, except publicly owned incinerators or accessory to an apartment building or hospital, reduction, storage or dumping of slaughter house refuse, rancid fats, garbage, dead animals or offal.
Junkyards or the storage, sorting or bailing of junk, scrap iron, paper, bottles, metal or rags.
Keeping of livestock.
Match manufacture.
Motels, tourist camps or cabins; trailer camps or courts.
Oilcloth and linoleum manufacture.
Paint, oil, varnish, turpentine, shellac, enamel, japan, lacquer or solvents manufacture.
Paper pulp manufacture.
Petroleum refining.
Page 57
Plastics manufacture or the manufacture of articles from plastic having an inflammable base.
Pool hall.
Potash works.
Power forging, riveting, hammering, punching, chipping, drawing, rolling or tumbling of metals except as necessary incident of manufacture of which these processes form a minor part and which are carried on without objectionable noise audible beyond the limits of the lot.
Printing ink manufacture.
Psychic Reader.
Quarry, sandpits, gravel pits, topsoil stripping.
Raw hides or skins storage, cleaning, curing, pickling or tanning or retanning.
Rock or stone crusher.
Rubber, latex or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment.
Sexually Oriented Business as defined by NJSA:2C.
Shoddy manufacture or wool scouring.
Slaughtering or wholesaling of animals or fowl.
Smelting, smelters, and foundries.
Soap manufacture.
Solar or Photovoltaic Panels, ground mounted.
Starch, glucose or dextrin manufacture.
Steel furnace or rolling mill.
Stockyards.
Sugar refining.
Sulphurous, sulphuric, acetic, nitric, picric, carbolic or hycrochloric acid manufacture.
Tar distillation or manufacture.
Tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining.
Tattoo Parlors.
Tobacco manufacture or treatment.
Used automobile sales, except when operated by an authorized new car agency and located on the same or adjoining lot.
Use Group H-High hazard use as defined in the Building Code.
Video and pinball Game Arcade.
Yeast plant.
Page 58
ARTICLE V SUPPLEMENTARY LOT, HEIGHT AND YARD REGULATIONS
150-5.1 LOT REGULATIONS.
A. Existing Zone Lots of Record.
If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots, developed or undeveloped, with continuous frontage in single ownership were of record on June 20, 2011, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area established by this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining lots with width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter.
B. Corner Lot.
At all street intersections or the intersection of a street and a driveway, no obstruction exceeding two and one half feet in height above the established grade of the street at the property line, other than an existing building, post, column, hedge or tree, shall be erected, maintained or planted on any lot within the area bounded by the line drawn between the points along such street lot line 25 feet distance from their intersection.
D. Through Lots.
A through lot shall be considered as having two street frontages both of which shall be subject to the front yard requirements of the zoning schedule of this chapter.
E. Required Area or Space Cannot Be Reduced.
The area or dimension of any zone lot, yard, parking area, buffer zone or other space shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this chapter; and if already existing at less than the minimum required by this chapter, said area or dimension may be continued and shall not be further reduced.
F. Frontage Upon a Street.
Every lot or parcel created by subdivision and every building built upon a lot shall provide frontage upon an improved street in accordance with the street standards established by the Township of Verona and the State of New Jersey.
Page 59
G. Lot Located in More than One Zone.
For any lot which is located in more than one zone district, all yard, bulk and other requirements shall be measured from the zone district boundary line and not the true lot line.
150-5.2 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
A. General Application.
No building or structure shall have a greater number of stories or a greater number of feet than are permitted in the district where such building is located.
B. Permitted Exceptions.
1. The building height provision contained in this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, flagpoles, water towers, fire towers, chimneys, public buildings, or to necessary mechanical appurtenances or to parapet walls, except no parapet wall may extend more than four feet above the maximum height of the building.
2. The height of bulkheads, elevator enclosures or water tanks or other structures constructed upon the roof of a building and occupying in the aggregate less than 20 percent of the area of the roof upon which the same are located shall not be included as a part of the height of the building for the purpose of the regulations and restrictions of this chapter.
3. All rooftop appurtenances shall be appropriately screened from all adjoining properties with architectural screening, the material color and composition of which shall be approved by the approving body.
Page 60
150-5.3 YARD REGULATIONS.
A. General.
The area required in a yard at any given level shall be open and unobstructed from such level to the sky, except for the projections and encroachments identified in Section 150-5.3C.
B. Front Yard Requirements Affected by Official Map.
Where any lot shall front on a street right-of-way which is proposed to be widened as indicated on the Official Map or Master Plan of the Township of Verona, the front yard shall be measured from such proposed right-of-way line or easement line, if a dedication of right-of-way is not effectuated.
C. Projection into Required Yards.
Certain features may project into required yards as follows:
1. Normal skylights and parapets above the bottom of such yard.
2. Ordinary projections of windowsills and belt courses to the extent of not more than four inches.
3. Cornices and other ornamental features to the extent of not more than 12 inches.
Page 61
4. An open or lattice enclosed iron fire escape, fireproof outside stairway or solid floored balcony to a fire tower to the extent of not more than six feet into a yard or an inner court provided, however, that an open or lattice enclosed iron fire escape may project not more than eight feet into a yard or into an inner court when it does not occupy more than 20 percent of the area of such inner court.
5. Chimneys or flues may be erected within a side or rear yard to the extent of not more than three feet, provided that they shall not obstruct ventilation.
6. Patios may be located in any side or rear yard, provided that they are not closer than five feet to any property line.
7. Self supporting walls and fences may project into any required yard, provided that any accessory retaining wall or fence is not higher than three feet in height and shall not obstruct automobile visions.
D. Corner Lots, Sight Triangle.
On a corner lot, no obstruction that would be greater than two and one half feet above the center-line grades of the intersecting streets shall be installed, erected, planted or maintained within the triangular area formed by the right-of-way lines at such corner and a straight line joining said right-of-way at points which are:
1. Fifteen feet distant in business and commercial districts, except for the Town Center District which shall be five feet. 2. Twenty-five feet distant in residential districts from the intersection of the right-of-way lines and measured along said right-of-way lines which are on the side of the property and for the full length of the right-of-way line when said right-of-way line is located in the front of the property.
E. Required Yard Setbacks.
1. Interior Lot, Frontage Upon One Street.
An interior lot containing frontage upon an improved street will contain a front yard, two side yards and a rear yard.
2. Interior Lot, Frontage Upon Two Streets.
An interior lot containing frontage upon two improved streets (a through lot) shall contain two required front yards and two required side yards.
Page 62
3. Corner Lot, Frontage Upon Two Streets.
A corner lot having frontage upon two improved streets shall have two front yards, one side yard and one rear yard. The rear yard shall be located opposite the more narrow frontage. The minimum side yard setback for such lot shall be 1.5 times the minimum yard requirement. In the event the two lot widths are equal, the lot shall contain two front yards and two rear yards.
4. Lot Containing Three Frontages.
A lot containing frontage upon three improved streets shall contain three required front yards. The fourth required setback shall be a required rear yard setback.
5. Three Sided Triangular Shaped Lot.
a. If fronting on two streets, a three-sided triangular shaped lot shall contain two required front yard and one required rear yard setback.
b. If fronting on one street, a three-sided triangular shaped lot shall contain one required front yard, two side yards and one required rear yard setback.
Street ROW
If A is a street right of way, B is a front yard.
If A is an adjacent lot, B is a side yard.
A
B
Front Yard
Rear Yard
Side Yard
Page 63
A
B D B D B F
C A A
A, B, C are front yards / D is a rear yard.
If A = B then E and F are rear yards.
If A > B then F is a rear yard and E is a side yard.
If A < B then F is a side yard and E is a rear yard.
E
Page 64
F. Paving of Required Yard Areas.
For a one or two-family dwelling abutting a public street, no front yard, side yard or rear yard shall be paved in excess of 20 feet in width, and in no case shall paving in the front yard, side yard or rear yard abutting a public street exceed 50 percent of the area of said front yard, 50 percent of said side yard abutting a public street or fifty percent of said rear yard abutting a public street, unless such additional paving is otherwise permitted by this chapter. The curb cut shall not exceed the width of the driveway.
For all other uses other than one and two family dwellings, no required front yard, side yard, or rear yard shall be paved except to allow driveway aprons to a public street or another approved parking area from an approved parking area.
G. Unenclosed Balconies, Porches and Steps.
Unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches or steps may have a roof over same within the yard areas not to exceed the sizes listed:
MAXIMUM
MAXIMUM
PROJECTION
AREA
YARD
(FEET)
(SQUARE FEET )
Front
5
35
Side
3
15
Rear
5
30
Multiple family dwellings may have one canopy or porch at ground level which shall not exceed 70 square feet and which shall have a minimum setback of eight feet. Said canopy or porch shall not contain any walls but shall be restricted to a roof and supporting columns only.
150-5.4 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
A. The maximum percentage of lot coverage by buildings or structures and the required area of front, rear and side yards shall be as noted in the Schedule of Zone District Regulations.
B. All accessory buildings shall be computed with principal building in determining the coverage of the land.
Page 65
ARTICLE VI SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN PERMITTED USES
150-6.1 ANIMAL HOSPITALS AND ANIMAL KENNELS.
Animal hospitals and kennels shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any residential zone line. Such facilities shall be maintained in an enclosed structure and shall be of soundproof construction and so operated as to produce no objectionable odors at the property line. Open kennels, exercise pens or runways shall not be located closer than 200 feet to any property line and shall be subject to noise and odor controls established for an enclosed building. Open kennels, pens or runways shall not be located within a wetland area, wetland buffer or flood hazard area.
150-6.2 COMMUNITY BUILDINGS, CLUBS, SOCIAL HALLS, LODGES, FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS AND SIMILAR USES.
All buildings shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from any property line, except where greater distances are otherwise required herein.
150-6.3 COMMUNITY RESIDENCES.
Community residences for the developmentally disabled, community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community residences for the terminally ill and community residences for persons with head injuries shall be a permitted use in all residential districts of Verona and the requirements therefore shall be the same as for single family dwelling units located within such district.
Page 66
ARTICLE VII REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN ACCESSORY USES
150-7.1 ACCESSORY USE AND STRUCTURE REGULATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
A. Accessory structures shall maintain a minimum yard requirement as further set forth within.
B. No accessory structure shall be located closer to the street right-of-way line than the required front yard setback of the principal structure with the following exceptions:
1. A single flag pole is permitted within a front yard so long as it is no higher than the permitted principal building.
2. A fountain or a landscaped water feature is permitted within a front yard so long as it is less than 24 inches in height.
3. Accessory structures that are manmade, at grade, and used for the purpose of ingress and egress to a principal or accessory structure such as driveways and walkways.
C. No accessory building or structure shall be erected or altered unless such accessory building or structure is set back from the street lot line a distance equal to at least 150% of the minimum required front yard setback for the zoning district
D. No portion of an accessory structure shall be used for dwelling unit.
E. When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building, it shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this ordinance applicable to the principal building, including lot coverage.
F. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed or placed on any lot unless there exists a principal use on said lot.
G. The height of an accessory building shall not exceed one and one-half stories or a height of 15 feet.
H. Fenced-in dog runs shall be located in the rear yard only and shall be at least ten feet from any side or rear lot line.
I. No accessory building or structure shall be utilized for business or industrial uses, except for the parking of commercial vehicles by one who occupies the principal structure as a dwelling unit.
Page 67
150-7.2 ACCESSORY USE AND STRUCTURE REGULATIONS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
A. No accessory structure or use shall be located within any required setback or closer than five feet to any lot line. Said requirements shall not apply to retaining and decorative walls and fences, provided same do not exceed seven feet in height.
B. Despite the forgoing, no accessory use shall be located within ten feet of a residentially zoned property.
C. When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building it shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this ordinance applicable to the principal building including lot coverage.
D. No portion of an accessory structure shall be used for a dwelling unit.
E. The height of the accessory structure shall not exceed two stories or 20 feet.
150-7.3 FENCES.
A. No fence or other manmade enclosure shall exceed six feet in height at any point, as measured from existing ground levels. In the case of commercial property that abuts a residential property, no fence or other manmade enclosure shall exceed seven feet in height except along the property line common to the residence, where the six-foot limit shall apply.
B. Fencing shall not exceed six feet in any yard up to the front façade of the principal structure where said fencing shall not exceed three feet.
C. No fence within 25 feet of a corner of two intersecting streets shall exceed 30 inches in height, as measured from existing ground levels.
D. No fencing shall be installed within ten feet of a front lot line.
E. All fences shall be installed or erected as close to the ground as possible. The total height of the fence may exceed six feet where otherwise permissible to conform to existing ground heights; provided, however, that 80 percent of the fence does not exceed the maximum height of the six feet. Decorative type structural posts may extend no more than six inches above the top of the fence.
Page 68
F. Fences must be constructed with the face or finished side away from the property and the structural side toward the interior of the property.
G. No fences or other enclosures shall be installed within six inches to the property line.
H. Fences shall be erected in a manner so as to permit the flow of natural drainage and shall not cause surface water to be dammed so as to create ponding.
I. Fencing from the front façade of the building to a minimum of ten feet from the front lot line shall be limited to three feet in height.
J. Fences or other enclosures shall be maintained to assure the structural integrity of the fence, to prevent all or portions of the fence from encroaching over the property line and shall be maintained so as to prohibit an unsightly appearance to adjoining property owners. “Unsightly appearance” shall include the following:
1. Painted fences or other enclosures whereon paint has chipped or peeled from more than 15 percent of the surface area of the fence.
2. Fence posts which have become loose or which are leaning more than five degrees from the fence line.
3. In the case of picket fences, slatted or other solid-wall fences, where more than ten percent of the picket fences have fallen, been removed or rotted in any given ten-linear-foot section of such fence.
Page 69
K. The following fences and fence materials are specifically prohibited: barbed wire, chicken wire, pointed iron slats or pickets, canvas, cloth, fiberglass, poultry netting, electrically charged fences, temporary fences such as snow fences, except where necessary for active construction, and collapsible fences, except during active construction.
L. No fence shall be erected that interferes with the public right-of-way or interferes with the visibility of vehicular and pedestrian traffic proceeding along any public right-of-way.
M. In the case of commercial property that abuts residential property, if chain link fence construction is used, the fence shall also include privacy inserts.
N. In business zoning districts chain link fences surrounding nonresidential property may be erected to a height of seven feet on all property lines.
O. As provided under Section 150-7.7 a fence with a maximum height of ten feet shall be permitted incidental to a tennis or basketball courts.
Page 70
150-7.4 OUTDOOR DISPLAYS. No outdoor merchandising displays or storage of any nature shall be permitted except the sale of automotive fuel, service station accessories, nursery or agricultural products.
150-7.5 PERMANENT AND PORTABLE SWIMMING POOLS.
A. Permanent and portable swimming pools accessory to a residential use shall be erected on the same zone lot as the principal structure. Said pool may be erected in the rear yard of the zone lot. The wall of the swimming pool shall be located no closer than ten feet to a side or rear yard line nor closer to a street than the principal building to which it is accessory, n or within ten feet of the principal building. All such pools shall be suitably fenced in accordance with the Township of Verona requirements.
B. All filtration equipment and pumps shall be located not less than five feet from any property line.
C. These regulations shall not apply to portable swimming pools which are less than two feet in height and pool regulations set forth and adopted by the Uniform Construction Code.
150-7.6 PRIVATE GARAGES.
A. Private garages shall be deemed to be accessory uses to a permitted principal use if it is located on the same lot or parcel as the principal use.
B. Private garages shall be subject to regulations established herein.
C. Private garages shall only be utilized for the storage and security of motor driven vehicles. Private garages and carports shall not be utilized for the conduct of any business, service, or residency.
D. Private garages shall be permitted as accessory uses in all residential zones either as a detached structure or as a part of the principal structure for the storage of automobiles and other permitted items owned by the occupants of the principal structure.
Page 71
150-7.7 TENNIS AND BASKETBALL COURTS.
A. Tennis and full court basketball courts shall be permitted in the rear yard as an accessory use. No portion of the court or fence shall be located within ten feet to any property line.
B. A fence with a maximum height of ten feet shall be permitted incidental to the tennis or basketball court.
C. Despite anything contained in this section to the contrary, development of tennis or basketball courts on any property shall be subject to site plan approval by the approving authority.
D. The temporary recreational use of a driveway for basketball uses does not create a basketball court as regulated above.
E. Tennis and basketball courts must be unlit.
150-7.8 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
A. Any owner of a recreational vehicle, as defined by this ordinance, may park or store recreational(s) vehicle upon premises on which the owner of such recreational vehicle resides in a residential district as follows:
1. Within an enclosed building meeting all Building Code and Zoning Ordinance requirements.
2. In the rear yard and no closer to any side or rear lot line or other structure than is required for an accessory building within such zoning district. However, in no case shall such recreational vehicle be located closer to a side or rear lot line than five feet.
3. No recreational vehicle parked or stored in a residential district in accordance with this section shall be used for any type of commercial or business use, nor shall it be registered with any motor vehicle department as a commercial vehicle.
4. All such recreational vehicles must be kept in good repair and carry a current year's license and/or registration. No major overhaul or body work shall be permitted on any recreational vehicle when parked on the residential premises.
5. No recreational vehicle shall be occupied or used for human habitation while parked or stored on any lot.
Page 72
6. No recreational vehicle shall have fixed connections to electricity, water, gas or sanitary sewer facilities.
B. Notwithstanding the above provisions, a recreational vehicle may be parked on a driveway in a residential district for the purpose of loading and unloading for a period not to exceed 48 hours in any one week.
C. If a trailer is utilized for the temporary storage of a recreational vehicle(s), it shall be treated as, and must follow the regulations concerning sheds in a residential zone. The area of said trailer shall be measured, in a horizontal plane, as a rectangle bounding the outermost extremities of the trailer as illustrated below.
Top view
150-7.9 SIGNS.
A. All signs hereafter erected, substantially rebuilt, enlarged or changed, except official, traffic and street signs, shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. Change of copy for outdoor advertising signs and theater marquees shall not be considered a substantial change.
B. No sign, except those specifically excepted, shall be permitted to be installed, structurally altered or relocated unless a written application has been made to the Construction Code Official and a permit therefore duly issued by him after payment of the established fee. No permit shall be required for the changing of message on any existing sign that is expressly designed for the periodic change of message, provided that such change does not entail alteration of sign structure.
C. A totally destroyed or un-repairable nonconforming sign, as determined by the Construction Code Official, may be replaced only by a conforming sign.
Hitch
Wheels
Break lights
Page 73
D. Illuminated signs shall be properly shielded and located so as to prevent glare or blinding effects upon vehicular traffic and so as to be inoffensive to residents of the area.
E. No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will cause confusion or danger to street traffic by obscuring the view or by simulating official, directional or warning signs maintained by any governmental body, railroad or public utility concerned with the protection of public health or safety. This shall include any sign visible from the public right-of-way which uses an arrow device or simulates a stop sign or stop light.
F. No sign shall be erected within or over any public right-of-way, unless specifically authorized by this or any other ordinance of the Township.
G. Signs shall relate solely to the business or profession conducted on the premises and shall advertise only the name of the owner or leasee, the name of the establishment, the type of establishment, goods or services or the trade name of the establishment and the goods manufactured, sold or services rendered, except for public service, directory, official or directional signs.
H. All signs attached to a building shall be thoroughly and rigidly secured in a manner approved by the Construction Code Official and shall be repaired and maintained as necessary to keep them secure, safe and free from danger.
I. All electrical wiring of signs shall conform to the requirements of the municipality and the National Electrical Code. J. No sign shall obstruct access to fire escapes or required windows, doors, exits or standpipes or create a hazard to pedestrians as determined by the Construction Code Official. K. All new and existing signs and supports shall be maintained in good condition and shall be repaired and repainted as required. L. The proper repair and maintenance of each sign shall be the responsibility of the permittee and then the owner of the property on which the sign is located.
Page 74
M. Any sign which is not painted or maintained in good condition or repaired shall be brought to the attention of the permittee and/or owner of the property where such sign is located, in writing. If said sign is not properly repaired, repainted or restored within 90 days after the receipt of such notice, the sign shall be considered abandoned and may be removed by the Township in the manner set forth in Subsection N below.
N. Any sign, now or hereafter erected or maintained, which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or product sold or notice of a current or future event shall be taken down and removed by the permittee or, if there is no permittee, by the owner of the premises within 30 days after such business ceases, such product ceases to be sold or such event occurs. Upon failure to comply, the Construction Code Official is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the permittee or owner of the premises upon which the sign is located. The Construction Code Official shall thereafter refuse to issue a permit for the erection of a sign to any permittee or property owner who refuses to pay the costs of such removal. The cost of removal shall be added to and become part of the real estate tax bill by the Collector of Taxes.
O. In the event that any sign is determined by the Construction Code Official to be hazardous to the public safety, he shall immediately notify the permittee and the owner of the property by certified mail. If the permittee or owner fails to correct the hazardous condition within 24 hours after receipt of the notice, the Construction Code Official shall cause the condition to be corrected, either by removal or repair of the sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the permittee or the owner of the property. The Construction Code Official shall thereto refuse to issue a permit for the erection of a sign on that property until the expense has been reimbursed. The expense shall be added to and become a part of the real estate tax bill by the Collector of Taxes.
P. Window signs, whether temporary, permanent or a combination of the two shall not exceed 25% of the window area. Temporary window signs shall not be posted for a period to exceed 30 days. Window signs are prohibited in residential zones.
Q. Theaters may display signs with removable lettering on a marquee or canopy which may be back lighted and which shall advertise only current or coming attractions.
Page 75
R. A nonconforming business sign lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter or lawfully authorized prior thereto may remain, provided that the sign is not enlarged or changed as to location, nature, purpose or type and further provided that the nature of the business remains the same. S. Business signs.
1. Unless otherwise specified, business signs shall not be allowed in residential zones. 2. Such signs, if displayed on a wall of a building facing a street on which the building lot has frontage, shall have a total area of all such signs not to exceed one square foot for each linear foot that such building extends along the street on which it has frontage. If the building has frontage on more than one street, a separate sign or signs may be provided for each street frontage, but the total area of all signs on each street shall be no greater in the aggregate than one square foot for each foot that the building extends along the street for which such signs are provided. In no event shall the total sign area on each street frontage exceed 100 square feet or be more than four feet in height.
3. Such sign or signs, if displayed on a wall of a building not facing a street on which the building lot has frontage, shall have a total area of all such signs for any wall not to exceed in the aggregate one square foot for each foot of horizontal dimension of such wall, provided that the total area of any such sign or signs shall not exceed 80 square feet or be more than four feet in height.
4. No business sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning, unless the business or use so advertised is open to the public later than 11:00 p.m. or earlier than 6:00 a.m.
T. No sign shall be erected or maintained on private property without the consent of the owner thereof.
Page 76
U. Signs for religious, charitable, educational and civic organizations, subject to the following restrictions:
1. No more than two signs per location. 2. No sign shall exceed 20 square feet in area and, if a ground sign, stand no more than five feet above ground level or be closer than ten feet to any property line.
3. Such signs may be illuminated subject to section 150-7.9 of this chapter.
4. Private off-street parking areas of such organizations may be identified by not more than one sign which is to be no larger than six square feet in area and, if a ground sign, shall not stand more than five feet above ground level or be closer than five feet to any property line. V. Signs not needing a construction permit: The following signs may be erected, constructed, placed and maintained without a permit from the Construction Code Official: 1. Directional signs which shall be no more than four square feet in area, stand no more than three feet above ground level and, unless attached to the principal building, be no closer than five feet to any property line. 2. Directory signs which shall be permitted at the entrance of a multiple-family dwelling, which shall be attached to the building proper and which shall be no more than four square feet in area. 3. Nameplate signs. One nameplate sign, not more than one square foot in area shall be permitted for each residential property, provided that it is not internally illuminated or spotlighted. Such sign shall not be erected closer than five feet to any property line. 4. Flags or emblems of religious, educational or government organizations, which shall be flown from supports on the building or grounds being occupied by the organization. 5. Interior signs. 6. Signs which are an integral part of vending machines and gasoline pumps.
Page 77
7. Official signs. 8. Customary signs of recognized nonprofit service organizations. 9. Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises or property upon which they are located. Unless otherwise set forth below, there shall be no more than one sign per location; the signs shall not be illuminated; they shall be removed within 14 days after entering into a contract for sale or lease and may be replaced by a "sold" sign which may remain for an additional period of 14 days; and they shall be subject to the following additional restrictions: a. In residential zones, the sign shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall not be more than four feet above ground level. b. In all other zones, the sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area, shall not be more than five feet above ground level and shall not be displayed for a period exceeding one year. c. Any subdivision of six or more lots or any apartment building or commercial building under construction may display not more than two signs which shall not be larger than 20 square feet in area, be more than five feet above ground level or closer than ten feet to any property line unless it is attached to a building. The signs must be removed when 75% of the lots or units have been sold. 10. A temporary, non-illuminated business sign at a construction, repair or alteration site, subject to the permission of the owner of the property, which shall not exceed six square feet in area, not to be more than four feet above ground level and which must be removed within seven days after completion of the job. 11. Temporary signs which shall not be displayed for a period exceeding 30 days. 12. Signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway or other premises, not to exceed two square feet in area. 13. Lights and strings of illuminated devices used to celebrate a national or religious holiday for a period not to exceed 60 days before the holiday and 15 days following the holiday. 14. Window signs, not exceeding 25% of the window area. 15. Political signs.
Page 78
W. Signs requiring special permits. Signs in this section are allowed upon submission of a permit to the Construction Code Official. These signs shall not be allowed in residential zones, except for garage sale signs. 1. Streamers, strings of illuminated devices, advertising flags, banners and similar attention-getting devices for special events. 2. Temporary signs for special events which are sponsored by charitable, educational, religious and civic organizations. These signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and, if a ground sign, shall not be more than six feet above ground level. The governing body may allow these signs to be located in residential zones.
3. Sandwich Board Sign.
i. Only one sandwich board sign per business shall be permitted.
ii. Sandwich board signs shall be no larger than thirty-two inches in width and thirty-six inches in height and no materials such as papers, balloons, wind socks, etc., may be added to the sign to increase its height and/or width. The height of such signs may not be artificially increased above the allowed maximum by placing material underneath the base of such sign.
iii. Sandwich board signs must be secured to withstand strong winds and to prevent a roadway hazard.
iv. Sandwich board signs may be used only during the hours when the business is open to the public.
v. No sandwich board sign shall be placed so as to obstruct vehicular traffic sight distance triangle requirements.
vi. All sandwich boards signs shall be constructed of weather resistant material.
vii. No sandwich board sign shall contain foil, mirrors, bare metal or other reflective materials which could create hazardous conditions to motorist, bicyclist, or pedestrians.
Page 79
viii. No sandwich board sign may contain lights of any kind.
ix. Signs located within the public right-of-way must provide a disclaimer indemnifying the Township of any liability for said use.
x. Sandwich Board Signs shall not be placed more than six feet from the front primary entrance of the business.
xi. Sandwich Board Signs shall not be placed so as to cause the width of the sidewalk to be reduced below five unobstructed feet in width.
xii. Sandwich Board Signs shall not be located or maintained in a manner that prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape.
xiii. Sandwich Board Signs shall be removed from public sidewalks if there is any snow accumulation (the sign may not be displayed until the snow is removed).
xiv. The owner of a sandwich board sign shall be required to provide adequate public liability insurance naming the Township of Verona and/or the County of Essex as additional insured and providing for coverage of not less than $ 1,000,000 for bodily injury and for not less than $500,000 for property damage and general liability insurance of $ 1,000,000.
4. Digital Display Systems (DDS) and Electronic Message Centers (EMC).
Digital display systems and electronic messages centers are permitted in the ETC and C2 zoning districts following conditional uses regulations:
i. No digital sign shall implement video, animation, strobe, scrolling, or other attention getting effects.
ii. Each message shall have a minimum duration of 60 seconds prior to changing to the next message.
iii. Between messages, there shall be no fading, scrolling or other attention getting effects.
iv. Lettering shall consist of a single color per message.
Page 80
v. Signage shall have automatic dimming capability.
vi. Malfunctioning signs must default to a blank sign.
X. Prohibited Signs. Signs in this section are prohibited unless otherwise permitted by this chapter.
1. Streamers, spinners, strings of illuminated devices, advertising flags, banners and similar attention-getting devices. 2. Signs posted on fences, posts, utility poles or trees, except for garage sale signs.
3. Signs posted on Township property without the consent of the governing body.
4. Business signs standing, installed or painted on sidewalks or curbs.
5. Portable signs not otherwise permitted.
6. Signs on bridges, abutments, retaining walls, standpipes, water towers, temporarily located on vehicles or similar structures.
7. Revolving signs.
8. Animated signs.
9. Neon Signs.
10. Flashing or intermittent illumination.
11. Temporary signs on parked vehicles.
12. Ground signs, freestanding signs, pylon signs, outdoor advertising signs and billboards.
13. Oscillating signs.
14. Lettering on main body of awnings.
15. Projecting signs.
16. Roof signs.
Page 81
17. Signs extending more than 15 inches from a wall. 18. Signs in residential zones.
19. Portable signage including “wrapped” cars, vans, or trucks or mobile billboard trailers and trucks.
20. Inflatable Advertising. 21. Flex blade signs.
22. Scrolling text signs.
Y. Signage on Awnings. 1. Regardless of the shape of the awning, no numbers, letters, or symbols, shall appear on the awning above ten inches from the bottom of said awning.
150-7.10 VENDING MACHINES.
In the all commercial zones all vending machines must be located within the principal building and primarily for the use of the occupants.
Page 82
150-7.11 SATELLITE OR DISH ANTENNAS. A. A satellite or dish antenna, when located in the rear or side yard of a lot, shall be a conditional use as an accessory structure to a principal structure in all zoning districts, subject to the regulations contained in this section. A rooftop installation of a satellite or dish antenna shall be a permitted use as an accessory structure to a principal structure in all zoning districts upon approval of the board with jurisdiction and subject to the regulations contained in this section. No satellite or dish antenna shall be located or installed in the front yard of any lot.
B. In the case of a rooftop installation, height shall be measured from the average elevation of the rooftop immediately surrounding the installation. C. Location.
1. Rear yard. A satellite or dish antenna located in the rear yard of a lot shall be set back at least five feet from the rear and side property lines of the lot and shall be located at least ten feet from any principal structure, including a principal structure on an adjoining lot. 2. Side yard. The board with jurisdiction may approve location of a satellite or dish antenna in the side yard of a lot, provided that the satellite or dish antenna is located at least five feet from the adjoining property line and at least ten feet from any principal structure, including a principal structure on an adjoining lot. In addition, the installation shall be set back from the front line of the property a distance at least equal to the setback of the principal structure or a distance equal to the front yard setback requirements of the applicable zoning district, whichever is greater. 3. Rooftop. A satellite or dish antenna may be installed on the rooftop of the principal structure, provided that the total height of the structure, including the satellite or dish antenna, shall not be more than three feet higher than the height limitations of this chapter. D. The number of satellite or antennas is limited to two satellite or dish antennas.
Page 83
150-7.12 RETAINING WALLS.
A. No retaining wall shall exceed four feet in height in the minimum front yard setback and six feet in height elsewhere. B. Multiple retaining walls.
1. When multiple retaining walls are proposed, there shall be a three foot spacing between the top of one retaining wall and the bottom of another. 2. A maximum of three retaining walls shall be permitted when said retaining walls are proposed to retain the same soil.
C. When a single or any combination of multiple retaining walls are utilized wherein the measurement from the bottom of the lowest retaining wall to the top of the highest retaining wall exceeds ten feet over a five foot horizontal measurement, a fence must be placed upon the land behind the highest retaining wall.
D. All retaining walls must be designed not only to retain the soil behind said wall but also contain structures to ensure adequate ground water drainage.
150-7.13 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
A. No mechanical equipment shall be located within a required minimum yard requirement and shall not extend more than five feet from the structure for which they serve.
B. No generator shall be permitted within a side yard.
150-7.14 GREENHOUSES.
A. Residential Greenhouses. 1. Residential greenhouses are for the cultivation of delicate or out of season plants for personal enjoyment only. 2. No sale of plants grown in a residential greenhouse is permitted.
3. Residential greenhouses shall follow all rules and regulations that govern sheds in residential zones.
4. A residential greenhouse constitutes a shed.
Page 84
B. Commercial Greenhouses. Garden centers, nurseries, or commercial greenhouses which require outside display or storage of merchandise according to the following requirements:
1. Products containing chemical fertilizers, pesticides, or herbicides must be stored in a roofed and contained area where water runoff cannot reach the exterior landscape or storm sewer.
2. Floor drainage for garden center/nursery must protect storm and ground water sources by following Storm water Best Management Practices (BMP’s), including a storm water pollution prevention plan.
3. No intercom system shall be used in a commercial greenhouse.
4. Siting of structures shall not disrupt safe traffic flow through the site.
5. Any outdoor storage areas must be buffered from adjacent properties. Said buffering must follow the requirements setforth in section 150-11.
6. All outdoor lighting must be shielded so as the maximum intensity of lighting is 0 at the property line.
7. Any greenhouse that is heated must be ten feet from the property line.
8. Items displayed outdoors are limited to plants, soils, gravel, soil amenities and fertilizer.
9. Sales shall be limited to: woody plants and shrubs; flowers and plants; sod, topsoil, humus, peat, and similar soil materials; mulch; aggregates used in landscaping applications such as washed stone and similar products; brick, stone and masonry used for landscaping applications only; and organic fertilizer related to landscaping applications.
10. The following are prohibited: sales or display of garden or farm equipment; outdoor structures such as sheds and similar accessory buildings; outdoor play structures; outdoor furniture; outdoor cooking equipment, including brick, stone or masonry intended for construction of outdoor cooking equipment; aggregates intended for fill or other construction applications;
Page 85
brick, stone or masonry intended for construction applications; pond construction materials and equipment; irrigation equipment; and any other item not clearly intended for landscaping applications.
11. Processing of materials on site, such as washing of stone, making/drying of mulch, etc., is prohibited.
12. Any stockpiles of soil, aggregate, organic fertilizer, mulch or similar loosely packaged materials shall be stored within a structure, sufficiently covered or contained to prevent dust or blowing of materials. The outdoor storage of hazardous materials is prohibited. The containment structure, and the material contained within it, shall not exceed eight feet in height.
13. All access drives leading to parking, loading and outdoor display/storage areas shall be paved along their entire length with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, which shall be graded and drained to dispose of storm water without creating a negative impact on adjacent property.
14. All loading and truck maneuvering shall be accommodated on the site.
15. The height of any material and equipment stored in an outdoor storage area shall not exceed the height of any landscape screening, wall or fence, or eight feet, whichever is less.
150-7.15 DUMPSTERS. A. Dumpsters for the routine storage of waste shall be located in the rear or side yard only. B. Dumpsters shall be sited in a location that does not interfere with the normal operation of any parking or loading spaces.
150-7.16 SHOPPING CART CORRALS.
A. Any business, such as a grocery store, which uses self service shopping carts in order to allow customers to carry goods between the business and their motor vehicles, is required to install shopping cart corrals within its parking lot. Said parking corrals shall be shown on all parking plans.
Page 86
B. Shopping cart corrals shall be accessible from every parking bay serving the establishment. Shopping cart corrals may contain canopies and/or signs to indicate their location above the roofs of vehicles but neither may contain any corporate logo, name, or slogan. The owner or tenant shall be responsible for retrieving abandoned shopping carts taken from the premises.
C. When an establishment is closed, shopping carts are to be stored either within the building, shopping cart corral, or screened with a wall that is integral to the architectural design of the building.
150-7.17 UTILITY BOXES.
A. A utility box may be located adjacent to a commercial building or in close proximity to the building.
B. If a utility box could potentially be damaged by vehicles, it must be protected with bollards.
150-7.18 SIDEWALKS, NON RESIDENTIAL
A. Sidewalks shall be placed parallel to the street. A variance may be requested if the location of the sidewalks has been located to preserve topographical or natural features, or if required to provide visual interest, or unless an alternative pedestrian system provides a safe and convenient
B. Sidewalks along streets with nonparallel parking shall be placed parallel to the street, and shall be placed so that sidewalks do not lead pedestrians between parked vehicles and the traveled way. This shall not apply to driveways.
C. Sidewalk width shall be a minimum of four feet. Where sidewalks abut a curb and cars overhang the sidewalk, the side walk depth shall be increased to six feet.
D. Sidewalks of concrete shall be five inches thick except at points of vehicular crossing, where they shall be at least eight inches thick and shall be reinforced with welded wire fabric mesh or an equivalent.
Page 87
150-7.19 STREET FURNITURE (EXCEPT FOR SIDEWALK CAFES).
Street furniture will only be allowed on public sidewalks of a width greater than six feet from the curb face to the back of the walk. In all instances street furniture shall be located in such a manner so as to ensure and maintain a minimum clearance width of six feet along the public sidewalk and changes of direction for travel along the sidewalk of no more than 30 degrees. In no instance shall street furniture be located in such a manner so as to block access for the pedestrians or in a manner that the street furniture would constitute a tripping hazard or other hazard to pedestrians.
Street furniture shall be:
A. Located within the extended limits of the property to which the street furniture belongs provided all other requirements can be met.
B. Freestanding, internally weighted or anchored to an adjacent building. Street furniture shall be placed at sidewalk grade level and shall not be placed on planters, wall, curbs or any similar structure.
C. In order to reduce or eliminate unsightly items, street furniture must be kept in a state of good repair and condition and free from the following conditions: rust, chipped or peeling paint or finishes, delaminating or peeling materials, missing hardware, rotting materials, poor craftsmanship or construction that would cause the item to be structurally unsound and thereby pose a health or safety hazard.
D. No street furniture shall be placed, installed, used or maintained as follows:
1. Within five feet of any marked or unmarked crosswalk or access ramp.
2. Within five feet of any driveway.
3. Within any drivers sight triangle.
Page 88
150-7.20 SHEDS.
B. The size and number of sheds shall be as follows:
Zone
Number of Sheds
Maximum Total Area (Square Feet)
R-100
Two
200
R-70
One
150
R-60
One
150
R-50B
One
150
R-50
One
100
R-40
One
100
B. The location of a shed shall be governed by the bulk standards for the zone in which it is located.
150-7.21 DECKS.
If an existing building fails to comply with zoning setback requirements, uncovered decks may be added, provided that all of the following conditions are met:
A. That the deck does not exceed 20% of the building footprint.
B. That no portion of the deck shall be elevated more than four feet above grade, excluding handrails and guardrails.
C. That the deck does not extend into the side yard beyond the line of the existing dwelling unless the deck meets the side yard setback requirements of this chapter.
D. That the deck shall be no less than five feet from the side lot line and no less than 20 feet from the rear lot line.
150-7.22 SIDEWALK CAFÉS.
A. Submission of Café Plan.
1. No person shall operate a sidewalk cafe within the Township of Verona without first obtaining a sidewalk cafe license from the Construction Code Official and satisfying all of the requirements of this chapter.
Page 89
2. A Sidewalk Cafe is allowed to be used upon the receipt and approval of a Sidewalk Cafe Permit issued by the Construction Code Official and shall meet all of the requirements as a Retail Food Establishment in accordance with the following requirements:
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The name and address of the person who has prepared the cafe plan.
c. Identification of the subject property and properties immediately adjacent to such building.
d. A scaled drawing of the proposed design and location of the sidewalk cafe;
e. A scaled drawing illustrating the location of the all temporary structures, equipment and apparatus to be used in connection with its operation, including tables, chairs, planter, lighting and electrical outlets (if any);
f. A scaled drawing illustrating the location of any existing fire hydrant, plug or standpipe, utility pole, parking meter, street signs, or other permanent fixture between the building and the curb.
B. Sidewalk Café Regulations.
1. A sidewalk café may be located within the public right of way of the abutting restaurant subject to the jurisdiction of the governing body.
2. A sidewalk café shall be permitted only in the area immediately between the façade of the building in which the primary restaurant use is permitted and the curb line of the abutting street.
3. A business may provide one sidewalk café table per ten uninterrupted linear feet of store frontage.
4. Furniture, including tables and chairs, equipment, decoration or appurtenances used in connection with the operation of the Sidewalk Cafe shall not be permanently affixed to the sidewalk
Page 90
area. The Sidewalk Cafe and its use and occupation is considered of temporary nature and shall not be used in non-business hours and may only be used from May 1st through October 31st.
5. The Sidewalk Cafe outdoor seating area shall be directly located along the frontage of the facade of the indoor primary restaurant use and may not be located along any other uses on the subject property or any other adjoining property.
6. The outdoor seating area shall provide a minimum unobstructed sidewalk and aisle width of five feet for pedestrian access to patrons and non-patrons traversing the sidewalk area, and the sidewalk café shall not prohibit access to any building entrances and/or fire exits.
7. The numbers of tables and chairs used in connection with the Sidewalk Cafe is strictly limited and may be used in connection with other outdoor restaurant seating permitted within the zone provided the other outdoor restaurant seating is not located within the public right-of-way area.
8. Outdoor storage, cooking preparation, or selling of food is prohibited.
9. The consumption of alcohol is prohibited in the Sidewalk Café outdoor seating area.
10. All outdoor areas shall be kept litter and refuse free and maintained on a daily basis.
11. Outdoor restaurant lighting is limited to one foot candle over the seating area with the source of the light not visible from any adjoining residential uses. Exterior lighting shall be directed onto the sidewalk cafe and shall not intrude on adjacent residential properties.
12. The use of outdoor paging equipment and speakers are prohibited. No speakers, microphones, televisions or other audio or video devices shall be permitted at a sidewalk café.
13. All outdoor seating area lights must be extinguished in all non-seasonal use or when the restaurant is closed for business.
Page 91
14. All outdoor furniture used in accordance with this section shall be secured and/or covered at all times except during operation of the outdoor seating area.
15. No vending machines, carts, or objects for the sale of goods shall be permitted in a sidewalk café.
16. Outdoor heaters are prohibited in a public right of way.
17. The outdoor seating area shall be ADA accessible.
18. The operator of the Sidewalk Cafe shall be required to provide adequate public liability insurance naming the Township of Verona and/or the County of Essex as additional insured and providing for coverage of not less than $ 1,000,000 for bodily injury and for not less than $500,000 for property damage and general liability insurance of $ 1,000,000.
150-7.23 OUTDOOR RESTAURANT SEATING.
Outdoor restaurant seating shall be permitted as an accessory use within the ETC and TC Zoning District and receive site plan approval as required by the Chapter 118 of the Verona Code and shall also meet all of the requirements of a Retail Food Establishment as required by Chapter 114 of the Verona Code and in accordance with the following requirements:
A. The applicant for outdoor restaurant seating must prepare a site plan that clearly indicates the maximum size of the seating area, the maximum number of seats and tables, and the layout of the seating area and access aisles.
B. Outdoor restaurant seating, other than a Sidewalk Cafe, is prohibited within any public right-of-way and is prohibited in any front yard, except in the front yards of properties fronting Bloomfield Avenue, and may be located in any other side or rear yard.
C. Outdoor restaurant seating areas shall not be located in any required parking and/or loading areas and shall not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
D. The outdoor restaurant seating area must be directly accessible to the interior eating area and located on the first floor level.
E. No more than 49% of the total on-site seating may be provided outdoors including the seating supplied as part of a Sidewalk Cafe.
Page 92
F. No more than 49% of the floor area of the restaurant use shall be utilized for outdoor seating including the area supplied as part of a Sidewalk Cafe.
G. Outdoor storage, cooking or preparation of food is prohibited in the outdoor seating area.
H. A six-foot high enclosed fence and evergreen screening shall be provided if the outdoor seating area is adjacent to a residential zone.
I. All outdoor areas shall be kept litter and refuse free and maintained on a daily basis.
J. Outdoor restaurant lighting is limited to one foot candle over the seating area with the source of the light not visible from any adjoining residential uses.
Page 93
ARTICLE VIII REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN CONDITIONAL USES
150-8.1 CONDITIONAL USES.
Conditional uses shall be permitted upon authorization by the Planning Board, provided that such uses are found to comply with the following requirements and other applicable requirements as set forth in this chapter: A. The use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the citizens will be protected. B. Adequate landscaping and screening is provided. C. Off-street parking as required by this Chapter and off street loading is provided, and ingress and egress is so designed as to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets. D. The use conforms to all applicable regulations governing the district in which it is located.
150-8.2 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
A. The Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for a conditional use within 95 days of submission of a complete application by an applicant to the Secretary of the Planning Board or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. B. The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include site plan review. The time period for action by the Planning Board on conditional uses pursuant to Subsection A above shall apply to such site plan review. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the Township Clerk as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board is required by Section five of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), in the case of a subdivision or Section eight of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), in the case of a site plan, the Verona Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
Page 94
150-8.3 MIXED USES .
A. Mixed uses may be permitted upon authorization of the Planning Board in accordance with the following conditions and subject to site plan review when required:
1. Planned Commercial Developments.
i. Planned commercial developments must have a minimum of 1.5 contiguous acres.
ii. Planned commercial development must have site access from Bloomfield Avenue or Depot Street only.
2. Residential / Office or Retail Mixed Use.
When residential units are mixed with retail or office space, the residential units shall not be located on the first floor in any building. Access to a residential unit at the street level shall not be construed to be a residential unit on the first floor.
3. Office / Retail Mixed Use.
When office space is mixed with retail space, the office space shall not be located on the first floor in any building. Access to office space from the street level shall not be construed as office space on the first floor.
B. Conditional Use Requirements Applicable to all Mixed Uses:
1. Mixed uses shall have an even distribution between principal uses within each building(s).
2. Parking for the various types of uses shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 150-12.
3. Not less than 20% of the lot shall be reserved for open space and landscaping.
4. A dense landscape buffer of not less than 15 feet shall be reserved between the mixed uses and any adjoining residential uses.
5. In the C-2 zone site access must be from Bloomfield or Pompton Avenues.
Page 95
150-8.4 AUTOMOBILE SALES
Automobile sales establishments may be permitted upon authorization by the Planning Board in accordance with the following standards and site plan review when required: A. Automobile sale businesses shall be operated from an enclosed building. B. No parking or storage of vehicles shall be permitted in the required front yard area.
C. Outdoor storage of vehicles for sale or otherwise shall not exceed more than twice the gross floor area of the principal building.
150-8.5 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS Automobile service stations may be permitted as a principal conditional use upon authorization by the Planning Board in accordance with the following standards and site plan review, when required: A. All storage areas, trash facilities, pits, lifts, and working areas shall be within a building. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be performed in an enclosed building, and no dismantled parts shall be placed or stored outside. B. All gasoline pumps, air pumps and the islands upon which pumps are normally located shall be set back from the street lot line at least 25 feet.
C. A canopy shall be permitted. A canopy shall be no larger than is necessary to provide shelter for the vehicles and attendants associated with the pump area. The canopy may extend to the building. All lighting associated with the canopy shall be directed downward. There shall be a minimum clearance of 14 feet six inches under the canopy, and the total height of the canopy shall not exceed 18 feet. No more than two signs shall be permitted on the canopy. Signs may be internally illuminated and shall not exceed ten% of the surface area of the side of the canopy on which each sign is located.
Page 96
D. No junked or inoperable motor vehicle or part thereof and no unregistered motor vehicle shall be permitted outside an enclosed service station building. Vehicles awaiting repair may be parked overnight outside an enclosed service station building, but the number of such vehicles shall not exceed two per enclosed service bay. E. No other uses shall be permitted upon the lot unless such uses are accessory to the principal use as an automobile service station. This restriction shall not preclude incidental retail sales by means of vending machines on a limited basis. However, other uses, including but not limited to fast-service restaurants, convenience stores or retail stores, even if otherwise permitted in the zoning district, shall not be permitted.
150-8.6 BUSINESS PROVIDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
A. Businesses providing live entertainment shall provide said services wholly within an enclosed structure.
B. Such live entertainment shall be conducted within a building within which seating space shall be provided for patrons. No area designated as patron standing room shall be permitted.
C. Such building shall comply with the minimum requirements for fire safety, sanitary facilities and structural safety as established by the Uniform Construction Code.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in the amount as required by ordinance for the principal use to which such live entertainment is accessory and shall also be provided as follows:
1. Off-street parking shall be provided in the amount of one space per two seats plus ten percent of the total required parking for seating related to live entertainment.
2. One space shall also be required for each 30 square feet of dance floor, stage area or other area devoted to live entertainment.
3. In no event shall required off-street parking be less than one off-street parking space for each three persons of maximum occupancy of such area devoted to live entertainment as established by the Uniform Construction Code regulations.
Page 97
150-8.7 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
A. Enclosed or permanent structures.
Public utility services.
Such uses shall include electric substations, transformers, switches and auxiliary apparatus serving a district area, and water pumping station and shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. Such facility shall not be located on a residential street, unless no other site is available, and shall be so located as to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through such street.
2. The location, design and operation of such facility may not adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area.
3. Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be provided, and shall be landscaped in accordance with Article XI.
B. Open Uses.
1. Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead electrical, gas, water transmission or distribution systems or collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, include poles, wires, mains, drains, sewer, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. Open essential services shall not include any human or animal fecal matter or material.
2. Landscaping requirements and performance standards established in Article XI and Article XIV shall be adhered to.
Page 98
150-8.8 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
Home occupations are permitted in all residential zone districts if the following conditions are met:
A. The home occupation is clearly the subordinate use to the principal residential use.
B. There shall be no employees other than those who reside on the premises.
C. There shall be no visible change in the exterior appearance of the dwelling.
D. The storage of commercial vehicles on site shall conform to standards found in section 150-12.5.
E. There shall be no truck deliveries of merchandise other than normal delivery services such as UPS and Federal Express.
F. No signs are permitted in conjunction with said home occupation.
G. There shall be no outdoor storage in conjunction with the home occupation.
H. Any home occupation that involves the tutorial instruction of music, art and academic subjects shall be limited to two students at one time.
I. Any home occupation that involves the tutorial instruction of music, art and academic subjects shall be limited four hours of tutorial instruction during a 24 hour period.
J. No more than two clients, customers or other business invitees are permitted at any one time per calendar day.
K. The home occupation activity uses no equipment or process that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, detectable by any neighbor.
L. The home occupation activity does not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
M. Any home occupation that requires client visitation must not have a volume guests in excess of what is customary for residential use in the neighborhood.
Page 99
150-8.9 DONATION DROP BOX.
A. No person shall place, use or employ a donation clothing bin for solicitation purposes within the Township of Verona unless all of the following requirements are met:
The person shall apply for and obtain permit from the Construction Code Official. The application for the permit shall include, along with the required fee set forth in this ordinance:
1. The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as possible;
2. The manner in which the person, entity, or organization anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed and the method by which the proceeds collected would be allocated or spent.
3. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin.
4. Written consent of the property owner to place the bin on his property.
B. Safety and Maintenance.
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of anything contained in this Chapter to the contrary, no donation clothing bin shall be placed, used or employed in a location that is considered by the Construction Code Official to cause a safety hazard. Placement that will be considered to pose a safety hazard includes, but is not limited to, placement within one 100 yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases. Placement of a donation clothing bin shall also be undertaken in a manner so as to reasonably consider and account for the personal safety of the persons using the clothing bins for the placement of clothing and/or unloading of donation clothing bins.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of anything contained in this Chapter to the contrary, no donation clothing bin shall be placed, used or employed pursuant to this Chapter unless such donation clothing bin is free of rust, peeling, or other deleterious effects and subject to the Township Property Maintenance Code and its violation provisions.
Page 100
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of anything contained in this Chapter to the contrary, no donation clothing bin shall be placed, used or employed pursuant to this Chapter unless appropriate maintenance obligations are met, which include, but are not limited to, keeping the donation clothing bin and surrounding placement area free of debris and other materials, and the required emptying of donation clothing bins of donations and contents on a periodic regular basis.
C. Permit Renewal.
All persons who have obtained a permit pursuant to subsection one above and wish to renew said permit shall submit, along with the required fee set forth in this ordinance, an application for renewal prior to the expiration of the permit, which such renewal application shall include the following information:
1. The location where the bin is currently situated, as precisely as possible, and, if the person intends to move it, the new location where the bin would be situated and a written consent of the property owner to place the bin on his property;
2. The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been allocated or spent, and any changes the person anticipates it may make in these processes during the period covered by the renewal; and
3. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, and of any entities which may do so during the period covered by the renewal.
D. Permit Fee and Duration.
1. The application fee, which must be submitted with the application, shall be $25.00.
2. The fee for a renewal of the permit, which must be submitted with the application, shall be $25.00.
3. All permits and renewals obtained shall be in effect for one year and shall expire on December 31st of the year in which the permit or renewal was issued.
Page 101
E. Bona Fide Office of Permitee.
The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, must maintain a bona fide office where a representative of the person or other entity, respectively, can be reached at a telephone information line during normal business hours for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or other entity. For the purposes of this ordinance, an answering machine or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office.
F. Notices Required.
The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
1. The permit number and the date of expiration of that permit;
2. The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin, and any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or donations collected from the bin;
3. The telephone number of the person’s bona fide office and the telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity which may share or profit from any clothing or donations collected via the bin;
4. In cases where an entity other than the person who owns the bin may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the notice shall also state that clothing or other donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given directly to, an entity other than the person who owns the bin, which such entity shall be identified; and
5. A statement indicating the manner in which the person, entity, or organization anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or spent.
G. Complaints and Investigation.
1. The Construction Code Official, upon receipt of any complaint concerning a donation clothing bin, shall request that the police department perform an investigation within 30 days of the receipt of the complaint.
Page 102
2. Any person who places a clothing bin in violation of this ordinance or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 shall be given a warning stating that if the violation is not rectified or a hearing with the Construction Code Official is not requested within 45 days, then the bin will be seized and removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and any clothing or other donations collected via the bin shall be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. This notice shall be place on the donation clothing bin and forwarded to the last known address of the person who placed the bin at the location according to the Township’s records.
3. If the person who placed the bin does not rectify the violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the warning, then the Township shall remove the bin or have it removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin and sell at public auction or otherwise dispose of the clothing or donations. All proceeds from the sale of the donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Office of the Township.
H. Additional Fines and Penalties.
In addition to the remedies set forth in Section 74-7 above, any person who violates this ordinance or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. and as amended and or supplemented, which results in the seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be subject to the following:
1. A penalty up to $20,000.00 for each violation. The Township shall bring this action in Municipal Court or Superior Court in a summary proceeding under the “Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999”, P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). Penalty monies collected shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the Township.
2. Deemed ineligible to place, use or employ a donation clothing bin for solicitation purposes. A person who is deemed ineligible may apply to the Construction Code Official to have that person’s eligibility restored. The Construction Code Official may restore the eligibility of a person who:
i. acted within the public interest; and
ii. demonstrated that he has made a good faith effort to comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. and this ordinance and had no fraudulent intentions.
Page 103
150-8.10 CABANAS.
A. A cabana is a permitted accessory use/structure to a permanent pool.
B. A cabana does not constitute a shed.
C. Cabanas shall not be designed or constructed to include sleeping facilities;
D. Cabanas shall be restricted in size to a total of 100 square feet of gross floor area.
E. Cabanas shall be designed and constructed as freestanding, self-supporting structures.
F. Cabanas shall be ten feet from all property lines, be one story tall, and no higher than 15 feet.
150-8.11 MASSAGE PARLORS, MASSEURS AND MASSEUSES
A. License Required.
1. No person shall operate any establishment or utilize any premises in the Township as or for a massage business unless and until there first has been obtained a license for the establishment or premises from the Township Clerk in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section.
2. No person shall render or perform services as a masseur or masseuse or engage in the business of or be employed as a masseur or masseuse unless and until he or she has obtained a masseur’s or masseuse’s license from the Township Clerk in accordance with the term and provisions of this section.
B. Application.
Each and every applicant for a license, either for an establishment or premises, to be used for a massage business or for a masseur’s or masseuse’s license, shall set forth the following information in writing on forms provided by the Township Clerk:
1. The name and address of the applicant and all former addresses for a period of three years prior to making the application.
Page 104
2. The address of the establishment or premises to be used in the massage business and a physical description of the property and facilities, if the applicant desires a license for the establishment or premises.
3. If the applicant desires a masseur’s or masseuse’s license, a statement of all employment for a period of three years prior to making the application.
4. A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any officer or director thereof, is a corporation has ever been convicted of a crime in this or any other State.
C. Fee; Late Fee.
1. The applicant for a license for a massage establishment or premises shall pay an annual license fee of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars, which license fees shall become due on January 1st annually. The applicant for a masseur’s or masseuse’s license shall pay an annual license fee of one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars, which license fee shall become due on January 1st annually.
2. The license shall be issued for one year, January 1st and expire on December 31st. There will be no proration of fees. Any establishment or individual failing to renew a license, under this section, by January 31st shall be charged an additional twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per license.
3. A condition for approval for the license is that all municipal taxes, liens and fees have been paid.
D. Approval of License.
1. Each application for a license or the renewal thereof, either to operate a massage establishment or premises or to engage in the business of or to be employed as a masseur or masseuse, which is submitted to the Township Clerk shall be approved by the Township Council before any license is issued.
2. The Township Council shall not approve the application if, on the basis of the past criminal record of the applicant or of the principals thereof, or on the basis of other evidence of bad character or morals, it shall determine that the granting or renewal of such license would tend to encourage or permit criminal or immoral activities within the Township of Verona.
Page 105
E. Exemptions.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to massage or physical therapy treatments given:
1. In the office of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or physical therapist.
2. In a regularly established medical center, hospital, or sanitarium having a staff which includes licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors and/or physical therapists.
3. By any licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or physical therapist in the residence of his patient.
Page 106
ARTICLE IX REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN TEMPORARY USES
150-9.1 MOBILE TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS.
A. Mobile temporary storage units shall not exceed eight feet in height, eight feet in width, or sixteen feet in length.
B. Mobile temporary storage units may remain on a property for up to 30 consecutive days. No lot shall contain a mobile temporary storage container for more than 90 days per 360 day period.
C. Mobile temporary storage units shall not be located in such a location that would obstruct the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and shall in no instant, be located within a public right of way.
D. No mobile temporary storage unit shall contain advertizing except for the manufacture of the mobile temporary storage units.
E. The location of temporary mobile storage containers shall be as directed by the zoning code enforcer based upon the specific factors including but not limited to accessibility, safety and aesthetics.
150-9.2 MOBILE TEMPORARY TOILET FACILITIES.
The location of temporary toilet facilities shall be as directed by the zoning code enforcer based upon the specific factors including but not limited to accessibility, safety and aesthetics.
150-9.3 DUMPSTERS. Roll off dumpsters utilized in conjunction with single and two family residential development may be located on the driveway for a period of no longer than 30 calendar days.
Page 107
ARTICLE X REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN INHERENTLY BENEFICIAL USES
150-10.1 SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY STRUCTURES.
Solar or photovoltaic energy structures are permitted as an accessory structure in all zones so long as said structure meets the following conditional use requirements:
A. In no event shall the placement of the solar panels result in a total height that exceeds the maximum building height for the zoning district in which said panels are installed plus an additional three feet.
B. Development Standards for All Solar Energy Systems and Structures.
4. Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto nearby properties, businesses, residential homes, or roadways. The applicant shall submit certifications from an Engineer or manufacturer that the design will not cause a reflection or noise nuisance to adjacent property owners or flow of traffic on nearby roadways.
5. The design of the solar energy system shall conform to all applicable industry standings including New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, National Electric Code, and Township of Verona Building Codes and Zoning Regulations. The applicant shall submit certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturer from a certified organization and any such design shall be certified by an Engineer registered in the State of New Jersey. The manufacturer specifications shall be submitted as part of the application.
6. Mechanical equipment shall not be located in the front yard, side yard, or rear yard setbacks.
7. No portion of the solar panel including the racking system, poles, or ballast shall contain or be used to display advertising. The manufactures and equipment information, warning, or indication of ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the solar energy system provided they comply with the prevailing sign regulations.
8. A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a building and/or construction permit has been approved and issued.
Page 108
ARTICLE XI BUFFER AND GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
150-11.1 BUFFER ZONE REQUIREMENTS.
A. All commercial, industrial, office, apartment, health care, institutional, or a public use adjoining or abutting a residential zone, an shall provide a buffer zone in accordance with the standards set forth below subject to other more restrictive regulations herein.
BUFFER ZONE REQUIREMENTS
TOWNSHIP OF VERONA, NEW JERSEY
BUFFER ZONE
DEPTH OF BUFFER ZONE
MIN. MAX.
5% of Lot Depth 5 Feet 30 Feet
B. No principal or accessory structure, other than as may be provided herein, nor any off-street parking or loading areas or other use shall be permitted within the buffer zone.
C. No access or driveway, other than as may be permitted herein, shall be permitted within the buffer zone.
D. Said buffer zone shall be kept in its natural state where wooded, and when natural vegetation is sparse, plant material at least six feet in height and a solid or tightly woven fence may be required so as to provide a year-round visual screen by the Planning Board. Said planting may be placed in suitable areas in the buffer zone as shall be required by the Planning Board.
E. Within said buffer zone, underground utility easements shall be permitted.
F. The area encompassed in the buffer zone may be utilized for the purpose of computing lot coverage.
G. Where the extension of a utility or a street extends into a mandatory buffer, said utility or street shall be located perpendicular to the buffer area and shall disturb the buffer to the minimum extent possible.
Page 109
150-11.2 GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
A. Enclosed Uses.
Any enclosed use require by this Ordinance to be landscaped shall be provided with a fence or a visual screen designed to produce a dense cover consisting of evergreen or evergreen-type hedges or shrubs, spaced at intervals of not more than five feet, located and maintained in good condition within ten feet of the property line or as shall be determined by the Planning Board. The Planning Board, in the alternative, may require a landscaped earthen berm not less than five feet in height.
B. Unenclosed Uses.
Any use, required by this Ordinance to be landscaped, which is not conducted within a completely enclosed building, such as required off-street parking, shall be screened by a solid or closely woven fence or by evergreen hedges or shrubs spaced at intervals of not more than five feet, located and maintained in good condition, within ten feet of the property line or the zone district boundary line or as shall be determined by the Planning Board. In the alternative, the Planning Board may require a landscaped earthen berm not less than five feet in height.
C. Maintenance.
1. Any fence or landscaping installed in accordance with this section shall be maintained in good order to achieve the objectives of this ordinance. Failure to maintain fencing or to replace dead or diseased landscaping or any refuse which may collect therein shall be considered a violation of this ordinance.
2. Whenever a buffer or landscaping requirement is imposed, and to the extent that same is in fulfillment of the requirements of this ordinance or any other Township ordinance, a guaranty in the form of a security bond, cash or security deposit shall be required.
3. All properties shall be kept free of Poison Ivy (Toxicodenrin radican), Japanese Knotweed (Polygonim cuspidatum), and Ailanthus (Ailanthus Altissima), which are undesirable or invasive species that may readily spread to nearby properties
Page 110
D. Submission of proposed landscape plans.
A proposed landscape plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its consideration by:
1. All applicants for site plan approval.
2. All applicants for subdivision approval where any of the lots to be created would require a planted buffer area or a planted area.
3. All applicants for subdivisions requiring planting of public dedicated land.
E. Contents of landscape plan.
1. The landscape plan shall be prepared at a scale shown on the plan by a landscape architect, architect or professional engineer. The name of the preparer of the plan, his address, telephone number and license number shall be indicated on the plan. The scale of the plan shall also be indicated. The name of the applicant and any authorized agents shall also appear on the plan.
2. The plans shall specify all planted areas and planted buffer areas, if required, and the dimensions of each of said areas. The plan shall specify the total number of square feet of any planted area (not including buffer area), the total number of square feet of any required planted buffer area, the combined total area in square feet, if applicable, and the percentage figures of planted areas and buffer areas of the sum of the two and of the total site area.
Page 111
150-11.3 LOCATION, SHAPE AND CONTENT OF AREAS.
A. The criteria to be considered in determining the location, shape and content of any required planted area and the creation of any required buffer area shall include the following:
1. Drainage control.
2. Traffic and pedestrian safety.
3. Conservation of the economic values of the property and adjacent property.
4. Proper vehicular and traffic sight lines.
5. Shade and pollution control.
6. Screening and privacy of adjacent residential areas.
7. The configuration and relationship of planting areas to the total plan submitted.
8. The reduction of noise and lights disturbing to nearby property zoned for residential use.
9. The objectives of good planning and zoning pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40.55D-1 et seq.
10. The preservation of healthy substantial trees wherever it is reasonable to do so, consistent with the criteria set forth herein.
B. In connection with Planning Board consideration for site plan approval, the Planning Board shall have the right to determine the proper areas for the required planted area, taking into consideration the criteria set forth above.
150-11.4 USE OF AREAS RESTRICTED.
A planted area and a planted buffer area required by this Chapter shall not be used for any buildings, structures, paving or parking or for the sale, display, storage or leasing of materials or for any other use other than a planted area or a planted buffer area except:
A. Detention basins, subject to a finding by the Board that adequate visual screening is still provided.
Page 112
B. Below-grade, underground parking facilities may be erected underneath any required planted area or planted buffer area, provided that the surface of the lot in the area of the planted buffer area and the planted area has at least four feet of soil and is properly drained so that the same is sufficient to support the growth of plants, ground cover, shrubs and trees.
C. Upon Board site plan approval, the Board shall, however, allow paved ingress and egress from the site to a public street or highway through a planted buffer area where there are no possible safe exits or entrances to a road or highway. The area to be so paved shall not be included as part of the area making up the required planted buffer area.
150-11.5 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
A. The required planted area (other than planted buffer areas) need not be all in one area of the lot.
B. The Board may, at the request of any applicant for site plan approval, consider any portion of the planted area to be provided by the applicant on any other lot or lots for purposes of determining the required planted area requirement (not including planted buffer areas) if, in the opinion of the Board:
1. The subject lots are to be operated essentially and substantially as a single site rather than as separate sites; and
2. The lots have or are to be provided as part of the site plan with designated pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress between or among each lot in the unit considered, without using public roads, and utilizing common parking areas.
150-11.6 DESIGN CRITERIA.
A. The planted area and required planted buffer area shall be so designed to provide proper drainage of the soil.
B. The planted area or required planted buffer area shall be planted with approved plant material with sufficient organic sanitary material, topsoil, peat moss and the like, so that the same shall be likely to thrive. Minimum depth of topsoil in all turf areas shall be four inches. All topsoil shall conform to specifications approved by the Township Engineer.
Page 113
C. The planted area shall be designed to provide for the planting of plant material that is hardy and of a variety which requires a minimum amount of maintenance.
D. Where a planted buffer area is required and in areas where there are to be required planted areas, the Board may require on site plan approval that changes in topography or elevation of the planted buffer areas and planted areas be made where such changes would better serve the criteria set forth in Article IX.
E. In connection with any site plan approval granted, the developer of the property shall protect against damage to trees that are located in the approved planted area and approved planted buffer area and shall also protect these areas by temporary fencing until the certificate of occupancy has been issued and all outside construction has been completed.
150-11.7 PLANT SELECTION AND PLACEMENT.
A. The following types of evergreen plants (hereinafter denominated 'Group A’) in the upright varieties are recommended for buffer areas to establish screening of nonresidential use and residential use:
Group A
Pines of all upright varieties
Junipers of all upright varieties
Spruces of all upright varieties
Firs of all upright varieties
Cedars of all upright varieties
Tsuga of all upright varieties
Arborvitaes of all upright varieties
B. The trees denominated 'Group B-1' in the accompanying tabulation and the shrubs denominated 'Group B-2’ in the accompanying tabulation are recommended for use as a formal clipped hedge for screen and buffer planting.
C. The plants denominated 'Group C’ in the accompanying tabulations are recommended for informal flowering or fruiting or evergreen hedge for buffer and screen planting.
Page 114
D. The plants denominated 'Group D' in the accompanying tabulations are recommended for ground covers for greenery planting and the planted areas that are at the end of aisles of parking or very close to entrances and exits to other property or streets or highways. The plants in Group D shall be utilized so as to not obstruct proper sight lines for vehicular and pedestrian safety. The maximum height shall not exceed 30 inches at maturity.
E. The plant species in ‘Group E’ (shade trees) and ‘Group F’ (ornamental trees) are recommended and approved species for planted areas and planted buffer areas. ‘Group E’ (shade trees) when planted shall have a minimum size of two-and-one-half-inches caliper and a minimum branch height of seven feet. If shade trees in ‘Group E’ are planted in any area on the lot where they will be close to automobiles or at the end of any parking aisle or near the corner of any intersection of any aisle and any other driveway or aisle or in any other location in parking aisles, the trees shall be pruned to remove all limbs at the trunk if at that point the limbs are lower than ten feet from the ground. All new trees in Group E and F must be staked in accordance with the American Nurserymen's Standards.
Group B-1
Acer campestre
Acer ginnala
Carpinus in variety
Crataegus cordata
Crataegus, crus-galli
Picea excelsa
Pinus strobus
Taxus cuspidata capitata
Tsuga canadensis
Tsuga occidentals nigra
Page 115
Group B-2
Berberis thunbergii
Buxus sempervirens
Euonymus alatus
Euonymus alatas compactus,
Euonymus fortunel vegetus
Ilex crenata varieties
Ilex crenata microphylla
Ligustrum lbolium
Ligustrum ovalifolium
Phamnus, fragula tallhedge
Pyracantha coccinea lalandi
Taxus in variety
Group C
Berberis in variety
Cydonia japonica
Deutzia gracilis
Euonyrnus patens
Forsythia intermedia varieties
Hetzi
Juniperus chinensis pftzeriana
Juniperus chinensis glauca
Lonicera (bush forms)
Mahonia aquifolium
Philadelphus; virginalis
Rhodotypes kerriodes
Rosa nitida
Rosa rugosa
Spirea bum antony waterer
Spirea thunderergi
Spirea vanhouttei
Syringa vulgaris
Syringa vulgaris alba
Taxus intermedia densilomis
Taxus intermedia hatfieldi
Virburnum dentatum
Virburnum lantana,
Viburnum tomentosum
Page 116
Group D
Turf (grass)
Scotch heather
Rockspray cotoneaster
Candytuft
Creeping juniper
Sargent juniper of the valley Ferns
Shore juniper
Juniper wiltoni
Lily of the Valley Ferns
Epimedium,
English ivy
Japanese spurge
Periwinkle or myrtle
Hall's honeysuckle
Virginia creeper
Moss pink
Creeping thyme
Bulge plant wintercreeper
Chinese matrimony vine
Memorial rose yellow root
Page 117
Group E
Recommended Shade Trees for
Buffer Planting and Planted Areas
Common Name
Botanical Name
Sycamore maple
Acer pseudo-platanus
Red Maple
Acer Rubrum
Armstron II
Clumnar
October Glory
Soashanger
Sugar maple
Acer saccharum
Colunbar
Green Mountain
Momentale
Red horsechestnut
Aesculus carnea
White ash
Fraxinus Americana
Marshall Seedless ash
Fraxinus Pennsylvania “Marshall”
Blue ash
Fraxinus velutina “Modesto”
Ginkgo maidenhair tree
Fraxinus Pennsylvania “Marshall”
Autumn Gold (must be male)
Lakeview (must be male)
Sentry (must be male)
Honey locust
Gleditsia triacanthos inernis
Imperial
Skyline
Sunburst
Sweetgum
Liquidambar styraciflua
Sour-gum
Nyssa sylvatica
Oaks
Scarlet oak
Pin oak
Willow oak
Northern red oak
Quercus coccinea
Quercus palustris
Quercus phellos
Quercus rubra
Japanese pagoda tree
Sophora japonica
Lindens
Littleleaf lindern
Chancellor
Greenspire
Rancho
Tilia cordata
Sawleaf zelkova
Zelkova serrata
Katsura
Cercidiphyllum japonicum
Dawn redwood
Metasequoia glypostroboides
Page 118
Group F
Recommended Ornamental Trees for Buffer
Planting and Planted Areas
Common Name
Botanical Name
Shadblow Serviceberry
Amelanchier Canadensis
Canoe birch, Paper birch
Betula papyrifera
Gray birch
Betula populifoloa
European white birch
Betula verrucosa
European hornbeam
Carpinus betulus
American hornbeam Fastigiata
Carpinus caroliniana
Goldenrain tree
Koelreuterua paniculata
Sourwood sorrel tree
Oxydendrum arboretum
Amur corktree
Phellodendron amurense
Bradford pear
Pryus calleryana
English holly
Ilex aquifolium
American holly
Ilex opaca
Flowering cherry
Prunus
Sargent Cherry
Prunus sargenti
Autumn Flowering Cherry
Prunus subhirtella autumnnallis
Beni Hagan Cherry
Prunus beni hagan
Weeping Japanese Cherry
Prunus subhirtella pendula
Kwanzan Cherry
Prunus Kwanzan
Yoshino Cherry
Prunus Kwanzan
Dogwoods
Pink dogwood
Cornus florida rubra
Flowering dogwood
Cornus florida
Chinese dogwood
Cornus Kousa
Cornelian Cherry
Cornus mas
Flowering crabapple
Malus
Bilrelana plum
Prunus birelana
Purpleleaf plum
Prunus cerasifera “Atropurpurea”
American Beauty Plant patent 2821
Malus American Beauty
Snow Cloud Plant patent 2913
Malus Snowcloud
Double Flowering Plant patent 2912
Malus Pink Perfection
Snowdrift Crabapple
Malus Snowdrift
Catherine Crabapple
Malus Catherine
Sergeant Crab
Malus Scheldeckeri
Scheidecker Crab
Malus Scheideckeri
Eastern redbud
Cercis Canadensis
Lavallie hawthorn
Crataegus Ivellei
Carolina Silverbell tree
Halesia carolina
Page 119
F. All landscaping is to be completed in a good and workmanlike manner and all planted areas and planted buffer areas are subject to the inspection and approval of the Board prior to the issuance of any permanent certificate of occupancy.
G. The developer must notify the Board at least forty-eight hours prior to the installation of any planted material. The Board may adopt resolutions at public meetings creating standard specifications for planted material and planting which, if adopted, shall be adhered to by all persons installing such material.
H. Substitutions of plants within the same grouping from those shown in plans submitted are allowed, subject to Board approval, where the originally designated plants are not available.
Page 120
ARTICLE XII OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND DESIGN CRITERIA
150-12.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
A. In all districts, in connection with every business, institution, recreational, residential, manufacturing, public building or any other use, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected or is enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking spaces in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 150-12.1B which spaces shall be paved; provided, however, that off-site, off-street parking spaces may be utilized in any district subject to the following requirements:
1. That a permanent and irrevocable easement of the parking facilities in favor of the premises to be benefited thereby shall be dedicated and recorded as a condition of such use.
2. That the nearest point of the premises utilized for such parking spaces shall be not more than 250 feet walking distance from the nearest point of the premises to be benefited thereby.
B. MINIMUM NUMBER OF SPACES. 1. Minimum requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be as set forth in Section 150-12.6c, Minimum Required Off-Street Parking. 2. Except in residential zoning districts, the minimum number of required parking spaces may not be met or satisfied by parking spaces located within or underneath a principal building. 3. In the Town Center Zoning District, parking requirements shall not apply except in the case of additions and/or new construction of greater than 1,000 square feet gross floor area or for cafeterias, full-service restaurants, snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars, and limited-service restaurants with a seating capacity of greater than 50 patrons.
Page 121
150-12.2 SIZE OF PARKING SPACES.
A. Each off-street parking space shall measure not less than nine feet by 20 feet exclusive of access drives and aisles and shall be of usable shape and condition. Where front overhang of the vehicle is possible onto a paved or grass area not used for vehicular or pedestrian circulation or parking, the space may be reduced to 18 feet. B. If hairpin striping is utilized to demark the location of parking spaces, each parking space width shall be measured from the centerline of one hairpin to the centerline of another. C. Except in the case of one-family dwellings, no parking areas provided hereunder shall be established for fewer than three spaces.
150-12.3 ACCESS.
In the interest of safety, the following requirements with respect to the location and construction of driveways are promulgated: A. There shall be an adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Access drives shall be paved and so designed as to minimize interference with traffic on abutting streets. B. No driveway or access or egress from a parking area shall be located closer than 50 feet from any intersection or as required by county or state regulations.
C. All driveways shall cross sidewalk areas at sidewalk grade.
D. No driveway shall be less than one foot from an adjacent property line.
150-12.4 ACCESS WIDTH. A. Minimum width. 1. Access drives or driveways, except for one-family dwellings, shall be not less than 12 feet wide. In the business district where customer parking is involved, driveways for two-way traffic shall be at least 20 feet wide, and driveways for one-way traffic shall be at least 12 feet wide. 2. Access drives or driveways for one-family dwellings shall be at least eight feet wide.
Page 122
B. Maximum width. 1. No driveway for a commercial use shall have a width in excess of 24 feet at the curbline, and the curb cut leading to property from street shall not be more than 20 feet in length. 2. Access drives or driveways for one-family dwellings shall be not more than 14 feet wide at the curbline for single driveways or 16 feet for double driveways.
3. There shall be no more than one curb cut for each single family parcel.
4. No access drive or driveway, pathway or any other means of egress or ingress shall be located in any residential district to provide access to uses other than those permitted in such residential district.
5. No parking shall be permitted in any required minimum front or side yards, except in the driveway in said yard.
2. Standards for areas for three vehicles or more. A. Parking areas for three or more vehicles and access to this parking shall be paved and shall be designed and planned in accordance with accepted engineering principles. B. All plans shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, and his recommendations shall be forwarded to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, whichever is reviewing the site plan, before the Board shall act.
C. Parking areas shall be landscaped to minimize nuisance characteristics to adjacent properties and for aesthetic reasons. They shall be drained in accordance with good engineering and construction practices.
D. For reasons of safety, all parking area lighting shall be designed and operated so as not to reflect or shine on adjacent properties. Parking spaces and ways shall be clearly marked.
Page 123
150-12.5 OFF STREET LOADING
A. All nonresidential uses shall provide for off-street loading and unloading. A minimum of one such space shall be provided for the first 10,000 square feet of first-floor building area and one space for each additional 10,000 square feet on the first-floor level. B. All such spaces shall be designed and planned in accordance with generally accepted engineering principles and be reviewed by the Township Engineer prior to submission to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, whichever is reviewing the site plan.
C. Where the existing characteristics of the site make it impractical to provide spaces for off-street loading and unloading, this requirement may be waived in whole or in part by the Planning Board at the time of site plan review.
D. Required loading spaces shall be at least 12 feet wide and 30 feet long or longer depending on the length of trucks or trailers to be accommodated. They shall have a clearance height of at least 15 feet.
E. No loading areas shall be located in the front yard.
F. No loading areas shall be located within five feet of any lot line.
150-12.6 OFF STREET PARKING A. Off-street parking shall be provided in conformity with the off-street parking requirements as set forth in the Schedule of Off-Street Parking Regulations, which is hereby adopted and set forth below.
B. All residential land uses must follow the residential site improvement standards (RSIS).
C. Parking Schedule:
USE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
Adult Care Center
one space per 100 square feet of G.F.A.
Assembly hall, auditorium, community center building.
one space per 100 square feet of G.F.A. or one space per four seats, whichever is greater.
Page 124
USE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
Banks and financial institutions
one space per 300 square feet of G.F.A.
Bowling alley
four spaces per bowling lane.
Commercial Recreation
Computer and Data Processing Center
One space per 250 square feet of G.F.A.
one space per 400 Square feet of G.F.A.
Club, Lodge
20 plus one additional space per 200 square feet of G.F.A.
Day Care Facility
one space per four children plus one space per two employees.
Eating and drinking places
one space per two seats devoted to service
Florist
one space per 1,000 square feet of G.F.A.
Funeral home
ten spaces, plus one space for each 100 square feet of floor area
Gasoline service station
one space per 1,000 square feet of lot area
House of worship
one space per three seats or 72 inches of seating space when benches rather than seats are used
Library
one space per 600 square feet
Live Entertainment
one space per two seats plus ten% the total area dedicated to live entertainment. One space per 30 square feet of dance floor, stage area or other area devoted to live entertainment.
Medical, dental, chiropractic or veterinary
one space per 180 square feet of G.F.A. or five for each doctor, dentist, chiropractor or veterinarian, whichever is greater.
Establishments devoted to establishments devoted to installation of motor supplies and motor vehicle service.
four spaces per repair bay. If no bays are provided, the required parking for a retail use shall apply.
Multifamily dwelling
Utilize the RSIS.
Page 125
USE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
Nursing home
one for each two beds
Office (non medical)
Building Size: Under 10,000 square feet 10,001 to 24,999 square feet 25,000 or more
six spaces per 1,000 G.F.A. five spaces per 1,000 G.F.A. four spaces per 1,000 G.F.A.
Personal service establishment
one space per 300 square feet of G.F.A.
Research, experimental or testing laboratory, manufacturing or industrial use or service use
one space per 300 square feet of G.F.A.; or one for every 1 ½ employees during maximum shift plus ten%, plus six for visitors, whichever is greater.
Repair garages
three spaces plus one space for each 700 square feet of G.F.A.
Retail store
one space per 200 square feet of G.F.A.
Sale of new and used motor vehicles
six spaces plus one space for each 700 square feet of G.F.A.
Schools: public, parochial, private and religious below the level of high school, including day nursery and nursery schools
two spaces per classroom, and one for every eight seats in auditoriums and/or assembly halls; or one space for each teacher and employee, plus ten%, whichever is greater
Secondary school
ten spaces per classroom
Shopping Centers
Building Size: Less than 150,000 sq.ft. 150,000-500,000 sq.ft. 500,000 sq.ft. or more
five and 1/2 parking spaces per 1,000 sq.ft. five spaces per 1,000 sq.ft. four and 1/2 parking spaces per 1,000 sq.ft.
Storage Warehouse
one space per 750 square feet of G.F.A.
Theater
one space per three seats
Townhouse
Utilize the RSIS.
Page 126
USE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
Wholesale business, warehouse lumber or coal yard; animal hospital
one space per 300 square feet of G.F.A.
Unlisted uses
To be determined by Planning Board or Board of Adjustment pursuant to site plan review, based on nature and intensity of use and impact on surrounding area
Mixed use building
Parking is based upon the maximum occupancy of the sum of the individual uses.
NOTE 1: Whenever the formula for parking spaces required, results in a fraction of a space exceeding 0.49, a full space shall be provided.
NOTE 2: G.F.A. denotes "Gross Floor Area".
150-12.7 PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
It is the intent of this subsection (150-12.7) to retain the character of residential neighborhoods in residential zones by restricting the parking of commercial vehicles in said zones.
A. No individual other than the occupant of the dwelling unit shall be permitted to park a commercial vehicle in a residential zone subject to the following:
1. No commercially licensed motor vehicle, truck, van, trailer or other equipment shall be parked on a residential property in a residential zone unless completely housed in a garage and sheltered from public view, except as provided hereunder.
2. Commercially licensed automobiles, station wagons, vans and trucks are permitted to park on a residential property, provided that all of the following conditions are satisfied:
a. Such vehicle shall have a single chassis body with not more than four wheels and shall not be more than 20 feet long and seven feet high and shall not exceed 6,000 pounds' registered gross vehicle weight.
Page 127
b. If such vehicle contains commercial advertising in the form of lettering, logos or graphics, then such vehicle shall be utilized for transportation and not intended for advertising alone.
c. No equipment, ladders or other commercial accessories or materials which are not permanently affixed to the vehicle shall be permitted on the vehicle when parked in a residential zone.
d. Any garage on the premises must be physically unable to accommodate the commercially licensed vehicle sought to be parked in the residential zone. A determination by the enforcing authority that the door opening dimensions and size dimensions of the garage are adequate to accept the vehicle shall be presumptive evidence, subject to rebuttal, that the vehicle can be fully accommodated.
e. Only one commercially licensed vehicle which meets all of the above criteria shall be permitted to park on a residential property.
3. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a person from parking a commercially licensed vehicle on residential property while such vehicle is being used in the transaction of business with the owner or occupant of the residential property.
4. Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored on a residential property unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
a. Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored in a garage located on the premises, provided that such garage completely enclosed the recreational vehicle.
b. If stored outside of a garage, such recreational vehicle shall be stored on a parking area which is in addition to such parking spaces as are required in other portions of this chapter.
c. No recreation vehicle can be located in an area where an accessory structure would be prohibited. 5. This section may be enforced by the Township Building Inspector or the Township Police Department.
Page 128
150-12.8 ADDITIONAL OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
In addition to the provisions of the Schedule of Off-Street Parking Regulations there shall be applicable the regulations as set forth below.
A. Except for one- and two-family structures, all parking areas and driveways shall be paved with bituminous concrete, concrete or other approved permanent hard-surfaced material, and all parking spaces shall be lined and designated on said pavement.
B. Except for one and two-family structures, all parking areas and driveways must have a six inch solid concrete or Belgian block curb to separate the parking area and/or driveway from the required front, side and rear yard when these parking areas are located within six feet of the yard.
C. Parking Stall and Driveway Requirements.
1. Driveway widths for other than one and two-family structures shall be the sizes indicated in the table below, depending upon their location and traffic flow.
2. The parking layout tabulated below shall be for one-way traffic only and for parking on one side of said driveway. A driveway for the above mentioned parking requirement shall be provided with an exit and entrance to either another driveway, right-of-way or public thoroughfare. If said driveway does not comply with the above, a cul-de-sac shall be installed with a minimum radius of 35 feet at its blind end. When said driveway serves two-way traffic, the minimum width of the driveway shall be 22 feet, except for angle parking between 76° and 90° for standard sized spaces which shall be a minimum width of 25 feet.
3. For parking stalls and aisles, there shall be provided a minimum stall width of nine feet and a minimum stall depth of 20 feet.
(a) The following minimum aisles widths shall be used:
Standard
Space
Angle Parking
(9 x 20)
Parallel
10
30° or less
12
31° - 45°
13
46° - 60°
18
Page 129
61° - 75°
22
76° - 90°
24
4. Where sidewalks abut and overhang the sidewalks, the side walk depth shall be increased to six feet to account for the overhang.
D. All parking areas required by this Chapter when located in residential districts, except for one and two-family structures, shall be screened along the side or sides abutting a public street with either a solid fence or wall. Said fence or wall shall be a minimum of five feet in height.
E. All parking areas required by this Chapter, when located in residential districts, except for one-and two-family structures in all districts, shall be required to be sufficiently lighted so as to ensure safety to both pedestrians and motorists. Such lighting shall be in accordance with the following:
1. Nonattendant parking areas shall have a minimum of one-foot-candle power lighting throughout the entire parking area.
2. Attendant parking areas shall have a minimum two-foot candles lighting throughout the entire parking area.
3. The lighting in parking areas shall be installed and arranged so as to throw no glare toward windows of dwellings on adjoining residential property.
G. All parking spaces shall be laid out so as to have direct access from a driveway or aisle, and no double-parking or tandem parking spaces shall be permitted except on driveways accessory to one and two-family dwellings.
H. All off-street parking areas shall provide space to permit a vehicle to turn around on the site so as to avoid a backing maneuver within the street. Backing within the street shall only be permitted for driveways and parking associated with one and two-family residences.
I. Off-street loading and unloading shall be provided in such amount and manner that all loading and unloading operations will be conducted entirely within the boundaries of the lot concerned, and no vehicle shall use public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way for loading or unloading operations, other than ingress and egress to the lot.
150-12.9 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND DESIGN CRITERIA
A. General Application.
Page 130
All industrial, business, office, multiple-family residential and health service uses, are subject to the following performance standards and procedures. Other uses, existing or proposed, which the Construction Code Official or Zoning Officer has reasonable grounds to believe violate these performance standards shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance as well.
B. Compliance with Performance Standards.
1. Prior to Construction and Operation.
Any application for a building permit for a use which shall be subject to performance standards shall be accompanied by a sworn statement by the owner of the subject property that said use will be operated in accordance with the performance standards set forth herein.
2. Continued Compliance.
Continued compliance with performance standards is required and enforcement of continued compliance with these perfor-mance standards shall be enforced by the Construction Code Official and Zoning Officer.
C. Nuisance Elements
The location where determinations are to be made for the enforcement of performance standards shall be made at or outside property lines of the use creating such element for noise, odor, vibration, glare, dust, smoke, air pollution or water pollution.
150-12.9 DESIGN CRITERIA.
In the judgment of the Planning Board, in accordance with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance, the following design criteria shall be adhered to in each and every case, except where otherwise provided.
A. Traffic access: All proposed site traffic access ways are adequate but not excessive in number; adequate in grade, width, alignment and visibility; and not located too near street corners, entrances to schools or places of public assembly; and other similar considerations.
Page 131
B. Circulation and parking: that interior circulation is adequate and that all required parking spaces are provided and are easily accessible. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be surfaced with a durable and dust-free surface. All areas shall be properly marked so as to provide for the orderly and safe loading, parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
C. Lighting. All exterior lighting devices shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises. No rotating or flashing signs or lights shall be permitted.
D. Drainage, water supply and sewage disposal facilities. All development shall be provided with adequate water supply, sewage disposal and drainage facilities in accordance with the Township requirements.
E. Disposal of usable open space. Usable open space shall be so arranged as to ensure the health and safety and to promote the general welfare.
F. Arrangement of buildings. Adequate provision shall be made for light, air, access and privacy in the arrangement of buildings.
G. Landscaping. Landscaping, where required, shall be provided in order to enhance and protect the natural and scenic qualities of the land. Where adjacent land use dictates, screening and buffer areas shall be required.
H. Wetlands. Wetland areas and wetland transitional areas also known as wetland buffers shall be preserved and protected in accordance with law. Wetlands and wetland buffers shall not be considered usable open space.
Page 132
ARTICLE XIII NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
150-13.1 CONTINUATION OF USE.
A. A use, building or structure which is lawfully in existence at the effective date of this chapter and shall be made nonconforming at the passage of this Ordinance or any applicable amendment thereto may be continued, except as otherwise provided herein.
B. Any lawful nonconforming use or structure existing on the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued upon the premises or in the building so occupied or used.
C. Any lawful nonconforming use subject to condition or conditions or limited as to term of duration shall continue subject to any such condition or conditions and only for and to the end of the term of duration for which such nonconforming use was granted.
150-13.2 PARTIAL DESTRUCTION OF NONCONFORMING USE: RESTORATION OR REPAIR.
A. Despite anything to the contrary, nothing herein shall prevent an owner of a structure being utilized with a non-conforming use from rebuilding the structure after it is destroyed by fire or other catastrophic event, provided the use has not been abandoned. Rebuilding shall be allowed without regard to the percentage of the structure that remains after the fire or catastrophicv event. The replacement structure shall retain the exterior dimensions and height of the destroyed structure except that no replacement structure shall be allowed to exceed the then existing height requirement in the zone in which the structure is located.
B. In the event of a partial destruction of a structure devoted to a nonconforming use, the owner or occupant shall, within 90 days after such event, give notice in writing to the Administrative Officer or the Construction Official of his intention to restore or repair the structure, and within 90 days after date of notice, commence and diligently proceed to the completion of the work.
C. Nonconforming signs as established by this Ordinance and/or the Building Code may remain at their present location, provided that only basic maintenance work on these signs shall be permitted. Maintenance work shall not mean to include the removal of a sign for repair, alteration or repainting nor the relettering of a sign to a name other than that which existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance. The relettering of a sign at the site shall not apply to billboards.
Page 133
D. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe or lawful condition any part of any building or structure declared unsafe or unlawful by the Construction Official, Zoning Officer, or other authorized State or Township official.
159-13.3 EXTENSIONS, ENLARGEMENTS OR CHANGES.
A. No existing building or premises containing any non-conforming use as permitted by this Article, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located; and no nonconforming use shall be changed to another or different nonconforming use.
B. A one - or two - family residential building which complies with the use requirements of this Ordinance and is non-conforming because of the yard regulations may be enlarged, provided that any violation of any setback may be expanded provided that the expansion does not encroach further into such violated setback and no other setback regulations are violated.
150-13.3 DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT.
No nonconforming use or structure which shall have been discontinued or abandoned for a period exceeding 12 months shall be resumed; provided, however, that no such use or structure shall be resumed if the premises upon which such use or structure existed is devoted to a conforming use after the discontinuance or abandonment of the nonconforming use.
150-13.4 MODERNIZATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
Nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit the modernization of existing nonconforming structures; provided, however, that such modernization does not entail any extension, enlargement, intensification, addition or change of the nonconforming use.
Page 134
150-13.5 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS LAWFULLY UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
Any nonconforming building or structure lawfully under construction on the effective date of this Ordinance, pursuant to plans filed with the Construction Official and approved by him and all other municipal boards and agencies as required under law, may be completed and may be used for the nonconforming use for which it was designed, to the same extent as if such building had been completed and been in use on the effective date of this chapter, provided that such building or structure shall be completed within one year after the effective date thereof.
Page 135
ARTICLE XIV PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
150 - 14.1 AIR QUALITY. This chapter hereby incorporates by reference and makes a part hereof as though fully set forth those standards as found in N.J.A.C. 7:27-1, et seq. and the Township of Verona Air Pollution Control Code.
150 - 14.2 ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE. In any zoning district, no use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in any zoning district.
150 - 14.3 FIRE PROTECTION. This chapter hereby incorporates by reference and makes a part hereof as though fully set forth those standards as found in N.J.A.C. 5:10 - 19.11 (Hotel and Multiple Dwelling), N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.17 (Fire Protection Subcode), N.J.A.C. 5:23-4 (Enforcement), including all the amendments to the above.
150 - 14.4 HUMIDITY, HEAT AND GLARE. In any zoning district, any activity producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air or producing heat or glare shall be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat or glare is not perceptible at any lot line.
150 - 14.5 NOISE CONTROL – METHOD OF MEASUREMENT.
A. Methods of measurement. For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequencies of sound, sound-level meters and octave-band filters shall be employed. In the enforcement of this regulation, sounds produced by the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities shall not be included in determining the maximum permitted decibel levels. B. The maximum permitted sound-pressure level (in decibels) shall be 0.0002 microbars.
Page 136
150 - 14.6 RADIATION. This chapter hereby incorporates by reference and makes a part hereof as though fully set forth those standards as found in N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq., including all the amendments to the above.
150 - 14.7 VIBRATION.
A. Method of measurement. For the purpose of measuring vibration, a three-component measuring system shall be employed. B. Maximum permitted steady state and impact vibration displacement (in inches).
Octave Band (cycles per second)
Sound-Pressure Level (decibels)
0 - 74
65
75 - 149
50
150- 299
44
300 - 599
38
600 - 1,199
35
1,200 - 2,399
32
2,400 - 4,799
29
4,800 and over
26
Frequency Vibration Displacement
(cycles per second) (in inches) Steady State
Impact
Under 10 0.0005 0.0010
10 - 19 0.0004 0.0008
20 - 29 0.0003 0.0006
30 - 39 0.0002 0.0004
40 and over 0.0001 0.0002
Page 137
ARTICLE XV BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
150-15.1 CONTINUANCE OF ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
All ordinances applicable to the Zoning Board of Adjustment are expressly not repealed or amended by this Chapter.
Page 138
ARTICLE XVI ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
150-16.1 ENFORCING OFFICER.
The Zoning Officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. He may require any member of the Police, Fire or Health Department or other department to report to him in writing any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
150-16.2 BUILDING PERMIT, CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY & CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
A. Building Permits. No person shall construct, erect, repair or make any alteration to or restoration of any structure or swimming pool until he shall be applied for and secured a building permit from the Construction Official.
B. Certificates of Occupancy. No person shall occupy or use or change the occupation or use of, in whole or in part, any building or structure until he shall have applied for and secured a certificate of occupancy therefore from the Chief Building Inspector.
C. Conditions of Approval. No person shall construct, erect, repair or make any alteration to or restoration of any structure that does not comply with any and all conditions required at the time of approval.
150-16.3 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
A. Building Permits
1. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, applications for building permits shall be submitted to the Chief Building Inspector in the manner prescribed by the Building Code of the Township of Verona, including the amendments and supplements thereto.
2. For all apartment houses, all plans submitted for approval to the Department of Community Affairs shall contain on the plan a breakdown giving the number of apartments, number of bedrooms per apartment, percentage of land covered and the total square foot area of the lot.
Page 139
B. Certificates of Occupancy. Applications for certificates of occupancy shall be submitted to the Chief Building Inspector in the manner prescribed by the Building Code of the Township of Verona, including the amendments and supplements thereto.
150-16.4 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.
A. Building permits and certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the Chief Building Inspector.
B. Determination Required as Prerequisite to Issuance.
1. The Chief Building Inspector shall issue building permits or certificates of occupancy only after he shall have determined that the building, structure or use is one permitted under the provisions of this chapter and that any and all conditions required at the time of approval have been addressed.
2. To assist the Chief Building Inspector in making such a determination, he may require any member of the Police, Fire or Health Department or other department to make an investigation of the premises in question and to report to him the findings of such investigation.
150-16.5 NOTICE OF DENIAL TO PERMIT A CERTIFICATE.
If the Chief Building Inspector shall determine that a building, structure or use is not permitted under any provision of this ordinance, he shall give written notice thereof to the applicant as follows:
A. Such notice shall state in what respects the building, structure or use does not conform to such provision or provisions, and shall contain a brief description of the building, structure or use to which the notice refers in terms sufficient to identify it and its location.
B. The notice may be served upon the applicant by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or where such resides in the Township of Verona, in person or by leaving it at his usual place of residence with a member of his family above the age of 14 years. Where lands are held by joint tenants, tenants in common or tenants by the entirety, service upon one of the owners shall be sufficient and deemed and taken as notice to all.
Page 140
150-16.6 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
A. Any owner, general agent, contractor or tenant of any building or premises or part thereof, in which premises or part thereof is in violation of any provision of this ordinance has been committed or shall exist, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist; or any person who constructs, alters, restores, repairs, reconstructs, converts or maintains, or permits the construction, alteration, restoration, conversion or maintenance of, any building or structure, or who uses, maintains or permits the use or maintenance of any land, building or structures, in violation of any provisions of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
B. For every day that a use or structure in violation of any provision of this ordinance is permitted to exist or is continued in any building or location, a distinct violation of this ordinance shall be deemed to have been committed.
C. Any owner, agent, or tenant of any building or premises or part thereof, in which premises or part thereof occupies or uses the structure, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in such, in violation of any provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine, for the first offense, of one thousand two hundred and fifty dollars, ($1,250.00). For the second and subsequent violation the fine shall be equal to the annual cost of the education of a student in the schools in the Township of Verona. Said fines shall be recovered in a civil action, in a summary proceeding, in the name of the municipality, pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:51-1, et seq., said proceeding shall be commenced in the municipal court of the Township of Verona for the enforcement of the penalty provided for herein.
D. Complaints of Violations
Any person may file a complaint if there is any reason to believe a violation of this ordinance exists. All such complaints must be in writing and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, who shall properly record such complaint and immediately investigate.
Page 141
E. Procedures for Abatement of Violations
1. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure of land is used in violation of this ordinance or of any ordinance or regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the Zoning Officer or other proper official, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate legal action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct business or use about such premises.
2. A violation of any of these terms of this ordinance shall be abated within five days, or within as reasonable time as may be determined, after written notice has been served, either by mail or personal service.
150-16.7 AMENDMENTS.
All amendments to this ordinance and to the Zoning Map, which forms a part hereof, shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of New Jersey law.
150-16.8 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided that where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.
Page 142
ARTICLE XVII SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
150 - 17.1 R-100 (VERY LOW DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Single family homes.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Detached garage.
2. Family day-care center.
3. Swimming pool, hot tub, and related facilities.
4. Basketball Court, unlit.
5. Tennis Court, unlit.
6. Deck, either attached or unattached.
7. Greenhouse.
8. A maximum of two sheds totaling no more than 200 square feet in floor area.
C. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the single family district (R-100) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. A satellite or dish antenna installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in
section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Home occupations subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-8.8 of this chapter.
Page 143
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal & Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 12,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 100
3. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 20
4. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 35
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 35
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 9
3. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 20
4. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both
(Percentage of lot width) 25
5. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
6. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 30
F. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 9
2. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
3. Minimum Distance between accessory
and principal structures (feet) 10
4. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
5. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
Page 144
150 - 17.2 R-70 (LOW DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Single family homes.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Detached garage.
2. Family day-care center.
3. Swimming pool, hot tub and related facilities.
4. Basketball Court, unlit.
5. Tennis Court, unlit.
6. Deck, either attached or unattached.
7. Greenhouse.
8. A single shed up to 150 square feet in floor area.
C. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the single family district (R-70) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. A satellite or dish antenna installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Home occupations subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-8.8 of this chapter.
Page 145
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal & Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 8,400
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 70
3. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 20
4. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 35
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
3. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 18
4. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) 25
5. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
6. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 30
F. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
2. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
3. Minimum Distance between accessory
and principal structures (feet) 10
4. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
5. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
Page 146
150 - 17.3 R-60 (MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Single family homes.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Detached garage.
2. Family day-care center.
3. Swimming pool, hot tub and
related facilities.
4. Tennis Court, unlit.
5. Deck, either attached or
unattached.
6. Greenhouse.
7. A single shed up to 150 square feet in floor area.
C. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the single family district (R-60) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. A satellite or dish antenna installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Home occupations subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-8.8 of this chapter.
Page 147
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal & Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 7,200
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 60
3. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 25
4. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 40
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
3. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 18
4. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) 25
5. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
6. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 30
F. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
2. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
3. Minimum Distance between accessory
and principal structures (feet) 10
4. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
5. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
Page 148
150 - 17.4 R-50B (MEDIUM/HIGH DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Single family homes.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Detached garage.
2. Family day-care center.
3. Swimming pool, hot tub and related facilities.
4. Deck, either attached or unattached.
5. Greenhouse.
6. A single shed up to 150 square feet in floor area.
C. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the single family district (R-50B) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. A satellite or dish antenna installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Home occupations subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-8.8 of this chapter.
Page 149
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal & Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 7,500
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 50
3. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 25
4. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 40
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
3. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 18
4. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) 25
5. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
6. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 30
F. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
2. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
3. Minimum Distance between accessory and
principal structures (feet) 10
4. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
5. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
Page 150
150 – 17.5 R-50 (HIGH DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Single family homes.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Detached garage.
2. Family day-care center.
3. Swimming pool, hot tub and
related facilities.
4. Deck, either attached or
unattached.
5. Greenhouse.
6. A single shed up to 100 square feet in floor area.
C. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the single family district (R-50) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. A satellite or dish antenna installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Home occupations subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-8.8 of this chapter.
Page 151
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal & Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 5,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 50
3. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 30
4. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 40
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
3. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 18
4. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) 25
5. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
6. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 30
F. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
2. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
3. Minimum Distance between accessory
and principal structures (feet) 10
4. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
5. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
Page 152
150 - 17.6 R-40 (VERY HIGH DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Single family dwellings.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Detached garage.
2. Family day-care center.
3. Swimming pool, hot tub and
related facilities.
4. Deck, either attached or
unattached.
5. Greenhouse.
6. A single shed up to 100 square feet in floor area.
C. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the single family district (R-40) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. A satellite or dish antenna installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Home occupations subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-8.8 of this chapter.
Page 153
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal & Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 4,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 40
3. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 30
4. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 40
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
3. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 18
4. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) 25
5. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
6. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 30
F. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
2. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
3. Minimum Distance between accessory and
principal structures (feet) 10
4. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
5. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
Page 154
150 - 17.7 A-1 (MULTI FAMILY - LOW RISE) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Apartment Houses.
2. Townhouses.
3. Housing for elderly and handicapped households.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Detached garage.
2. Swimming pool and related facilities.
3. Basketball Court, unlit.
4. Tennis Court, unlit.
C. Conditional Uses
1. A satellite or dish antenna installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Home occupations subject to the conditions set forth in 150-8.8 of this chapter.
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Acres) 4.0
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 150
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 40
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 15
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 40
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) N/A
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 25
8. Maximum Density – Townhouse (Dwelling Units/Acre) 6
9. Maximum Density – Apartment Houses (Dwelling Units/Acre) 10
10. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5/35
11. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 60
12. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 75
Page 154A
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
2. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
3. Minimum Distance between accessory
and principal structures (feet) 10
4. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
5. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
Page 155
150 - 17.8 A-1R (MULTI FAMILY-LOW RISE-REDEVELOPMENT) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Apartment Houses.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Detached garage.
2. Swimming pool and related facilities.
3. Basketball Court, unlit.
4. Tennis Court, unlit.
C. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the multi-family district (A-1) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. A satellite or dish antenna installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Home occupations subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-8.8 of this chapter.
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 43,560
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 150
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 40
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 15
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 40
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) N/A
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 25
8. Maximum Density (Dwelling Units / Acre) 10
9. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 35
10. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 25
11. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 55
Page 155A
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
2. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
3. Minimum Distance between accessory
and principal structures (feet) 10
4. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
5. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
Page 156
150 - 17.9 A-2 (MULTI FAMILY - HIGH RISE) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Apartment Houses.
2. Senior Citizen Housing.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Parking garage.
2. Swimming pool and related facilities.
3. Basketball Court, unlit.
4. Tennis Court, unlit.
C. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the multi-family district (A-2) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. A satellite or dish antenna installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Home occupations subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-8.8 of this chapter.
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Acres) 8
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 300
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 100
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 100
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 250
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) N/A
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 15
8. Maximum Density for lots under 10 Acres(Dwelling Units/Acre) 35
Maximum Density for lots over 10 Acres (Dwelling Units/Acre) 25
9. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 10/120
10. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 25
11. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 75
Page 156A
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
1. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
2. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
3. Minimum Distance between accessory
and principal structures (feet) 10
4. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
5. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
Page 157
150 - 17.10 A-3 (RESIDENTIAL - TOWNHOUSE) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Single family dwellings.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Detached garage.
2. Family day-care center.
3. Swimming pool, hot tub and related facilities.
4. Basketball Court, unlit.
5. Tennis Court, unlit.
6. Deck, either attached or unattached.
7. Greenhouse.
8. A single shed up to 150 square feet in floor area.
C. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal & Accessory Structures & Uses
(Single Family)
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 8,400
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 70
3. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 20
4. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 35
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Principal Structures & Uses
(Single Family)
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
3. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 18
4. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) 25
5. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
6. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 30
Page 158
E. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations for Accessory Structures & Uses
(Single Family)
6. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 10
8. Minimum Distance between accessory
and principal structures (feet) 10
9. Maximum aggregate area covered by accessory
structures in the yard it is located in. (percent) 15
10. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 1 ½ / 15
F. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the residential townhouse district (A-3) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. A satellite or dish antenna, as an accessory use, installed in the side or rear yard, subject to the conditions set forth in section 150-7.11 of this chapter.
2. Townhouses subject to the following density and bulk regulations:
(du = dwelling units)
a. Over 8 acres in size 8 du / acre
b. Between 6.0 and 7.99 acres in lot size 9 du / acre
c. Between 4.1 and 5.99 acres in lot size 11 du / acre
d. Under 4 acres in lot size 12 du / acre
e. Minimum Acreage (Combined) 1.5 Acres
f. Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 Ft
g. Minimum Side Yard Setback 25 Ft
h. Minimum Rear Yard Setback 50 Ft
i. Minimum Rear Yard Setback-Bloomfield Frontage 30 Ft
j. Minimum Front Yard Setback-Bloomfield Frontage 25 Ft
k. Minimum Buffer between townhouses and
off site residential uses 25 ft.
l. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 35
m. Maximum Lot Coverage 40 %
n. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage 55%
Page 159
150 - 17.11 C-2 (PROFESSIONAL OFFICE AND BUSINESS) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Commercial and professional offices.
2. Commercial schools offering instruction in dance, music, fine art and
similar pursuits.
3. Family day care
centers.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Accessory uses
customarily
incidental to the
principal or
conditional use.
C. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the district subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. Mixed residential and professional office uses (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
2. Mixed residential and commercial office uses (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
3. Mixed professional (non-medical) and commercial office uses (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
Page 160
C-2 (PROFESSIONAL OFFICE AND BUSINESS) ZONE DISTRICT
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 15,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 100
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 20
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 15
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 35
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) N/A
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 50
8. Maximum Height for Principal Building (Stories / Feet) 2.5/35
9. Maximum Height for Accessory Structures (Feet) 15
10. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 30
11. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 65
12. Maximum Floor Area Ratio (Percent) 50
13. Minimum Landscaped Buffer Along Residential Zone (Ft) 15
Page 161
150 - 17.12 R-CMO (RESIDENTIAL–CONDITIONAL MIXED OFFICE) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Single family dwellings.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal or conditional use.
C. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 12,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 75
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 18
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) 25
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
8. Maximum Height for Principal Building (Stories / Feet) 2.5/35
9. Maximum Height for Accessory Structures (Feet) 15
10. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 30
11. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 65
Page 162
R-CMO (RESIDENTIAL – CONDITIONAL MIXED OFFICE) ZONE DISTRICT
D. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the district subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. Mixed residential and professional offices (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
2. Mixed residential and commercial offices (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
3. Planned Commercial Development (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3 and subject to the following requirements:
a. Minimum Acreage (Combined) 1.5 Acres
b. Maximum Density in Planned Commercial Development 5 du/acre
c. Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 Ft
d. Minimum Side Yard Setback 25 Ft
e. Minimum Rear Yard Setback 50 Ft
f. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 35
g. Maximum Lot Coverage 30 %
h. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage 65 %
i. Minimum Distance between buildings (ft) 25
j. Maximum Floor Area Ratio 0.25
k. Minimum Landscaped Buffer Along Residential Zone (Ft) 15
4. Residential Clusters subject to the following requirements:
a. Minimum Acreage (Combined) 1.5 Acres
b. Maximum Residential Cluster Density 7 du/acre
c. Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 Ft
d. Minimum Side Yard Setback 25 Ft
e. Minimum Rear Yard Setback 50 Ft
f. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 35
g. Maximum Lot Coverage 30 %
h. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage 65 %
i. Minimum Distance between buildings (ft) 25
j. Maximum Floor Area Ratio – 0.30
k. Minimum Landscaped Buffer Along Residential Zone (Ft) 15
Page 163
150 - 17.13 MR (MIXED RETAIL) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Single family dwellings.
2. Professional offices (non-medical).
3. Commercial offices (non-medical).
4. Retail.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal or conditional use.
C. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 6,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 60
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 20
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 15
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 35
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) 25
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 50
8. Maximum Height for Principal Building (Stories / Feet) 2.5/35
9. Maximum Height for Accessory Structures (Feet) 15
10. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 30
11. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 65
12. Minimum Landscaped Buffer Along Residential Zone (Ft) 15
Page 164
MR (MIXED RETAIL) ZONE DISTRICT
D. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the district subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. Mixed residential and retail subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
2. Mixed residential and commercial office (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
3. Mixed commercial and professional offices (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
4. Mixed residential and professional office (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
5. Residential Clusters subject to the following regulations:
a. Minimum Acreage (Combined) 1.5 Acres
b. Maximum Residential Cluster Density 7 du/acre
c. Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 Ft
d. Minimum Side Yard Setback 25 Ft
e. Minimum Rear Yard Setback 50 Ft
f. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 35
g. Maximum Lot Coverage 30 %
h. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage 65 %
i. Minimum Distance between buildings (ft) 25
j. Maximum Floor Area Ratio – 0.30
k. Minimum Landscaped Buffer Along Residential Zone (Ft) 15
Page 165
150 - 17.14 TC (TOWN CENTER) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Retail stores and retail service establishments, including stores or shops or retail business conducted entirely within the confines of a building.
2. Cafeterias, full-service restaurants, snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars, confectionery and nut stores, retail bakeries. These uses shall have a maximum seating capacity of 100 patrons. These uses shall be permitted on lots having frontage on Bloomfield Avenue.
3. Banks and other financial institutions, but not including drive in uses.
4. Theatrical and motion picture theaters.
5. Family day care centers.
6. Personal service establishments.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal or conditional use.
2. Outdoor restaurant seating in accordance with section 150-7.23.
3. Sidewalk Café in accordance with section 150-7.22.
Page 166
TC (TOWN CENTER) ZONE DISTRICT
C. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 2,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 50
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 0
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 0
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 0
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) N/A
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 20
8. Maximum Height for Principal Building (Stories / Feet) 3 / 50
9. Maximum Height for Accessory Structures (Feet) 15
10. Maximum Building Coverage (Percent) 80
11. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 100
12. Minimum Landscaped Buffer Along Residential Zone (Ft) 15
D. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the Town Center zone (TC) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. Mixed residential and retail subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
2. Mixed retail and commercial (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
3. Mixed retail and professional office (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
4. Massage Parlors subject to the conditional standards set forth in section 150-8.11.
Page 167
150 - 17.15 ETC (EXTENDED TOWN CENTER) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Retail stores and retail service establishments, including stores or shops for retail business conducted entirely within the confines of a building.
2. Cafeteria.
3. Full-service restaurant.
4. Snack and nonalcoholic beverage bar.
5. Confectionery and nut store.
6. Baked goods store.
7. Retail bakery.
8. Caterer, off-site.
9. Caterer, on-site.
10. Limited-service restaurant.
11. Banks and other financial institutions.
12. Commercial and professional offices.
13. Wholesale trade.
14. Family day care centers.
15. Personal service establishments.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal or conditional use.
2. Outdoor restaurant seating in accordance with section 150-7.23.
C. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 12,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 100
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 20
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 40
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) N/A
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
8. Maximum Height for Principal Building (Stories / Feet) 3 / 50
9. Maximum Height for Accessory Structures (Feet) 15
10. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 40
11. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 80
12. Floor Area Ratio (Percent) 100
13. Minimum Landscaped Buffer Along Residential Zone (Ft) 15
Page 168
ETC (EXTENDED TOWN CENTER) ZONE DISTRICT
D. Conditional Uses
The following conditional uses are permitted within the Extended Town Center zone (ETC) subject to area, yard and bulk regulations and other controls identified in the conditional use regulations of this ordinance.
1. Automobile sales subject to the conditional uses standards set forth in section 150-8.4.
2. Mixed residential and retail subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
3. Mixed retail and commercial (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
4. Mixed retail and professional office (non-medical) subject to the mixed use standards set forth in section 150-8.3.
5. Automobile service stations subject to the conditional uses standards set forth in section 150-8.5.
5. Massage Parlors subject to the conditional use standards set forth in section 150-8.11.
Page 169
150 - 17.16 RR (REGIONAL RETAIL) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Regional shopping center.
2. Retail stores and retail service establishments, including stores or shops for retail business conducted entirely within the confines of a building.
3. Supermarket.
4. Cafeteria.
5. Full service restaurant.
6. Snack and nonalcoholic beverage bar.
7. Confectionery and nut store.
8. Baked goods store.
9. Retail bakery.
10. Limited service restaurant.
11. Commercial recreational facilities.
12. Personal service establishments.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal or conditional use.
C. Conditional Uses
None.
Page 170
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Acres) 10.0
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 750
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 200
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 50
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 100
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) N/A
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 40
8. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2/50
9. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 40
10. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 100
Page 171
150 - 17.17 P (PUBLIC) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Public schools.
2. Public parks.
3. Public open space.
4. Public library.
5. Public parking facilities.
6. Public utilities.
7. Municipal offices.
8. Municipal pool.
9. County offices.
.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal or conditional use.
C. Conditional Uses
None.
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 10,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 100
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 20
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 40
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) N/A
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 40
8. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 3/50
9. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) N/A
10. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) N/A
Page 172
150 - 17.18 SP (SEMI PUBLIC) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Houses of Worship.
2. Private Schools.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Accessory uses customarily
incidental to the principal or
conditional use.
C. Conditional Uses
None.
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 65,340
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 100
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) 30
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) 8
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) 18
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) 25
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 30
8. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) 2.5 / 35
9. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 30
10. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) 40
Page 173
150 - 17.19 T (TRANSPORTATION) ZONE DISTRICT
A. Principal Permitted Uses
No building or premises or land shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each district as follows:
1. Street Right-of-Ways.
2. Public Utilities.
3. Street furniture.
4. Sidewalk Café.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
None.
C. Conditional Uses
None.
D. Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) N/A
2. Minimum Lot Width (Feet) N/A
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) N/A
4. Minimum Side Yard Setback-One (Feet) N/A
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Feet) N/A
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks-Both (Percentage of lot width) N/A
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) N/A
8. Maximum Height (Stories / Feet) N/A
9. Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) N/A
10. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage (Percent) N/A
Page 174
ARTICLE XIIX HILLTOP PROPERTY REDEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
150 - 18.1 PREAMBLE
The requirements which follow are intended to govern all development within the Verona Township portion of the Hilltop Property Redevelopment Area. These requirements supersede the zoning and development regulations currently applicable to the area being designated as a Redevelopment Area and will supersede all other requirements of Verona's Zoning Ordinance with respect to the properties encompassed within the Redevelopment Area except as specifically noted and referenced herein or where a specific standard to the contrary is not included herein. The requirements of Verona's Site Plan and Subdivision Ordinances shall, however, remain in full force and effect relative to development within the Redevelopment Area except where a specific requirement of one of these Ordinances is in direct conflict with a requirement or regulation contained herein, in which case, the requirement or regulation contained herein shall be applicable.
The purpose of multifamily housing, within the Hilltop Redevelopment Area, is to permit a procedure for development which will result in improved living environments by encouraging ingenuity and originality in total subdivision and individual site design and which will preserve open space to serve recreational, scenic, and public service purposes, and other purposes related thereto. It is the intention of this ordinance to provide for procedures for development of the district and to assure adequate protection of existing and potential developments adjoining the proposed development. To achieve these goals, this ordinance deviates in some respects from other zoning ordinance provisions and provides for building sizes and types that may not be permitted in other residential zones.
Interior Lot lines: In order to complement the goals that the developmental regulations contained herein achieve, the interior lot lines that are within the district, whether the interior lots are owned by one entity or multiple entities, are not to be utilized in computing set back lines, frontage, or any other bulk requirement contained herein.
Page 175
150 - 18.2 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT ONE
A. Permitted Principal Uses:
1. One single family detached dwelling per lot with an attached or detached garage designed for not more than three passenger vehicles wherein all garage doors are located and screened such that they are not visible from the street.
2. Uses permitted in Redevelopment Districts Five and/or Six.
3. Multiple family housing developments having common or public open space as an appurtenant use. The exercise of this option shall be instead of and shall preclude the uses permitted in section 150-17(A)1 above and shall also be instead of and shall preclude the residential development otherwise permitted in Redevelopment Districts Two and Three, which shall be limited solely to the uses permitted in Redevelopment Districts Five and/or Six. Neither the exercise of this option nor the preclusion of permitted single family detached residential development shall apply to that portion of Redevelopment District One located along Fairview Avenue.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses and Requirements - for Single family Detached Dwellings:
1. A detached garage designed for not more than three passenger vehicles, may be provided the dwelling does not include an attached garage, and further provided that the design of the garage complies with the provisions of these regulations specifically set forth herein at section 150-17.8, Section d.
2. A swimming pool and related facilities may be provided in compliance with the following: shall be located solely within the rear yard area; shall be set back from side and rear lot lines a distance of 50 feet; shall be densely buffered for a distance of 25 feet surrounding the pool area; and shall not exceed 750 square feet of water surface area in size. If a pool cabana is provided, it shall be set back 50 feet from the rear lot line and 25 feet from any side lot line.
4. One shed per lot may be provided, up to 100 square feet in floor area and set back a minimum of 25 feet from side and rear lot lines.
4. Satellite or dish antenna may be installed in the side yard or on a rooftop and as otherwise regulated at Section 150-7.11.
Page 176
5. An attached or detached deck may be provided not exceeding a maximum of 300 square feet in area and located entirely within the rear yard.
C. Development Requirements for Single family Detached Dwellings:
1. Minimum Lot Area: 30,000 square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width: 150 feet at required building setback line: 125 feet at street line.
3. Minimum Lot Depth: 170 feet.
4. Minimum Conservation Area: 25 feet, which shall be located adjacent to the rear lot line shall be for the purpose of prohibiting any re-grading or the removal of any tree over 30 feet high without the express authorization of the Verona Township Engineer, who shall permit the removal of such tree if and only if it is dead or diseased or poses an imminent threat to life or property; and shall be protected by an easement in favor of the Township of Verona, the terms and conditions of such easement to be reviewed by the Verona Township Attorney prior to the grant official subdivision approval.
5. Minimum Front Yard: 50 feet.
6. Minimum Side Yard: 25 feet; combined yards for both sides shall be not less than 35 percent of lot width at building setback line.
7. Minimum Rear Yard: 50 feet of which at least 65% shall be unoccupied by accessory buildings or structures and impervious surfaces, including driveways, parking areas, decks, patios, sidewalks, pavement, pools, courts or other structures.
8. Maximum Building Coverage: 15% for a principal and accessory buildings.
9. Maximum Lot Coverage: 30% total improved lot coverage.
10. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 0.25.
11. Maximum Building Height: 2.5 stories, not to exceed 35 feet, for the principal building, and 1 ½ stories, not to exceed 15 feet, for all accessory buildings and structures.
12. Comer Lots: The provisions of Section 150-5.3D shall apply to the development of a corner lot.
Page 177
13. Other Provisions: The provisions of Article IV and Article VII shall apply to any development in Redevelopment District One.
14. Parking: Parking shall be provided on each lot as required by the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.).
15. Driveway Access: No more than two driveway access points shall be permitted per lot, with all driveways and driveway access points to be located a minimum of five feet from any adjoining property line and no driveway access point to be located closer than 50 feet measured centerline to centerline to another driveway access point on the same lot and with no driveway access point exceeding a width of 12 feet measured at the front lot line.
16. Applicability: The applicability requirements set forth in Section 150-4.2 shall apply to the use and interpretation of the foregoing provisions for Redevelopment District One.
17. General Regulations: The general regulations set forth in section 150-17.8 of these regulations shall apply to all developments in Redevelopment District One.
D. Development Requirements for Multiple Family Housing Option:
1. Tract Size Area: Minimum of 15 acres, and a maximum of 20 acres, except that, subject to the Planning Board's approval, necessary stormwater management and utility facilities need not be wholly encompassed within the maximum tract area. Bulk standards shall be applied to the overall tract area and shall not be applied to any interior lot lines.
2. Number of Units:
a. Maximum Number of Dwelling Units: 225 units.
b. Minimum Number of Multiple Family Units: 90 units.
c. Maximum Number of Age-Restricted Housing Units: 100 units.
3. Number of Bedrooms:
a. Minimum Number of Bedrooms: Each unit shall have a minimum of one bedroom.
Page 178
b. Maximum Number of Bedrooms: Each unit shall have a maximum of two bedrooms.
c. Maximum Number of Total Bedrooms: 356 bedrooms.
4. Maximum Building Height:
a. Principal Building: 55 feet.
b. Accessory Building: 26 feet.
5. Minimum Building Setbacks:
a. Minimum Front Yard: 50 feet.
b. Minimum Side Yard: 25 feet.
c. Minimum Rear Yard: 25 feet.
6. Maximum Building Coverage: 18% for all principal and accessory buildings.
7. Maximum Impervious Coverage: 50% for total impervious coverage based on overall tract area.
8. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 0.50.
9. Minimum Distances Between Principal Buildings:
a. End to End: 50 feet.
b. Front to Front: 70 feet.
c. Rear to Rear: 70 feet.
d. Rear to Front or Front to Rear: 70 feet.
The foregoing distances between principal buildings may be reduced to accommodate emergency stairwells, overhangs, balconies and the like provided the minimum required separations are maintained between building walls.
10. Minimum Distance between Principal Buildings and Accessory Buildings: ten feet.
11. Maximum Number of Buildings; Maximum Units per Building:
Page 179
a. Age Restricted Housing: Maximum of 100 units in a maximum of four buildings.
b. Multiple Family Housing: Maximum of 225 units and a minimum of 40 units per building.
12. Interior Common Space Within: When no common recreational or clubhouse building has been provided, any building shall contain a minimum of 1,000 square feet of interior common space for the use and enjoyment of the residents and for the provision of activities for the age-restricted residents which interior common space shall be calculated exclusive of hallways, stairs, elevators, bathrooms, utility rooms and administrative office space.
13. Parking: Parking shall comply with RSIS standards along with the following additional provisions:
a. In addition to the minimum requirements for parking as determined by the RSIS standards, there may be additional spaces provided for staff and visitors as follows:
i. Age-Restricted Housing: 20 additional spaces.
ii. Multiple Family Housing: 30 additional spaces.
b. The parking requirement may be met with a combination of separate garage or understructure parking as well as surface parking.
14. Parking Lot Setbacks: All parking spaces and aisles shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from tract boundaries.
15. Tree Preservation/Removal:
a. A minimum depth of 15 feet from the southerly and easterly tract boundaries shall be retained in a natural state in order to preserve scenic vistas and provide adequate buffering to adjoining sites. Said natural area shall be designated on the site plan. Necessary utility crossings of the designated natural area may be authorized by the Planning Board in the course of site plan approval. This Section shall not apply to the main entrance roadway servicing the project. Any disturbance or clearance to accommodate the main entrance roadway shall be re-landscaped as approved by the Planning Board and as permitted by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP).
Page 180
b. No trees shall be removed from the tract prior to the grant of site plan approval without the express authorization of the Township Engineer based upon a plan identifying the specific trees to be removed and the purpose thereof. The clearing or removal of trees shall be permitted in designated utility right-of-way or easement areas only upon written authorization of the Township Engineer in advance of any development approval.
c. Following site plan approval by the Planning Board, re-grading within the drip lines and/or removal of any trees that have been shown to remain on the approved site plan shall be prohibited without the written authorization of the Township Engineer. Such tree removal shall be authorized by the Township Engineer only if the tree is diseased or poses an imminent threat to life or property.
16. Design Standards:
a. The storm water management system, including all necessary pipes, inlets, manholes and detention basins, shall be owned and maintained by the developer and/or its assignee and shall be in accordance with the most recent regulations governing storm water management as promulgated by the DEP.
b. All access road (s) shall meet or exceed the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.AC. 5:21 et seq.).
c. Solid waste disposal and recycling containers shall be stored indoors or, if stored out-of-doors, shall be enclosed with a masonry enclosure, which shall be fully screened from view by landscaping.
d. Decorative pole-top mounted high pressure sodium lighting fixtures shall be provided which shall be a maximum of 15 feet in height and shall provide a minimum of 0.2, a maximum of 0.5 and an average of 0.35 foot-candles throughout the lighted areas of the site. The lighting fixtures shall be shielded on top to prevent overhead sky glow and shall also be shielded from the residential buildings themselves. The lighting plan shall be designed to avoid glare or illumination off-site.
e. HVAC equipment shall be screened from view with landscaping, fences, walls or architectural features.
f. Outdoor balconies not exceeding 120 square feet each may be provided for each residential unit.
Page 181
g. A maximum of eight roof decks may be provided with no more than four roof decks for either Lot one in Block 131 or Lot one in Block 132. Each roof deck may be up to 550 square feet in size.
h. The exteriors of the buildings shall be consistent with the requirements set forth in section. The building materials to be used shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Board.
17. Signs: A maximum of three monument signs identifying the multiple family communities shall not exceed an area of 32 square feet each exclusive of the supporting structure. Said signs may be illuminated only by external means and shall not be internally illuminated. The area of each sign shall be measured by drawing a rectangle encompassing the outer edges of the largest letters or symbols and may be approved by the township building code official and located on township property with owner consent. Directional signs up to a maximum of six square feet may be approved by the township building code official and located on Township property with owner consent.
18. Recreational Facilities: The permitted facilities are intended to be used and occupied exclusively by residents and their guests of either community and may be designed to be utilized exclusively for each development. The amenities listed below are permitted for each respective community (i.e. each community may have one swimming pool and club house):
a. A swimming pool with a maximum surface area of 3,500 square feet and related mechanical facilities for the exclusive use of the residents and their guests. The pool and related facilities shall not be located within any conservation area and shall be set back a minimum of l5 feet from any tract boundary, roadway, parking area or residential building and shall be fully screened from view with a dense, landscaped buffer or decorative masonry wall in addition to any required fencing, subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board.
b. A recreational clubhouse may be provided for each of the multiple family housing developments for the exclusive use of the residents and their guests. The building shall not exceed 6,500 square feet in floor area nor 26 feet in height.
Page 182
c. A maximum of two unlighted tennis courts, four unlighted bocce courts, one unlighted basketball court, and one unlighted dog run may be provided in addition to other active and passive recreational amenities, including but not limited to walking paths, gardens and gazebos; such facilities shall be for the exclusive use of the residents of the development and their guests.
150 - 18.3 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT TWO
A. If Redevelopment District One is redeveloped in accordance with the regulations for a Single Family Development contained within section 150-17.2 of the regulations the permitted uses are limited to the following:
1. One single family detached dwelling per lot with an attached or detached garage designed for not more than two passenger vehicles wherein all garage doors are located and screened such that they are not visible from the street.
B. If Redevelopment District One is redeveloped in accordance with the regulations for the Multiple Family Housing Option contained 150-17.2 of these regulations the permitted uses are limited to the following:
1. Conservation open space and passive recreational parkland owned by a public or non-profit entity.
2. Active and passive recreational facilities for or by the Township of Verona.
3. Public parks created to provide public access to sites of historic or cultural interest.
4. Utility buildings and facilities related to the protection, preservation, storage or distribution of municipal or regional water supplies and works for watershed management and protection.
5. Public Utility facilities and services, electrical and gas transmission lines and rights-of-way and other public utility buildings and facilities.
Page 183
C. Requirements for Single Family Development, if provided:
1. A detached garage designed for not more than two passenger vehicles, may be provided for dwellings that does not include an attached garage, and further provided that the design of the garage complies with the provisions of these regulations specifically set forth herein at section 150-17.8 Section d.
2. A swimming pool and related facilities may be provided in compliance with the following: shall be located solely within the rear yard area; shall be set back from side and rear lot lines a distance of 40 feet; shall be densely buffered for a distance of 20 feet surrounding the pool area; and shall not exceed 750 square feet of water surface area in size. If a pool cabana is provided, it shall be set back 40 feet from the rear lot line and 20 feet from any side lot line.
3. One shed per lot may be provided, up to 100 square feet in floor area and set back a minimum of 20 feet from side and rear lot lines.
4. Satellite or dish antenna may be installed in the side yard or on a rooftop and as otherwise regulated at Section 150-17.1.
5. An attached or detached deck may be provided not exceeding a maximum of 200 square feet in area and located entirely within the rear yard.
6. Minimum Lot area: 18,000 square feet.
7. Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet at required building setback line; 75 feet at street line.
8. Minimum Lot Depth: 150 feet.
9. Minimum Conservation Area: 20 feet, which shall be located adjacent to the rear lot line; shall be for the purpose of prohibiting any re-grading or the removal of any tree over 30 feet high without the express authorization of the Verona Township Engineer, who shall permit the removal of such tree if and only if it is dead or diseased or poses an imminent threat to life or property; and shall be protected by an easement in favor of the Township of Verona, the terms and conditions of such easement to be reviewed by the Verona Township Attorney prior to the grant of final subdivision approval.
10. Minimum Front Yard: 40 feet.
Page 184
11. Minimum Side Yard: 15 feet; combined yards for both sides shall be not less than 35 percent of lot width at building setback line.
12. Minimum Rear Yard: 40 feet of which at least 60% shall be unoccupied by accessory buildings or structures and impervious surfaces, including driveways, parking areas, decks, patios, sidewalks, pavement, pools, courts or other structures.
13. Maximum Building Coverage: 20% for all principal and accessory buildings.
14. Maximum Impervious Coverage: 35% total improved lot coverage.
15. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 0.30.
16. Maximum Building Height: 2.5 stories, not to exceed 32 feet, for the principal building and 1 ½ stories, not to exceed 15 feet, for all accessory buildings and structures.
17. Corner Lots: The provisions of Section 150-5.3D shall apply to the development of a comer lot.
18. Other Provisions: The provisions of Article V and Article VII shall apply to any development in Redevelopment District Two.
19. Parking: Parking shall be provided on each lot as required by the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. S:21 et seq.).
20. Driveway Access: No more than two driveway access points shall be permitted per lot, with all driveways and driveway access points to be located a minimum of five feet from any adjoining property line and no driveway access point to be located closer than 50 feet measured centerline to centerline to another driveway access point on the same lot and with no driveway access point exceeding a width of 12 feet measured at the front lot line.
21. Applicability: The applicability requirements set forth in Section 150-4.2 shall apply to the use and interpretation of the foregoing provisions for Redevelopment District Two.
22. General Regulations: The general regulations set forth in section 150-17.8 of these regulations shall apply to any developments in Redevelopment District Two.
Page 185
150 - 18.4 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT THREE
A. If Redevelopment District One is Redeveloped in accordance with the regulations for a Single Family Development contained within section 150-17.2 of the regulations the permitted uses are limited to the following:
1. Permitted Development: All development occurring in Redevelopment District Three shall comply with the terms and conditions of section 150-17.2 of these regulations pertaining to development in Redevelopment District One, except as specifically provided in connection with this section 150-17.4(b).
2. Permitted Redevelopment Option - Attached Single family Residential Development:
The policy of the Mayor and Council is to provide only for single family detached residential development within the portions of the Redevelopment Area which are to be residentially developed. In order to facilitate the implementation of the Redevelopment Plan, however, attached single family residential development will be permitted within the Redevelopment District Three, provided that all of the following conditions and criteria shall be met:
a. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Attached single family dwellings, each with an attached garage designed for not more than two passenger vehicles.
2. Utility buildings and facilities related to the protection, preservation, storage or distribution of municipal or regional water supplies and works for watershed management and protection.
3. Public Utility facilities and services, electrical and gas transmission lines and rights-or-way and other public utility buildings and facilities.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses and Requirements therefore, if provided.
Page 186
1. One common swimming pool, with a maximum water surface area of 3,500 square feet, and related facilities all for the exclusive use of the residents of Redevelopment District Three and their guests. Any pool and related facilities shall be set back from all tract boundaries a minimum of 50 feet and shall be screened with a dense, landscaped buffer for a distance of 25 feet surrounding the pool area.
2. A maximum of two common tennis courts and related facilities for the exclusive use of the residents of Redevelopment District Three and their guests. Any such facilities shall not be lighted for play.
3. One common recreational and maintenance building / clubhouse for the exclusive use of the residents of Redevelopment District Three and their guests. Such building shall not exceed 1,200 square feet in floor area and 1 ½ stories and 18 feet in height.
4. One satellite or dish antenna as regulated in Section 150-7.11 which shall serve the entire development within Redevelopment District Three.
5. Decks, which, if provided, shall be located only at the rear of each unit and shall occupy an area no larger than 200 square feet each.
3. Maximum Tract Size. The maximum tract size for the development shall be three acres exclusive of the access road leading up to the development.
4. Minimum Conservation / Buffer Area. 50 feet, which shall be located around the entire perimeter of the tract; shall be for the purpose of prohibiting any re-grading or the removal of any tree over 30 feet high without the express authorization of the Verona Township Engineer, who shall permit the removal of such tree if and only if it is dead or diseased or poses an imminent threat to life or property; and shall be protected by an easement in favor of the Township of Verona, the terms and conditions of such easement to be reviewed by the Verona Township Attorney prior to the grant of final site plan approval. If the existing vegetation within the Conservation / Buffer Area is sparse, the Planning Board may require additional plantings of trees and shrubs, to include both native deciduous species and evergreens (for screening purposes, where appropriate). The required Conservation / Buffer Area shall be in addition to the requirement that the entirety of
Page 187
Redevelopment District Three shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any land in the A-1 or R-3 Zoning Districts. The required Conservation / Buffer Area may be pierced by a generally perpendicular access road and / or subsurface utility lines and structures, if approved by the Planning Board.
5. Maximum Density and Number of Units. Attached single family residential development within Redevelopment District Three shall not exceed a maximum density of six dwelling units per net acre exclusive of the access road leading up to the development and shall not exceed a maximum of 18 dwelling units in total.
6. Maximum Number of Units per Building and Placement of Units. The maximum number of attached dwelling units in one building or building cluster shall not exceed six units, and units shall be entirely separated from one another by a common vertical wall such that no unit or portion of a unit shall be located over another unit or portion of another unit.
7. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage. The maximum improved lot coverage for the entire development shall not exceed 55 percent of the net tract area exclusive of the access road leading up to the development tract but inclusive of all roadways within the tract itself.
8. Maximum Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 125 on any individual lot and shall not exceed 0.45 on the net tract area exclusive of the access road leading up to the development.
9. Minimum Common Open Space. The minimum common open space shall be not less than 20 percent of the net tract area. Such common open space shall be set aside and deed-restricted as permanent common open space and, unless offered to and accepted by the Township of Verona, shall be deeded to a corporation, association or other organization established for the purpose of owning and maintaining all of the common elements, including open space, recreational facilities, parking areas, roads, sidewalks and other improvements and areas designed for use in common by the residents of the development as provided at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43. The documents creating such corporation, association or other organization shall be submitted fur review and approval by the Verona Township Attorney.
10. Individual Lot Requirements. If a developer creates fee simple lots within Redevelopment District Three, then each lot shall have a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet and each lot shall have a front and rear yard of not less than 30 feet each.
Page 188
11. Minimum Distances between Buildings. The provisions of paragraph ten above notwithstanding, all buildings or building clusters shall be separated from all other buildings or building clusters by the following minimum distances:
a. End to end: 50 feet, except that where buildings are angled, the minimum end to end distance may be reduced to 30 feet, provided a 50 foot or greater separation is achieved within the end to end overlap area.
b. Front to front: 65 feet.
c. Rear to rear: 65 feet.
d. Rear to front or front to rear: 65 feet.
12. Maximum Building Height. 2.5 stories, not to exceed 32 feet, for the attached single family dwellings and 1 ½ stories, not to exceed 18 feet, for all accessory buildings and structures.
13. Other Provisions. The provisions of Article V and Article VII shall apply to any development in Redevelopment District Three.
14. Parking. Parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit as required by the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.).
15. Applicability. The applicability requirements set forth in Section 150-4.2 shall apply to the use and interpretation of the foregoing provisions for Redevelopment District Three.
16. General Regulations. The general regulations set forth in section 150-17.8 of these regulations shall apply to all development in Redevelopment District Three.
B. If Redevelopment District One is Redeveloped in accordance with the regulations for the Multiple Family Housing Option contained within section 150-17.2 of these regulations the permitted uses are limited to the following:
1. Conservation open space and passive recreational parkland owned by a public or non-profit entity.
2. Active recreational facilities for or by the Township of Verona.
3. Public parks created to provide public access to sites of historic or cultural interest.
Page 189
4. Utility buildings and facilities related to the protection, preservation, storage or distribution of municipal or regional water supplies and works for watershed management and protection.
5. Public Utility facilities and services, electrical and gas transmission lines and rights-of-way and other public utility buildings and facilities.
150 - 18.5 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT FOUR
A. Purpose: Redevelopment District Four is established to encompass a small portion of the Redevelopment Area located in the Township of Verona for the purposes of facilitating the redevelopment of land in the adjoining municipality with age-restricted housing and assisted living. The redevelopment plan does not contemplate that any of the principal structures will be located within the Township of Verona.
B. Permitted Uses and Requirements, if provided:
1. One access road or driveway serving a development in an adjacent municipality of an assisted living residence and/or age-restricted housing.
2. Parking lots or portions thereof serving the development of age-restricted housing and/or assisted living, provided said parking lots or areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any property or street line in the Township of Verona and shall be screened from public view by a dense landscaped buffer at least 25 feet deep and further provided that if any parking is to be located within the Township of Verona, then the rate at which parking shall be provided on the site shall be as provided by the Residential Site Improvement Standards (NJAC.S:21 et seq.) for age-restricted housing units.
3. Fences or masonry or stonewalls, not to exceed four feet in height, except that entry posts or pillars located on either side of the access road or driveway may be up to six feet in height. All fences and walls shall be set back at least ten feet from any existing or proposed street line within the Township of Verona.
4. One monument sign conveying the name of the development, which sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in lettered area, regardless of the size of the monument structure to which it is attached. Said sign or
Page 190
lettered area shall only be illuminated by external means and shall not be internally illuminated, and only the lettered area shall be permitted to be illuminated. The size of the lettered area shall be measured by drawing a rectangle encompassing the outside edges of the largest letters.
5. Open space and front yard area for a development in an adjacent municipality consisting of an assisted living residence and/or age-restricted housing.
6. A gatehouse, security kiosk, key card operated gates or similar entry structure(s) not to exceed twelve feet in height and located immediately adjacent to or within the access road or driveway and at least twenty-five feet from any existing or proposed street line within the Township of Verona.
7. Such landscaping, berms, screen plantings, detention and retention basins and subsurface utility structures as may be required for the permitted development in the adjacent municipality.
C. Applicability: The applicability requirements set forth in Section 150-4.2 shall apply to the use and interpretation of the foregoing provisions for Redevelopment District Four.
D. Site Plan Requirements: Any excavation, use or development of the land in Redevelopment District Four may require site plan approval by the Verona Township Planning Board. Site plan review and approval shall be confined to the jurisdiction of Verona Township, but at least six copies of the site plan or general development plan for the entire development of which any of the land in Redevelopment District Four is a part shall be submitted to the Verona Township Planning Board for informational purposes as part of the site plan application for the lands in Verona.
Page 191
150 - 18.6 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT FIVE
A. Permitted Principal Uses and Requirements:
1. Conservation open space and passive recreational parkland owned by a public or nonprofit entity.
2. Active recreational facilities for or by the Township of Verona or the County of Essex.
3. Public parks created to provide public access to sites of historic or cultural interest, provided that such parks shall be closed between sunset and sunrise.
4. Utility buildings and facilities related to the protection, preservation, storage or distribution of municipal or regional water supplies and works for watershed management and protection.
5. Buildings for the administration of garbage collection and sewage disposal services, water distribution, electrical and gas transmission lines and rights-of-way and other public utility buildings and facilities.
6. Cellular Communication Tower.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses and Requirements, if provided:
1. Parking lots serving the above permitted uses.
2. Maintenance, educational and office buildings accessory to the park use, provided that no such building shall be greater than 3,000 square feet in floor area nor have a height exceeding 30 feet.
3. Signs erected by a governmental entity for public safety and informational purposes.
4. Lighting of parks, public ways, parking lots, pathways and active recreational areas, provided that no lighting other than that deemed necessary for security purposes shall remain on from one hour after the time a facility closes to the public until sunrise the next day.
5. Distribution facilities related to the protection, preservation, storage or distribution of municipal or regional water supplies and works for watershed management and protection and sanitary, storm water collection and distribution facilities.
Page 192
150 - 18.7 ZONING REGULATIONS & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT SIX
A. Permitted Principal Uses and Requirement, if provided:
1. Parks and active recreational facilities for or by the Township of Verona.
2. Municipal government, public utility buildings and facilities including De-icing Storage Facilities.
3. Cellular Communication Tower.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses and Requirements, if provided:
1. Parking lots and pathways required for the above permitted use(s).
2. Maintenance areas, buildings and offices accessory to the park and recreational use(s).
3. Signs erected by a governmental entity for public safety and informational purposes.
4. Lighting of parks, public ways, parking lots and active recreational areas, provided that no lighting other than that deemed necessary for security purposes shall remain on from one hour after the time a facility closes to the public until sunrise the next day.
5. Distribution facilities related to the protection, preservation, storage or distribution of municipal or regional water supplies and works for watershed management and protection and sanitary, storm water collection and distribution facilities.
Page 193
150 - 18.8 GENERAL REGULATIONS
A. Purpose and Applicability:
The purpose of the general regulations contained in this section is to ensure that the design and layout of developments within the Verona Redevelopment Area and each of the Districts thereof that will be developed by a private entity will be consistent with the objectives therefore set forth in the Verona Redevelopment Plan. To that end, the requirements of this section shall supplement and shall apply with the same force and effect as the zoning regulations set forth in section 150-17.2 through section 150-17.4 hereof.
B. Historic Preservation:
Development within the Verona Redevelopment Area shall occur in a way which provides for the creation of a public park encompassing “The White Rock” and the pond, the Town Line marker and the existing stone rows in its vicinity. To the extent that the boundaries of any of the Redevelopment Districts must be adjusted to provide for the preservation of these features and the lands around them within a public park, it is the intention of these regulations that such adjustments be made.
C. Design Standards:
1. Residential Site Improvement Standards:
All development within Redevelopment Districts One, Two and Three shall occur in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:21, et seq., the Residential Site Improvement Standards.
2. Building Materials and Design:
a. The design vocabulary, which consists of the style, materials and colors to be used shall be presented to the Planning Board for review prior to the preparation of detailed architectural drawings. The style of dwellings, buildings, and all appurtenant structures for each multi-family community shall be complementary to one another and reminiscent of a similar architectural period.
b. Single family detached dwellings adjacent to and across the street from each other shall differ, at least as to their style, façade treatment, colors and/or materials used, to insure variation in the streetscape.
Page 194
c. The following principles shall be used in the design of all residential buildings:
1. Roofs shall have a minimum 4 on 12 pitch when a pitched roof is part of the architectural style of the building. Flatter roofs shall have articulated cornices. Mansard roofs shall be prohibited.
2. The exterior building surface materials may include wood, brick, stucco, stone, cultured brick or stone, or cementitious based material, however, aluminum or vinyl siding is specifically prohibited.
3. Roof material may be slate, wood or asphalt shingles designed to emulate the look of slate or wood.
d. Detached garages shall be designed in accordance with the following:
1. Detached garages shall be located in the rear yard only and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from a side lot line and 25 feet from a rear lot line.
2. A detached garage shall be architecturally complimentary to the principal building.
e. Attached single family dwellings shall be designed in accordance with the following:
1. Each dwelling shall have a separate entrance articulated with a covered stoop or porch.
2. No more than two attached units shall be on a single plane. A minimum four foot front facade setback shall be provided between each pair of units.
3. The exterior of each building shall be of unified design articulated as a single building and shall be constructed of such material as wood, brick, stucco, stone, cultured brick or stone, or various types of siding.
3. Preservation of Natural Features:
a. Where possible, clustering of development should be encouraged to preserve natural features such as trees, views, natural terrain, open waters and critical areas.
Page 195
b. No topsoil shall be removed from areas intended for lawns and open space. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed on the lot so as to provide at least four inches of cover to all areas, which cover shall be stabilized by seeding and/or planting in accordance with an approved plan.
c. No soil shall be removed from or be imported to any site in excess of twenty cubic yards per year without the prior approval of the Township Engineer. For this purpose, a plan shall be submitted showing how the soil is to be distributed and stabilized, including grading contours. If the soil is to be imported, a plan shall be submitted describing the methodology and frequency of testing the soil to ensure its safe quality. Finally, the plan shall describe the size and number of vehicles that are proposed for hauling the removed or imported soil together with the hauling route.
d. Clearance of existing vegetation shall be limited to the areas of approved public rights-of-way, public utility easements and other approved public or public serving improvements as well as building footprints and driveways and the areas immediately adjacent to these improvements that are required to be cleared for access during construction or necessary grading pursuant to the approved site plan or subdivision plat. Every effort shall be made to preserve the existing vegetation on the site in all other areas. All trees having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of six inches or more, which are not required to be removed pursuant to an approved site plan or subdivision plat and which are located 25 feet or more from the actual building site or five fuel: or more from any paved area shall be identified and protected prior to the commencement of and during construction. The limits of disturbance together with the locations and species of the trees to be preserved shall be indicated on the site plan and/or subdivision submission, along with the proposed means of protection.
e. For the continued protection of certain natural features, the Board may require conservation easements.
4. Provisions of Underground Utility Service:
The developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for the underground installation of all distribution supply lines and service connections. Easements and dedication of additional right-of-ways and/or fee ownership of land necessary for installation of utilities shall be required as deemed necessary by the Township.
Page 196
Clearing and re-grading of land necessary for the installation of utilities within public right-of-ways, easements, Township and/or County owned property, etc. is strictly limited to area required for the installation and maintenance of the utility.
All utility services connections shall be provided by underground connection.
Page 197
ARTICLE XIX AFFORDABLE HOUSING
150 - 19.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms needed for the execution of Verona's responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
150 - 19.2 ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON POSITION AND COMPENSATION; POWERS AND DUTIES
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby established the position of the Municipal Housing Liaison for Verona.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and administration of the affordable housing program for Verona, including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted out:
1. Serving as Verona's primary point of contact for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents, and interested households;
2. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Verona's fair share plan;
3. Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reporting as required by COAH;
4. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and administrative agents, as applicable;
5. Attending continuing education programs as may be required by COAH;
6. If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of the restrictive units in Verona as described in Subsection F below.
Page 198
D. Subject to approval by COAH, Verona may contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of Verona. If Verona contracts with another entity to administer all or part of the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be as follows:
1. Affirmative marketing.
a. Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of Verona and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
2. Household certification.
a. Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews with interested households;
b. Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
c. Providing written notification to each applicant as to the determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
d. Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
e. Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant households living in the housing region and eligible applicant households with members working in the housing region where the units are located; and
f. Employing the random selection process as provided in the affirmative marketing plan of Verona when referring households for certification to affordable units.
Page 199
3. Affordability controls.
a. Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
b. Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
c. Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
d. Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
e. Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or certificates pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
4. Resale and rental.
a. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information between owners and the administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rental; and
b. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
5. Communicating with unit owners.
a. Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance during the term of their ownership;
b. Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of central air conditioning systems; and
Page 200
c. Processing requests and making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
6. Enforcement.
a. Ensure that all restricted units are identified as affordable within the Tax Assessor's office and any municipal utility authority (MUA) and upon notification to the administrative agent of change in billing address, payment delinquency of two consecutive billing cycles, transfer of title, or institution of a writ of foreclosure on all affordable units, notifying all such owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
b. Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or development, written acknowledgment of the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
c. The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with the telephone number of the administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
d. Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
e. Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
f. Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
g. Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering such affordability controls; and
h. Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
7. The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder.
Page 201
ARTICLE XX APPLICATION FOR A ZONE CHANGE
150-20.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to provide a procedure by which a property owner can file an application to amend the zoning district in which real property is located.
150-20.2 PLANNING BOARD REVIEW
An application for zone change shall be made to the Planning Board for its review and consideration in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 30-9 and as otherwise supplemented herein. The applicant shall submit 20 copies of the application for zone change to the Clerk of the Planning Board and shall pay the application fee and escrow fee for professional services in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in Chapter A175 (fees). The rules governing the conduct for the hearing of any such application for zone change shall be made by the Planning Board and shall otherwise be in accordance with the terms of Section 30-29 of the Verona Code.
150-20.3 NOTICE TO THE GOVERNING BODY
The Clerk of the Planning Board shall notify the governing body of the receipt of a completed application for zone change within ten days thereof.
150-20.4 DUTIES OF THE PLANNING BOARD
A. The Planning Board shall conduct a hearing, accept testimony and evaluate the evidence submitted by the applicant regarding the merits of amending a zoning district in accordance with the application for amendment and shall vote on the merits of such amendment in accordance with regular Planning Board procedure. The Planning Board shall consider the testimony presented by the applicant and the applicant's witnesses and shall consider exhibits and evidence presented by the applicant. All interested parties shall have the right to testify and to present witnesses, exhibits and evidence whether any such testimony or exhibits or evidence is in favor or against the zone change. The majority vote of those members present and participating in such application shall govern.
B. The Planning Board shall, prior to voting on the merits of a zone change, consider whether the proposed amendment would be consistent with the scope and intent of the Master Plan of the Township of Verona and whether the sound zoning principles, as set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law, would be promoted by such an amendment to the zoning district.
Page 202
C. If the Planning Board votes in favor of the application, it shall thereafter forward a recommendation to the governing body to amend the zoning district designation of the property that is the subject of the application.
D. The Planning Board may, in the event of a vote in favor of an application, consider the merits of moving to amend the Master Plan if such amendment is deemed to be warranted by the Planning Board.
E. After discussion and consideration, the Planning Board shall vote on whether or not the proposed zone change should be recommended to the governing body. A majority of the Planning Board members would be required to approve the zone change. Should the Planning Board vote in favor of the zone change, the Planning Board will submit, in writing, a recommendation to the governing board that the zone change be enacted.
150-20.5 REPORT TO THE GOVERNING BODY
The Clerk of the Planning Board shall notify the governing body within ten days of the passage of the memorializing resolution of the Planning Board's decision to recommend a change to the zoning district designation in which the property is located, and the governing body shall thereafter introduce an ordinance for such zone change and shall thereafter proceed in accordance with all laws governing such procedures. In no event shall the governing body be obligated to pass any such ordinance. The Clerk of the Planning Board shall notify the governing body within ten days of the passage of the memorializing resolution of the Planning Board's decision not to recommend a change to the zoning district designation in which the property is located.
150-20.6 RIGHT TO APPEAL
Any interested party shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Planning Board to the Superior Court. There shall be no right of appeal of the Planning Board's decision to the governing body.
Page 203
ARTICLE XXI DEVELOPMENT FEE
150-21.1 PURPOSE
In Holmdel Builders' Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules. This article establishes the standards for the collection, maintenance, and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's rules. Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This article shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees.
150-21.2 BASIC REQUIREMENTS
The Township of Verona shall not spend development fees until COAH has approved a plan for spending such fees and the Township of Verona has received third round substantive certification from COAH or a judgment of compliance.
150-21.3 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEES
A. Within all of the Township of Verona Zoning Districts, residential developers shall pay a fee of 1% of the equalized assessed value for residential development, provided no increased density is permitted.
B. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted, developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be realized.
Example: If an approval allows for four units to be constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1% of the equalized assessed value on the first two units, and 6% of the equalized assessed value for the additional two units. However, if the zoning on the site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application, the density for the purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance application.
Page 204
150-21.4 NON RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEES
A. Within all of the Township of Verona's zoning district(s), nonresidential developers shall pay a fee of 2% of the equalized assessed value for nonresidential development.
B. If an increase in floor area ratio is approved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(4), then the additional floor area realized (above what is permitted by right under the existing zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6% of the equalized assessed value for nonresidential development. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application, the base floor area for the purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest floor area permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance application.
150-21.5 ELIGIBLE EXACTIONS; INELIGIBLE EXACTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS
A. Affordable housing developments shall be exempt from development fees. All other forms of new construction shall be subject to development fees unless exempted below.
B. Developments that have received preliminary or final approval prior to the imposition of a Township development fee shall be exempt from development fees unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the approval.
C. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure is expanded or undergoes a change to a more intense use. The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
D. Developers of tax-exempt or not-for-profit projects shall be subject to a reduced development fee of 1%.
E. Developers of existing single family residential dwellings shall be exempt from development fees, including additions, renovations, rebuilding or replacement of an existing single family dwelling and the construction of accessory buildings or other structures on the same lot as the principal dwelling, provided no increase in density is permitted.
Page 205
150-21.6 COLLECTION OF FEES
Fifty percent of the development fee will be collected at the time of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion will be collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of certificate of occupancy.
150-21.7 CONTESTED FEES
Imposed and collected development fees that are challenged shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by Township of Verona. If all or a portion of the contested fees are returned to the developer, the accrued interest on the returned amount shall also be returned.
150-21.8 AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund in JPMorgan Chase Bank for the purpose of depositing development fees collected from residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls. All development fees paid by developers pursuant to this article shall be deposited into this fund.
B. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, Township of Verona shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the Township, JPMorgan Chase Bank, and COAH to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.16(b).
C. No funds shall be expended from the affordable housing trust fund unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by COAH. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
Page 206
150-21.9 USE OF FUNDS
A. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for any activity approved by COAH to address the Township's fair share. Such activities include, but are not limited to: rehabilitation, new construction, RCAs subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.4(d), ECHO housing, purchase of land for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing, purchase of housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability, or administration necessary for implementation of the housing element and fair share plan. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved by COAH.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Township of Verona for past housing activities.
C. After subtracting development fees collected to finance an RCA, a rehabilitation program or a new construction project that are necessary to address the Township of Verona's affordable housing obligation, at least 30% of the balance remaining shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income households in affordable units included in the municipal fair share plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, and rental assistance.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of median income may include buying down the cost of low- or moderate-income units in the third round municipal fair share plan to make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median income. The use of development fees in this manner shall entitle Township of Verona to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.22.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. Township of Verona may contract with a private or public entity to administer any part of its housing element and fair share plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.
Page 207
E. No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees each year, exclusive of the fees used to fund an RCA, shall be expended on administration, including but not limited to salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a housing element and fair share plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Development fee administrative costs are calculated and may be expended at the end of each year or upon receipt of the fees.
150-21.10 ONGOING COLLECTION OF FEES
The ability for the Township of Verona to impose, collect and expend development fees shall expire with its substantive certification or not later than December 21, 2013, unless the Township of Verona has filed an adopted housing element and fair share plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and has received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If the Township of Verona fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees prior to December 31, 2013, it may resume the imposition and collection of development fees only by complying with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:94-6. The Township of Verona shall not impose a development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or not later than December 31, 2013, nor will the Township of Verona retroactively impose a development fee on such a development. The Township of Verona will not expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification and not later than December 31, 2013.
Page 208
Township of Verona
SUMMARY OF PERMITTED USE BULK SCHEDULE
R-100
R-70
R-60
R-50B
R-50
R-40
A-1
A-1R
A-2
A-3*
C-2
R-CMO
MR
TC
ETC
RR
P
SP
T
Minimum
Lot Size (Sq. Ft.)
12,000
8,400
7,200
7,500
5,000
4,000
174,240
43,560
348,480
8,400
15,000
12,000
6,000
2,000
12,000
435,600
10,000
65,340
N/A
Lot Width (Ft.)
100
70
60
50
50
40
150
150
300
70
100
75
60
50
100
750
100
100
N/A
Front Yard Setback (Ft.)
35
30
30
30
30
30
40
40
100
30
20
30
20
0
30
200
30
30
N/A
Side Yard Setbacks
One (Ft.)
9
8
8
8
8
8
15
15
100
8
15
8
15
0
20
50
20
8
N/A
Both (Ft.)
20
18
18
18
18
18
40
40
250
18
35
18
35
0
40
100
40
18
N/A
Both
(% of lot width)
25
25
25
25
25
25
N/A
N/A
N/A
25
N/A
25
25
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25
N/A
Rear Yard Setback (Ft.)
30
30
30
30
30
30
25
25
150
30
50
30
50
20
30
40
40
30
N/A
Maximum
Height (Stories/Ft.)
2.5/30
2.5/30
2.5/30
2.5/30
2.5/30
2.5/30
2.5/35
2.5/35
10/120
2.5/35
2.5/35
2.5/35
2.5/35
3/50
3/50
2/50
3/50
2.5/35
N/A
Lot Coverage (%)
20
20
25
25
30
30
60
25
25
20
30
30
30
80
40
40
N/A
30
N/A
Improved Lot Coverage (%)
35
35
40
40
40
40
75
55
75
35
65
65
65
100
80
100
N/A
40
N/A
Floor Area Ratio (%)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
50
N/A
N/A
N/A
100
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Page 209
July 11, 2011