Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Township Committee
[Adopted 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Woolwich
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Committee
of the Township of Woolwich, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 203, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Woolwich,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Woolwich by impressing thereon the Seal of the township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Woolwich" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Woolwich, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Township
Committee, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Woolwich to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 11-23-1998.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. All ordinances pertaining to the municipally approved farmland
preservation program.
O. All ordinances pertaining to the regulation of junkyards.
P. Ordinance No. 89-15, pertaining to the surcharge for returned checks.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Committee that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C. Nomenclature: Throughout this Code, the following nomenclature
changes shall be made:
(1) References to the "Township Treasurer" are amended to "Chief
Financial Officer." In Chapter 8, "Township Clerk" is changed to
"Chief Financial Officer."
(2) References to the "Township Solicitor" are amended to "Township
Attorney."
(3) References to the "Township Engineer" are amended to "Municipal
Engineer."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, articles and sections which were
amended, added or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a
footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township Clerk's offices.
§ 1-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 1-14
1:6
§ 1-15. General penalty.
(4) References to the "Township Dog Person" and "Dog Warden" are
amended to "Animal Control Officer."
(5) References to the "State Department of Labor and Industry" are
amended to the "State Department of Labor."
A. For violation of any provision of the Code of the Township of Woolwich,
where no specific penalty is otherwise provided regarding the section
violated, the maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be one or more of
the following:
(1) A fine not exceeding $1,000.
(2) Imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
(3) A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. Except as otherwise provided, each day in which an ordinance violation
shall exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 2
AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 23.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 143.
Subdivision — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 2-1. Establishment of Agricultural Advisory Committee.
The creation of an Agricultural Advisory Committee is hereby established,
whose purpose it shall be to review and establish ways and means to guide
the preservation of open agricultural lands and to recommend strategies to
retain and enhance farming as an industry.
§ 2-2. Functions.
The Agricultural Advisory Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity
specific to the Woolwich Township Planning Board and Township
Committee, in conjunction with the Delaware Valley Regional Planning
Commission, with the ultimate goal of producing a Master Plan Farmland
Preservation Plan Element.
§ 2-3. Membership; terms.
§ 2-4. Officers and quorum.
A. The Agricultural Advisory Committee shall be comprised of five
members, appointed by the Woolwich Township Committee. Members
shall consist of:
(1) Minimum of three persons residing in Woolwich Township and
engaged in farming.
(2) Two members who shall be residents of the Township of Woolwich
and demonstrate a knowledge and interest in the preservation of
open space.
B. The terms of the membership shall be for three years and shall be
structured on a staggered basis of reappointment. Initially, one member
shall be appointed for one year, two members for two years, and two
members for three years. Vacancies on the Committee shall be promptly
filled by appointment of the Woolwich Township Committee to fill such
unexpired terms.
A. The officers of the Agricultural Advisory Committee shall consist of a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson, annually elected by the full
membership of the Committee. The Chair shall preside at meetings and
§ 1-15 WOOLWICH CODE § 2-4
2:8
§ 2-5. Meetings.
Agricultural Advisory Committee meetings shall be conducted at least once
per month, on a schedule to be determined by the Township. Meetings will
be held in the Municipal Building and may be subject to cancellation due to
the lack of an agenda or to the lack of a quorum. All meetings shall be open
to the public and advertised under the Open Public Meetings Act, except
where otherwise provided by law.
Chapter 3
(RESERVED)
Chapter 4
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
shall decide all points of order and procedure. All powers of the
Chairperson shall equally apply to the Vice Chair when the Vice Chair
is acting as Chairperson in the latter's absence.
B. A quorum needed to conduct business shall be three members.
§ 2-4 (RESERVED) § 2-5
3:9

ARTICLE I
Absenteeism
[Adopted 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-17]
§ 4-1. Rate of absenteeism.
The Woolwich Township Committee hereby establishes by ordinance a
policy whereby members of Township boards, committees and commissions
are limited as to their unexcused absenteeism rate to three consecutive
meetings per year or four meetings missed on an annual basis prior to
removal from such board, committee or commission position.
§ 4-2. Definition of excused absence.
The definition of an "excused absence" shall be for a personal vacation,
personal illness, care of an ill family member or actual employment
commitments, provided sufficient notice be provided to the board,
committee or commission secretary. If no secretary exists for such board,
committee, or commission, proper notice shall be given to the chairperson
or Township Committee liaison.
§ 4-1 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 4-2
4:11
Chapter 5
BUSINESS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY
COMMITTEE
§ 5-1. Purpose; creation.
The mission of the Woolwich Township Business and Economic Development
Advisory Committee is to support the development, success and retention
of businesses in the community.
§ 5-2. Vision statement.
The Business and Economic Development Advisory Committee will build
relationships between the Township of Woolwich, commerce and industry
associations and local businesses that encourage an exchange of
information, facilitate the growth of existing businesses, promote Woolwich
Township as a viable location for new development and investment and
enhance the quality of life for residents of the Township.
§ 5-3. Appointment of members; terms of office; vacancies.
A. The members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Township Committee. Each member shall
be a citizen of the United States and a resident of the Township of
Woolwich. Members shall be appointed for a term of four years.
Vacancies in the membership of the Committee, occurring for whatever
cause, shall be promptly filled by appointment for the unexpired term
thereof. Members shall serve for their respective terms and until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
B. The Mayor and/or Township Committee designee, Township Clerk and/
or designee and the Director of Community Development shall
automatically be nonvoting members of the Committee in addition to
nine voting members.
C. All terms as set forth in Subsection A herein expire as of December 31,
2017. Two members shall initially be appointed for a one-year term
expiring December 31, 2018, followed by successive four-year terms
thereafter. Two members shall initially be appointed for a two-year term
expiring December 31, 2019, followed by successive four-year terms
thereafter. Two members shall initially be appointed for a three-year
term expiring December 31, 2020, followed by successive four-year
terms thereafter. Three members shall initially be appointed for a fouryear
term expiring December 31, 2021, followed by successive fouryear
terms thereafter.
§ 4-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 5-4
4:12
§ 5-4. Officers; quorum.
Members of the Committee shall annually choose, from among its voting
members, a Chairperson and such other officers as it may deem necessary.
A majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum.
§ 5-5. Salaries and compensation.
The members and officers of the Committee shall serve without
compensation except for legitimate costs approved by the Township
Committee upon proper submission and review.
§ 5-6. Oath of office.
Each member and officer of the Committee shall, before assuming office,
take and subscribe an oath that he/she will faithfully and impartially
discharge the duties of his/her office.
§ 5-7. Powers and duties.
The Business and Economic Development Advisory Committee shall be
strictly an advisory committee. It shall perform the functions and exercise
the powers hereinafter enumerated:
§ 5-8. Limitation of powers; annual report.
The Committee shall not have any powers other than those set forth, and
specifically shall have no power to pledge the credit of the municipality or
to enter into contracts or authorize to create debts except as authorized.
It shall operate within the appropriation made by the Township Committee
in its annual budget. The Committee shall make an annual report to the
municipality during December of each year, setting forth, in detail, its
operations and recommendations covering the preceding 12 months.
Chapter 8
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 8-1. Voucher form.
All claims against the Township of Woolwich for payments shall be
submitted on a voucher form, to be supplied by the Chief Financial Officer,
or else on a state-approved voucher form.
A. It will make recommendations to attract industry and commerce and
forward the same to the Mayor and Township Committee for
consideration.
B. It will develop and coordinate programs and projects aimed at the
retention of existing businesses as well as support of new or expanded
business opportunities within the Township of Woolwich.
§ 5-4 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 8-2
4:13
§ 8-2. Submission of voucher.
All vouchers shall be signed by the claimant and dated and submitted
no later than the third business day of the calendar week immediately
preceding the meeting at which they are to be considered.
§ 8-3. Chief Financial Officer to receive vouchers.
All vouchers shall be submitted to the Chief Financial Officer at his office
during normal business hours.
§ 8-4. Certification of receipt.
Prior to review by the Township Committee, the Chief Financial Officer's
certification as to receipt of goods or services shall have been properly
signed and dated.
§ 8-5. Township Committee to review vouchers.
The Township Committee shall review and approve or reject each properly
signed and submitted voucher on or prior to the first and third regular
meetings.
§ 8-6. Bill List.
Approval of vouchers by the Township Committee shall be evidenced by the
signature of a majority of the Township Committee members present at the
meeting on a Bill List, which shall be presented to the Township Committee
at or before the meeting when the payment is approved. The Bill List shall
state the date and number of the voucher, the name of the claimant, the
amount of the claim and a brief designation of the kind of goods or type
of services on which it is based. Said Bill List shall be made a part of
the minutes of the Township Committee meeting. Committee members, in
signing the Bill List, may note abstentions or disapproval as to particular
vouchers.
§ 8-7. Payments.
All payments shall be made by check on a township account, properly
signed as provided by law.
§ 8-8. Emergency purchases. [Added 7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
A contract may be awarded or negotiated without public advertising for
bids, notwithstanding that the contract price will exceed the bid threshold,
when an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare requires
the immediate delivery of goods or the performance of services, provided
the award of the contract is made in the manner established herein.
A. Procedure for authorizing emergency contracts. The department head
of the department wherein the emergency occurs shall notify the
§ 8-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 8-8
4:14
Township Administrator of the need for the performance of the
contract, the nature of the emergency, the time of its occurrence and
the need for invoking this emergency contract section of the Township
Code. The department head providing the notification of emergency
shall reduce the request to writing and file it with the Administrator
as soon as practicable. The Township Administrator shall advise the
Mayor, or, in the Mayor's absence, the Deputy Mayor, of the department
head's request for an emergency contract. The Mayor, or, in his
absence, the Deputy Mayor, will direct the Township Administrator
whether to proceed with the emergency purchase. The Township
Administrator shall then implement the procedures for undertaking the
emergency purchase and, upon doing so, shall also notify the committee
person who is liaison to the department wherein the emergency
occurred of the need to undertake the emergency purchase.
Notification of the committee person is for information purposes only;
the committee person shall not participate in the procedure for
determining whether to authorize an emergency contract.
B. Payment to contractor. Upon the furnishing of such goods and/or
services in accordance with the terms of the emergency contract
awarded by the Township Administrator, the contractor furnishing such
goods or services will be entitled to payment therefor upon
presentation of a duly executed voucher for the emergency services or
purchases rendered.
C. Requirement of emergency circumstances. An actual or imminent
emergency must exist requiring the immediate delivery of goods or the
performance of services in order for the emergency contract to be
awarded in accordance with this section.
D. Good faith or lack of foreseeability. This emergency purchase procedure
may be utilized only in the event the need for goods or services could
not have been reasonably foreseen or the need for such goods or
services arose notwithstanding a good faith effort on the part of the
governing body to plan for the purchase of any goods or services
required by it.
E. Duration of contract. The emergency contract shall be of such limited
duration as to meet only the immediate needs of the emergency. Under
no circumstances shall this emergency purchasing procedure be used
to enter into a multiyear contract.
F. Chain of command in Administrator's absence. In the event the
Township Administrator, due to illness, absence, or other incapacity, is
unavailable when emergency action may become necessary, then the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall be consulted
by the department head regarding the emergency purchase. The
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall then comply
with the procedures established in this chapter for emergency
purchases and act in place of the Township Administrator.
§ 8-8 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 8-8
4:15
Chapter 10
CONSERVATION DESIGN ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 23.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Subdivision — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 10-1. Establishment of Conservation Design Ordinance
Committee.
The creation of a Conservation Design Ordinance Committee is hereby
established, whose purpose it shall be to review the current Conservation
Design Ordinance and make suggestions towards proper changes that will
benefit the Township by facilitating open space preservation in the design
process for new subdivisions.
§ 10-2. Functions.
The Conservation Design Ordinance Committee shall serve in an advisory
capacity specific to the Woolwich Township Planning Board and Township
Committee, in conjunction with the Delaware Valley Regional Planning
Commission.
§ 10-3. Membership.
G. Coordination with Chief Financial Officer. The official awarding the
emergency contract in accordance with this section shall coordinate his
actions with the Chief Financial Officer of the Township so appropriate
provision is made for funding the acquisition of emergency services or
purchases.
A. The Conservation Design Ordinance Committee shall be comprised of
four members of the residential public at large appointed by the
Woolwich Township Committee, as well as one member of the Woolwich
Township Committee who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee to serve as Committee liaison to the Conservation Design
Ordinance Committee.
B. The terms of the membership shall be for three years and shall be
structured on a staggered basis of reappointment. Initially, one member
shall be appointed for one year, two members shall be appointed for two
years, and two members for three years.
C. The Township Committee liaison to the Conservation Design Ordinance
Committee shall be appointed by the general membership of the
Township Committee to serve on an annual basis.
§ 8-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 10-3
10:16
§ 10-4. Officers and quorum.
§ 10-5. Meetings.
Conservation Design Ordinance Committee meetings shall be conducted at
least once per month, on a schedule to be determined by the Township.
Meetings will be held in the Municipal Building and may be subject to
cancellation due to the lack of an agenda or to the lack of a quorum. All
meetings shall be open to the public and advertised under the Open Public
Meetings Act, except where otherwise provided by law.
Chapter 11
CONTRACTS
D. Vacancies on the Committee shall be promptly filled by appointment of
the Woolwich Township Committee to fill such unexpired terms.
A. The officers of the Conservation Design Ordinance Committee shall
consist of a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson, annually elected by the
full membership of the Committee. The Chair shall preside at meetings
and shall decide all points of order and procedure. All powers of the
Chairperson shall equally apply to the Vice Chair when the Vice Chair is
acting as Chairperson in the latter's absence.
B. A quorum needed to conduct business shall be three members.
§ 10-3 CONTRACTS § 10-5
11:17

ARTICLE I
Professional Service Agreements
[Adopted 12-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-38]
§ 11-1. Prohibition awarding certain public contracts.
§ 11-2. Fair and open process.
A. Any other provision of the law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, shall not enter into
a contract having an anticipated value in excess of $17,500 as
determined in advance and certified in writing by the Township, agency
or instrumentality with a business entity that has made a political
contribution that is reportable by the receipt under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et
seq. to any municipal committee of a political party in that municipality
if a member of that political party is serving in an elective public office
of that municipality when the contract is awarded or to any candidate
committee of any person serving in an elective public office of that
municipality when the contract is awarded; and
B. A business entity that has entered into a contract having an anticipated
value in excess of $17,500 with the Township or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, except a contract that is awarded pursuant to a
fair open process, shall not make such a contribution reportable by the
recipient under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq. to any municipal committee of
a political party in the Township if a member of that political party is
serving in an elective public office of the Township when the contract is
awarded or to any candidate committee of any person serving in an
elective public office of the Township when the contract is awarded,
during the term of that contract.
A. Any professional service entity or other business entity providing
services to the Township of Woolwich shall be subject to a fair and open
process for selection. That fair and open process shall be set forth in
Subsection B below which shall establish a criteria for the fair and open
process.
B. The fair and open process established by the Township of Woolwich
shall require the following:
(1) Any professional position or service contract not subject to bidding
that shall expire as of December 31 of that calendar year shall be
advertised by the Mayor's office, appointing authority or board as
the case may be, in the official newspaper of the Township of
Woolwich for publication of notices, and published on the
Township's website, not later than December 10. The published
notice shall set forth the name of the position or contract which is
to become open and set forth the criteria to be considered and
materials required to be submitted by the applicant.
§ 11-1 CONTRACTS § 11-2
11:19
(2) Should the applicant be a professional acquiring licensure in the
State of New Jersey, said applicant shall be licensed for a period not
less than five years.
(3) The applicant shall submit a certificate of good standing or other
similar document evidencing that the professional's license is not
presently suspended or revoked.
(4) The applicant shall submit a resume which shall set forth
information, including but not limited to the following (as
applicable to a business entity or individual professional):
(a) Full name and business address.
(b) A listing of all post-high-school education of the applicant.
(c) Dates of licensure in the State of New Jersey and any other
state.
(d) A listing of any professional affiliations or memberships in any
professional societies or organizations, with an indication as to
any offices held therein.
(e) The number of licensed professionals employed by/affiliated
with the business entity or the business entity which employs
the applicant.
(f) A listing of all special accreditations held by the individual
licensed professional or business entity.
(g) A listing of all previous public entities served by the business
entity or licensed professional, indicating the dates of services
and position held.
C. The Mayor, appointing authority or board shall thereafter select the
professional or business entity for the position so advertised which shall
thereafter be confirmed or approved as required by law or ordinance.
§ 11-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 11-2
11:20
Chapter 12
COURT, JOINT MUNICIPAL
§ 12-1. Establishment.
A Joint Municipal Court is hereby established, pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1, et seq., as amended and supplemented, consisting of
the Township of Woolwich; Township of South Harrison; and the Borough
of Swedesboro. The Joint Municipal Court is created in accordance with
a certain agreement whereby the court is to be hereinafter known as the
Woolwich Joint Municipal Court.
§ 12-2. Name.
The name of the Joint Municipal Court shall be the "Woolwich Joint
Municipal Court."
§ 12-3. Effective date; jurisdiction.
This chapter shall be effective on or about 12:00 a.m. on October 1, 2019,
following due notice as provided in accordance with § 12-4 hereof. All
summonses, warrants and other matters issuing, arising from or within
the jurisdiction of the Township of Woolwich and the other Participating
Municipalities shall be within the jurisdiction of the Woolwich Joint
Municipal Court of the Township of Woolwich on and after the aforesaid
October 1, 2019, including those matters arising prior to such date which
have not theretofore been completed.
§ 12-4. Notice.
Written notice of the appeal and abolishment of the Municipal Court of
the Township of Woolwich, and the establishment of the Woolwich Joint
Municipal Court, shall be provided to the Administrative Office of the Courts
and the Assignment Judge of the Vicinage, and posted in the municipal
buildings of each participating municipality at a location where public
notices are routinely posted.
§ 12-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a single Joint Municipal Court to
be located in the Township of Woolwich 120 Village Green Drive, Woolwich
Township, New Jersey 08085.
§ 12-6. Shared service agreement.
The Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich hereby approves
of the terms and conditions of the Shared Service Agreement between
the participating municipalities to establish the "Woolwich Joint Municipal
Court", such Agreement attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference.2 The Mayor and Clerk of the Township of Woolwich are hereby
§ 11-2 CONTRACTS § 12-6
11:21
expressly authorized to execute and deliver the aforesaid agreement on
behalf of the Township.
§ 12-7. Authority.
Under and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1, et seq., a Joint
Municipal Court to be known as the "Woolwich Joint Municipal Court" is
hereby established.
§ 12-8. Official seal.
The Joint Municipal Court of the Township of Woolwich shall have an official
seal bearing the impression of the name of the Court.
§ 12-9. Jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of the Woolwich Joint Municipal Court of the Township
of Woolwich shall be coextensive with the Municipal territory of the
participating municipalities and the Township of Woolwich.
§ 12-10. Judge.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:12-4, as amended, the Judge of the Joint
Municipal Court of the Township Woolwich be appointed by the Governor
with the advice and consent of the Senate, and shall have such qualifications
as is now or may be required by law and shall serve for a term of three
years from the date of appointment until a qualified successor has been
appointed and qualified. Compensation of the Judge shall be at an annual
salary and other compensation as is now or hereinafter may be provided by
ordinance and in accordance with the terms of the aforesaid shared service
agreement.
§ 12-11. Administrator.
The appointment of a Joint Municipal Court Administrator and such number
of Deputy Court Administrators shall be appointed as provided consistent
with this chapter and in accordance with the terms of the aforesaid shared
service agreement between the participating municipalities.
§ 12-12. Staff.
The Woolwich Joint Municipal Court staff shall be appointed in a manner
consistent with this chapter and in accordance with the terms of the
aforesaid shared service agreement.
§ 12-13. Prosecutors.
Such number of Joint Municipal Court Prosecutors shall be appointed in
the manner provided by this chapter and in accordance with the terms
2. Editor's Note: Said agreement in on file in Township offices.
§ 12-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 12-13
11:22
of the aforesaid shared service agreement with a Joint Municipal Court
Prosecutor to have such jurisdiction, powers and duties as prescribed by
N.J.S.A. 2B:25-1, et seq.
§ 12-14. Joint Municipal Court Public Defender.
§ 12-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 12-16. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application of this chapter to any
person, entity or circumstances is held invalid by any court of jurisdiction,
the remainder of such provisions of this chapter not so deemed invalid shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 12-17. When effective.
This chapter shall only be effective upon the last of the following to occur:
A. Appointment. The Joint Municipal Court Public Defender shall be
appointed in a manner consistent with the terms of this chapter and in
accordance with the terms of the aforesaid shared service agreement,
and shall have such jurisdiction, powers and duties as prescribed by
N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1, et seq.
B. Representation. Any person applying to the Woolwich Joint Municipal
Court for representation by a Municipal Public Defender shall, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:24-17, pay an application
fee of not more than $200, but only in such amount determined by the
Woolwich Joint Municipal Court Judge which is necessary to pay the
necessary costs of Municipal Public Defender's services. The Joint
Municipal Court Judge may waive the application of such fee in whole,
or in part, if the Court determines, in its discretion, that the application
fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking
representation. Said determination shall be made in accordance with
applicable law and the rules of court.
C. Alternate method of collection. If payment of Municipal Public Defender
fees is deferred by the Joint Municipal Court Judge, or if the fee is
otherwise unpaid, then each of the participating municipalities may
endeavor to collect the fee in a manner authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:6A-1
and N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-19.
A. Its adoption and publication in accordance with law; and
B. Approval of the establishment of the Joint Municipal Court by the
administrative office of the Courts; and
§ 12-13 CONTRACTS § 12-17
11:23
Chapter 14
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 29.
§ 14-1. Statutory authority; conditions for indemnification.
Consistent with the provision of N.J.S.A. 59:10-4 and the Tort Claims Act,3
the Township of Woolwich shall indemnify and hold its employees and/or
elected officials harmless against any judgment for exemplary or punitive
damages incurred by them in the defense of an action resulting from the
employee's and/or elected official's civil violation of state or federal law,
including fees and costs and attorneys' fees, up, through and including any
appeals, subject only to the conditions set forth below:
C. An ordinance duly authorized and adopted by the governing body of
each of the participating municipalities.
A. The employees and/or elected officials of the Township of Woolwich
must notify the Township of Woolwich as soon as possible as to any
action threatened against the employee/elected official.
B. The Township of Woolwich reserves the option to defend an employee/
elected official of the Township of Woolwich or provide the employee/
elected official with the means for a defense or indemnify the employee/
elected official for his/her defense.
C. The indemnification shall apply to any action, statements, conduct or
any action in which the employee/elected official is involved giving rise
to the lawsuit, claim and demand, even if it is later decided by a judge
or jury to have been unlawful or improper as to the plaintiff; provided,
however, that this indemnification shall not apply and shall be totally
void and have no effect with respect to any action, statements, conduct
or inaction of an employee/elected official, giving rise to any such
lawsuit, claim and demand:
(1) That was not within the scope of the employee's employment or
elected official's capacity;
(2) If the act or omission was due to actual fraud, willful misconduct or
actual malice; or
(3) That constituted a crime.
3. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.
§ 12-17 WOOLWICH CODE § 14-1
14:24
Chapter 16
JOINT ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 4.
Joint Land Use Board — See Ch. 23.
§ 16-1. Creation.
Be it ordained by the Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich
that the Swedesboro-Woolwich Joint Environmental Commission is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 to 40:56A-12.
§ 16-2. Members.
D. In the event that it is ultimately determined that the employee/elected
official of the Township of Woolwich cannot be indemnified as per
Subsection C above, then the employee/elected official agrees to
reimburse the Township of Woolwich for monetary amounts, fees and
costs, including attorneys' fees, which have been advanced or provided
by the Township of Woolwich to the employee/elected official or on the
public employee's/elected official's behalf.
A. A Joint Environmental Commission shall consist of 10 members plus
two alternates. The Mayor of Woolwich Township shall appoint five
members, one of whom shall also be a member of the Joint Land Use
Board plus one alternate and all of whom shall be residents of the
Township of Woolwich. The Mayor of the Borough of Swedesboro shall
appoint five members, one of whom shall also be a member of the
Planning/Zoning Board plus one alternate and all of whom shall be
residents of the Borough of Swedesboro. The members shall serve
without compensation except as hereinafter provided. The Swedesboro-
Woolwich Joint Environmental Commission shall elect one of its
members to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the Joint
Commission. The term of the Chairman shall be one year. The terms of
office of the first commissioners shall be for one, two or three years, to
be designated by the Mayors in making their appointments, and their
successors shall be appointed for terms of three years and until
appointment and qualification of their successors. The alternates shall
be appointed for a term of one year. The first members of the Joint
Commission shall be appointed for the following terms:
(1) Two members: one from Woolwich Township, one from the Borough
of Swedesboro, for the one-year term expiring December 31, 2014.
§ 14-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 16-2
14:25
§ 16-3. Powers.
The Joint Commission is established for the protection, development or use
of natural resources, including water resources, located within territorial
limits of the Township of Woolwich and the Borough of Swedesboro. The
Joint Commission shall have power to conduct research into the use and
possible use of the open land areas of the municipalities and may coordinate
the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes, and may
advertise, prepare, print, and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary and prudent for its
purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately
owned, including open marshland, swamps and other wetlands, in order to
obtain information on the appropriate use of such areas and may from time
to time recommend to the relevant land use board plans and programs for
inclusion in the Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 16-4. Acquisitions.
The Joint Environmental Commission may, subject to approval of both of
the governing bodies, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name
of the municipalities by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease
for any of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes
subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may
be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement
(including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right
(including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as
may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future
use of, or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other
land and water areas in the municipalities.
(2) Four members: two from Woolwich Township, two from the
Borough of Swedesboro, for the two-year term expiring December
31, 2015.
(3) Four members: two from Woolwich Township, two from the
Borough of Swedesboro, for the three-year term expiring
December 31, 2016.
(4) Two alternates: one from Woolwich Township one from the Borough
of Swedesboro, for a one-year term expiring December 31, 2014.
B. The governing bodies may remove a member of the Joint Commission
from their own municipality for cause on written charges served upon
the member and after the hearing thereon at which the member shall
be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the Joint
Commission occurring otherwise than expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 16-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 16-5
14:26
§ 16-5. Records and annual reports.
The Joint Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and make an annual report to the governing bodies.
§ 16-6. Appropriations.
The Joint Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees and
incur such expenses as it may from time to time require, providing the same
shall be within the limits of funds appropriated to it by the governing bodies
or otherwise available to it. The Borough of Swedesboro will maintain the
funding for the Joint Environmental Commission between the Borough of
Swedesboro and the Township of Woolwich starting in budget calendar year
2014. The Joint Commission should establish a funding mechanism to get
the yearly funds from Woolwich to Swedesboro.
§ 16-7. Studies and recommendations.
The Joint Environmental Commission shall have the power to study and
make recommendations concerning open space preservation, water
resources management, air pollution control, solid waste management,
noise control, soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance,
marine resources and protection of flora and fauna.
§ 16-8. Transfer of assets.
The Woolwich Township and Borough of Swedesboro Environmental
Commissions shall transfer and convey to the Joint Commission all assets,
monies, books/records, property interests, funding/funding rights, and all
such other property they own and/or control in furtherance of the combined
goals of the heretofore existing Environmental Commissions.
§ 16-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its passage and publication
according to law subject to the passage and publication of the companion
ordinance by the Borough of Swedesboro.
Chapter 23
JOINT LAND USE BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental site assessment — See Ch. 92.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 16-5 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 16-9
14:27
GENERAL INFORMATION
The current checklist for development
applications, adopted 12-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-24, is on file in the Township offices.
Pursuant to this chapter, any reference in the
Township Code to "Planning Board" or
"Zoning Board of Adjustment" shall be
interpreted to refer to the "Joint Land Use
Board."
§ 16-9 WOOLWICH CODE § 16-9
14:28
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Membership
§ 23-1. Title of Board.
The Board is created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(c), and the title of the
Board shall be "Woolwich Township Joint Land Use Board."
§ 23-2. Establishment.
§ 23-3. Members.
A. The Joint Land Use Board shall serve as a Planning Board and a Zoning
Board of Adjustment pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(c)
and shall be established in accordance with the provisions set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
B. The nine-member Board shall exercise all the powers of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, but the Class I and Class III members shall not
participate in the consideration of applications for development which
involve relief pursuant to Subsection d of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. Any
reference to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment in any
existing Woolwich Township ordinance or Township code shall be
deemed to refer to the Joint Land Use Board.
A. All members of the Joint Land Use Board shall be municipal residents
and, pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, members shall be
appointed and shall consist of the four following classes as set forth
below:
(1) Class I: the Mayor or Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the Township other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor.
(3) Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the Township, to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, position or employment, except that one member may be a
member of the Board of Education. For purposes of this section, a
membership on a municipal board or commission whose function is
advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is discretionary
and not required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of
municipal office.
B. Alternate members: four alternates meeting qualifications of Class IV
members and appointed by the Mayor and designated as, respectively,
"Alternate No. 1, 2, 3 and 4." Alternate members may participate in all
matters but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a
regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a
regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event
§ 23-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-3
14:29
§ 23-4. Terms of members.
that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote and if Alternate No. 1 is unavailable, then in
descending order of numerical designation.
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.2, a member of the Joint Land Use Board
who was absent for one or more of the meetings for which a hearing
was held or was not a member of the Joint Land Use Board at that time
shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was
conducted, notwithstanding his or her absence from one or more of the
meetings; provided, however, that such Board member has available to
him or her the transcript or recording of all of the hearings from which
he or she was absent or was not a member, and certifies in writing to
the Board that he or she has read such transcript or listened to such
recording.
A. Class I. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to
the Mayor's official tenure or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in
the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure.
B. Class II. The term of the member composing Class II shall be for one
year or terminate at the completion of that member's respective term of
office, whichever occurs first.
C. Class III. The term of the member composing Class III shall be for one
year or terminate at the completion of that member's respective term of
office, whichever occurs first.
D. Class IV. The terms of the members of Class IV shall be four years. The
term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever that member is no longer a
member of such other body or at the completion of the Class IV term,
whichever occurs first. The terms of all Class IV members first
appointed shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years after the appointments.
E. Alternates. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years,
except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the
term of not more than two alternate members shall expire in any one
year. In no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first
appointed exceed two years.
F. General membership terms provisions.
(1) If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
the Joint Land Use Board term, it shall be filled by appointment as
provided by regular members, for the unexpired term.
§ 23-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-4
14:30
(2) No member of the Joint Land Use Board shall be permitted to act on
any matter on which the member has, either directly or indirectly,
any personal or financial interest.
(3) Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if
the member requests one, may be removed by the governing body
for cause.
(4) The governing body may provide that the term of appointment of
any class of member commence on January 1 of each year.
§ 23-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-4
14:31

ARTICLE II
Powers and Duties Generally
§ 23-5. Rules and regulations.
The Joint Land Use Board is authorized to adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of the
land use chapters. It shall also have the following duties:
A. To make and adopt and, from time to time, amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Township, including a specific policy
statement respecting its relationship to any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bears essentially upon the
planning of the Township, reworded to provide for a policy statement
rather than regulation, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
B. To administer the provisions of Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land, and
Chapter 149, Site Plan Review, of the Code of the Township of Woolwich
in accordance with the provisions of said chapters and the Municipal
Land Use Law.
C. To issue permits for conditional uses in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67.
(1) The term "conditional use" means a use permitted in a particular
zoning district only upon a showing that such use in a specified
location will comply with the conditions and standards for the
location or operation of such use as contained in Chapter 203,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Woolwich, and upon the
issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
D. To make the Official Map of the municipality for adoption by the
governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31, inclusive.
E. To prepare and review the capital improvement program in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29 through 40:55D-31, inclusive.
F. To grant variances and certain building permits in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60.
G. To consider and make a report to the Township Committee within 35
days after a referral as to any proposed development regulation
submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(a), and
also to pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning
Board pursuant to the provisions of 40:55D-26(b).
H. To interpret and hear applications under the Zoning Ordinance,
including conditional uses and relief under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70,
Subsection (d), of the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 23-5 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-5
14:33
I. To review the capital improvement program pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-29.
J. To hear and consider variance applications and certain building permit
hearings in conjunction with subdivision, site plan and conditional use
approval.
K. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulation.
L. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
M. To perform such advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance or
resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers, including with regard to
redevelopment planning and projects.
N. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter
203, Zoning.
O. To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Chapter 203, Zoning, or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which the Board is authorized to pass by Chapter 203, Zoning.
P. Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a
specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property, or by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures lawfully
existing thereon, the strict application of any regulation in Chapter 203,
Zoning, would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or
to exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such property,
to grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a
variance from such strict application of such regulation so as to relieve
such difficulties or hardship; or where, in an application or appeal
relating to a specific piece of property, the purposes of the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2, would be advanced by a deviation
from the requirements of Chapter 203, Zoning, and the benefits of the
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, to grant a
variance to allow departure from regulations of Chapter 203, Zoning;
provided, however, that no variance from those departures enumerated
shall be granted under this Subsection P.
Q. In particular cases and for special reasons, to grant a variance to allow
for departure from regulations pursuant to Article 8 of the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et seq., to permit a use or principal
structure; and expansion of a nonconforming use; deviation from a
specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 pertaining
solely to a conditional use; and increase in the permitted floor area ratio
§ 23-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-5
14:34
§ 23-6. Meetings.
as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4; and increase in the permitted density as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4 except as applied to the required lot area
for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which
lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from
a minor subdivision; height of a principal structure which exceeds by
10 feet or 10% of the maximum height permitted in the district for a
principal structure.
R. To direct the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official
Map.
S. To direct the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
T. To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance.
U. To hear and decide requests for variances from lot area, lot
dimensional, setback and yard requirements, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c).
V. To hear and decide requests for variances to permit a use or structure,
an expansion of a nonconforming use, deviations from conditional use
requirements, an increase in the permitted floor area and the height of
a principal structure which exceeds the permitted height in the zone by
10% or 10 feet.
A. Meetings shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for
lack of applications for development to process. Meetings of the Joint
Land Use Board shall not be scheduled to conflict with the regularly
scheduled meetings of the Township Committee.
B. Special meetings may be provided at the call of the Chairman or on the
request of any two Board members, which special meetings shall be
held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum of the
members being present as members of the Board, "quorum" being
defined as the majority of the full authorized membership of the Board.
D. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members of the Joint
Land Use Board present at the meeting except as otherwise required by
statute.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
§ 23-5 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-6
14:35
§ 23-7. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes thereafter shall be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours within
the municipality. Except for minutes of executive (closed) session(s), any
interested party shall have the right to compel production of the minutes for
use as evidence in any legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of
such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a fee for reproduction
of the minutes for his use.
§ 23-8. Fees.
The application fees for development approvals and other related matters
shall be as set forth in Chapter 95, Fees, of this Code.
§ 23-9. Hearings.
Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.). An executive session
for the purpose of discussing and studying any matters to come before
the Board properly pursuant to the Open Public Meetings Act shall not
be deemed to be a regular or special meeting.
A. Generally, except as otherwise provided for in this Code, the Joint Land
Use Board shall hold a hearing on each application for development and
on the adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan.
B. Rules. The Board may make rules governing the conduct of hearings
before such bodies, which rules shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. of this chapter.
C. Filing. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a
hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10
calendar days before the date of the hearing during normal business
hours in the office of the Land Use Secretary. The applicant may
produce other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
D. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by parties, and
the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
E. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and/or Board Attorney, and the right of cross-examination shall
§ 23-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-9
14:36
§ 23-10. Notice requirements for hearings.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
be permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the discretion
of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as to time and
number of witnesses.
F. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
G. Records. All proceedings before the Board shall be recorded by
stenographer or by mechanical or electronic means. Upon the request
of any interested party, the administrative officer shall cause a
transcript or duplicate recording to be furnished, at the request of the
party requesting same and such party's expense. The administrative
officer shall maintain and keep all records for the Board. Provisions for
the above shall be subject to and in accordance with both records
retention rules and schedules as promulgated by the New Jersey
Division of Archives and Records Management as well as the Open
Public Records Act.
H. A member of the Board who was absent for one or more meetings at
which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon
which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his or her absence
from one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such Board
member has available to him or her the transcript or recording of all the
hearings from which he or she was absent and certifies, in writing, to
the Board, that he or she has read such transcript or listened to such
recording.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the Township at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicates within 200 feet in all directions of the property
which is the subject of such hearing and whether located within or
without the Township in which the applicant's land is located.
(1) Method of serving notice.
(a) Such notice shall be given by:
[1] Serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on
the current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the
property; or
§ 23-9 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-10
14:37
[2] Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the property owner at his address as shown
on the current tax sale duplicate.
(b) This requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose
unit has a unit above or below it; or horizontal property
regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an
apartment above or below it.
(2) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
(3) Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime,
community trust or homeowners' association, because of its
ownership of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of
the property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in
the same manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit
owners, co-owners, or homeowners on account of such common
elements or areas.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the Clerk of such municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the
notice required to be given to the owners of lands in such adjoining
municipality which are located within 200 feet of the subject property.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the County Planning Board of a hearing on an
application for development of property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the
County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situate within 200
feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service, or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing
on an application for development of property adjacent to a state
highway.
F. Notice of a hearing on an application for development of property which
exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units shall be given by personal
service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Director of the
Division of State and Regional Planning in the Department of
Community Affairs. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or
documents required to be on file with the secretary of the appropriate
board.
§ 23-10 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-10
14:38
§ 23-11. Furnishing of list of property owners. [Amended 10-7-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-15]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12(c), the Township Assessor
shall, within seven days after receipt of a written request therefor and upon
receipt of payment of a fee as set forth in a resolution adopted by the
Township Committee, make and certify a list from the current tax duplicate
of names and addresses of owners and other persons or entities to whom
the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to the Code. Said certified
list of property owners to be utilized for said notice shall be valid for a
period of 75 days from the date issued.
§ 23-12. Decisions.
G. Notice of hearings on applications for approval of a major subdivision or
major site plan requiring public notice under this section shall be given
to every public utility, cable television company and local utility which
possesses a right-of-way or easement within Woolwich Township and
which has registered with the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12.1. Service shall occur upon such public utility, cable
company or local utility in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12(h).
H. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and the applicant shall
file an affidavit of proof of service with the board holding the hearing on
the application for development.
I. Any notice made by certified mail, return receipt requested, as
hereinabove required, shall be deemed to be complete upon mailing in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
J. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
the block and lot numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Township's Tax Assessor's Office and the location and times at which
any maps and document for which approval is sought are available for
public inspection.
A. Each decision on an application for development shall be set forth, in
writing, as a resolution of the Board, which shall include the findings of
fact and legal conclusions based thereon. Failure of a motion to approve
an application for development to receive the number of votes required
for approval shall be deemed an action denying the application. The
municipal agency may provide such written findings and conclusions
either on the date of the meeting at which the municipal agency takes
action to grant or deny approval or within 45 days of the date of the
meeting at which the municipal agency voted to grant or deny approval
by the adoption of a resolution of memorialization setting forth the
decision and the findings and conclusions of the Municipal agency
§ 23-10 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-12
14:39
§ 23-13. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Township. Such publication shall be arranged by the
applicant, who shall bear the expense of same. The aforementioned notice
shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the
date of the adoption of a memorializing resolution.
§ 23-14. Retention of records by Land Use Department.
All records of the Joint Land Use Board, including, but not limited to, a
copy of each application, supporting documentation, minutes of hearings,
correspondence, decisions and other information relevant to the
determination, shall be maintained in the Land Use office for a period of not
less than five years. Thereafter, said records shall be kept for an indefinite
period in accordance with the system of recordkeeping and archives
established by the Township and in accordance with the retention schedule
set forth by the State Department of Archives and Records Management.
Such documents and information shall be considered a public record within
the meaning of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
thereon. An action resulting from the failure of a motion to approve
an application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above,
with those members voting against the motion for approval being the
members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution. Such
resolution shall be adopted by a vote of a majority of the members
of the municipal agency who voted for the action previously taken,
and no other member shall vote thereon. The vote on such resolution
shall be deemed to be a memorialization of an action of the municipal
agency and not to be an action of the municipal agency. If the municipal
agency fails to adopt a memorializing resolution in the manner required
herein, any interested party may apply to the Superior Court to compel
adoption of a resolution in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10(g).
Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance
with this subsection, the date of such adoption shall constitute the date
of the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications
required by Subsection B below and this Code chapter.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of this decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to all persons who have requested it and have paid the fee set
forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2.4 A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the
office of the Township Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of the fee set
forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2.
4. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2 was repealed by L.2001, c. 404, § 17, effective 7-7-2002. See
now N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5.
§ 23-12 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-15
14:40
§ 23-15. Proof of payment of taxes required.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Joint Land Use Board shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application. If it is shown that the taxes or assessments are delinquent on
said property, no approval or other relief shall be granted by either board
until such taxes or assessments, including interest, have been fully paid.
§ 23-15 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-15
14:41

ARTICLE III
Joint Land Use Board Officers
§ 23-16. Organization; officers.
The Joint Land Use Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
from its members. The Board shall also select a Board Secretary, who may
be a member of the Board, a municipal employee or any other individual
designated by the Board. If the person appointed Secretary of the Board is
a municipal employee, that person shall not perform Board duties during
the hours that person works for the Township, unless the Township
Administrator and/or Township Committee orders otherwise. The Township
Administrator and/or Township Committee may appoint an Administrative
Officer to the Board for all purposes set forth in the Municipal Land Use
Law.
§ 23-17. Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the Joint Land Use Board Attorney. The Board may
annually appoint a Board Attorney who shall be an attorney licensed in
the State of New Jersey and who shall not be the Township Attorney. Said
attorney shall receive such compensation as agreed upon by the attorney
and the Board in an amount not exceeding the amount appropriated by
the Township Committee for such purpose and/or an amount not exceeding
moneys or deposits in escrow with respect to applications, whichever the
case may be. The Board Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Joint Land
Use Board and shall prosecute and defend actions by and against the Board.
§ 23-18. Chairperson.
The Chairperson, subject to this chapter, shall decide all points of order and
matters of procedure governing the meeting unless otherwise directed by
a majority of the Board in session at the time. The Chairperson shall have,
subject to this chapter and governing statutes, all the powers and perform
all the duties normally appertaining to his/her office. The Chairperson or
his/her designee shall swear in all witnesses giving testimony before the
Board.
§ 23-19. Vice Chairperson.
The Vice Chairperson shall preside at all Board meetings and hearings in
the absence of the Chairperson.
§ 23-20. Secretary.
A. Subject to this chapter, and under the direction of the Chairperson, the
Secretary shall conduct all official correspondence, compile the
required records, maintain and keep in order the necessary files and
indices and generally perform the secretarial work of the Board.
§ 23-16 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-20
14:43
§ 23-21. Employment of experts and staff.
B. The Secretary shall attend all meetings of the Board and have the care
and custody of all records, documents, maps, plans and papers of the
Board. When the votes are taken, the Secretary shall take roll by last
name, except that the Chairperson shall be called last.
C. The Secretary shall make a record of, and keep on file, the minutes of
the proceedings at each meeting or hearing held by the Board and shall
enter therein with the other proceedings such resolutions and orders as
are adopted and a copy of the minutes of that meeting. The Secretary
shall issue notices of meetings and shall perform such other duties as
usually appertain to his/her office.
D. The Secretary shall file a brief notice of the Board's decision as per
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10(i) and provide a full copy of the resolution to the
applicant.
A. The Joint Land Use Board may annually employ or contract for services
of experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The
staff of the Board may include, but shall not be limited to, a clerk, or
administrative clerk. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which
exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Committee for its use.
B. The Joint Land Use Board shall have the power, right and responsibility
to employ a professional engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey
who may also be the Township Engineer, to advise the Board as to
engineering matters. The Engineer shall receive such compensation as
is agreed upon by the Engineer for the Board in an amount not
exceeding the amount appropriated by the Township Committee for
such purpose and/or an amount not exceeding moneys in escrow with
respect to applications, whichever the case may be. The Board
Engineer shall be the advisor on the engineering matters of the Board.
In this connection, he/she shall review all plans and documents
received by the Joint Land Use Board for its action and make specific
recommendations concerning said matters.
C. The Joint Land Use Board shall have the right and power to employ a
professional planner, licensed by the State of New Jersey, to advise the
Board with respect to planning matters. The Planner shall receive such
compensation as is agreed upon by the Board and the Planner in an
amount not exceeding the amount appropriated by the Township
Committee for such purpose and/or and amount not exceeding moneys
in escrow with respect to applications, whichever the case may be.
D. The Joint Land Use Board shall have the right and power to employ a
duly certified stenographer for the purpose of providing a verbatim
recording of the proceedings. The stenographic reporter shall receive
such compensation as is agreed upon by the Board and the
stenographer in an amount not to exceed the amount appropriated by
§ 23-20 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-21
14:44
§ 23-22. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 23-23. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Joint Land Use Board shall act on any matter in which he
or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself or herself from acting
on a particular matter, he or she shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
the Township Committee for such purpose and/or an amount not
exceeding moneys in escrow with respect to applications, whichever
the case may be.
E. The Joint Land Use Board shall have the right and power to employ a
traffic engineer, licensed by the State of New Jersey, to advise the Board
with respect to traffic and circulation matters. The traffic engineer shall
receive such compensation as is agreed upon by the Board and the
traffic engineer in an amount not exceeding the amount appropriated
by the Township Committee for such purpose and/or an amount not
exceeding moneys in escrow with respect to applications, whichever
the case may be.
F. The Joint Land Use Board shall have the right and power to employ a
duly qualified archeologist to advise the Board with respect to
archeological matters. The archeologist shall receive such
compensation as agreed upon by the Board and the archeologist in an
amount not exceeding the amount appropriated by the Township
Committee for such purpose and/or an amount not exceeding moneys in
escrow with respect to applications, whichever the case may be.
G. The Joint Land Use Board shall have the right and power to employ an
environmental engineer, licensed by the State of New Jersey, to advise
the Board with respect to environmental matters. The environmental
engineer shall receive such compensation as is agreed upon by the
environmental engineer and the Board in an amount not exceeding the
amount appropriated by the Township Committee for such purpose and/
or an amount not exceeding moneys in escrow with respect to
applications, which ever the case may be.
§ 23-21 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-23
14:45

ARTICLE IV
Time Limitations For Board Action
§ 23-24. Minor subdivisions.
Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the Joint Land Use
Board, or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
Board approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et
seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision, is filed
by the developer with the county recording officer, the Board Engineer and
the Township Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed shall be signed by the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Board before it is accepted for filing by
the County Recording Officer.
§ 23-25. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions.
Upon submission of a complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer
lots, the Joint Land Use Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 45 days of the date of such submission, or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Board shall grant or
deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 23-26. Final approval of major subdivisions.
Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within
45 days of submission of a complete application, or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Final approval of a major
subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of signing of the plat, unless
within such period the plat has been duly filed by the developer with the
County Recording Officer. The Joint Land Use Board, for good cause shown,
may extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed
190 days.
§ 23-27. Site plan approval.
A. Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the administrative
officer, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval
of the site plan by the Board, subject to any conditions that the Board
may impose.
B. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a complete
application for a site plan which involves 10 acres of land or less, and 10
dwelling units or less, the Joint Land Use Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or
§ 23-24 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-27
14:47
§ 23-28. Failure of Board to act.
Failure of the Board to act within the period set forth in the sections
above, whichever is appropriate, shall constitute the approval applied for in
accordance with the automatic approval provisions of the Municipal Land
Use Law.
within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon
the submission of a complete application for a site plan which involves
more than 10 acres, or more than 10 dwelling units, the Joint Land
Use Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of
the date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Joint Land Use Board
shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval of the site plan.
§ 23-27 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-28
14:48
ARTICLE V
Appeals
§ 23-29. Appeals to Board.
A. Appeals to the Joint Land Use Board, which require the Board to invoke
its powers as a zoning board of adjustment, may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of
the Township based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter. Such
appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with the
officer from whom the appeal is taken specifying the grounds of such
appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately
transmit to the Joint Land Use Board all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed was taken.
B. Modification on appeal. In exercising its powers as a zoning board of
adjustment, the Joint Land Use Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
in part, or may modify the action, order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination appealed from and, to that end, have all
the powers of the administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken.
C. Stay of proceedings by appeal. An appeal to the Joint Land Use Board,
which requires the Board to invoke its powers as a zoning board of
adjustment, shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect to which the decision appealed from was made unless the
officer from whose action the appeal is taken certifies to the Joint Land
Use Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the
officer, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the
Superior Court upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
D. Time for decision. The Joint Land Use Board acting in the capacity as a
zoning board of adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120
days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative officer or after the submission of a complete application
for development to the Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72(b), or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the
event the developer submits separate consecutive applications,
pursuant to this chapter, the aforesaid time period shall apply to the
application for approval of the variance. The period for granting or
denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
E. Any variance from the terms of Chapter 203, Zoning, granted by the
Board of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any
structure or structures or a specified use of any premises shall expire
unless such construction, alteration or use shall have been actually
commenced on or in each and every structure permitted by said
variance within one year from the date of authorization by the Board of
§ 23-29 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-29
14:49
§ 23-30. Certification of completeness.
The designee of the Board shall examine each application to ascertain that
all required checklist items required by municipal ordinance are shown or
furnished in the application or accompanying documents or that otherwise
a waiver has been requested. If all checklist items are provided and no
waivers requested, the application shall be deemed complete and the
applicant shall be so notified. If waivers are requested as to any items,
the Board shall, at its next ensuing regular or special meeting held not
later than 45 days from the date of submission of such application, decide
whether to grant or deny the waiver or waivers requested and applicant
shall be notified promptly. In the event that the designee of the Board does
not certify the application to be complete within 45 days of the date of its
submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration
of the forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the applicable
time period, unless: (a) the application lacks information required on the
checklist; and (b) the Board designee has notified the applicant, in writing,
of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of submission of the
application.
Adjustment and is diligently pursued to completion; except, however,
that the running of this period shall be tolled from the date of filing
an appeal from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to a court of
competent jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such
appeal or proceeding; provided, however, that if any variance is granted
as part of a site plan or subdivision approval, the expiration of the
variance shall occur upon the expiration of the site plan or subdivision
approval.
F. Any appeal of the granting of a use variance pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17(d) may be taken to the Township Committee,
provided that such appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of
publication of such final decision of the Joint Land Use Board.
§ 23-29 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-30
14:50
ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 23-31. Definitions.
§ 23-32. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved in accordance with
the procedures and provisions set forth in this chapter. Any appeals arising
out of any such decisions shall be governed by the provisions of this code.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meaning
indicated:
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as
specified by ordinances and the rules and regulations of the Board
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval
of the application for development, including, where applicable, but
not limited to, a site plan, general development plan or subdivision
plat, provided that the Board may require such additional information
as specified in the ordinance or any revision in the accompanying
documents as is reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as
to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the application
have been met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack
of any such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents so required by the Board. An application shall be certified as
complete immediately upon meeting all of the requirements specified in
the ordinance and in the rules and regulations of the municipal agency
and shall be deemed complete as of the day it is so certified by the
administrative officer for purposes of the commencement of the time
period for action by the Board.
B. Whenever a term, word or phrase is used in this chapter and is defined
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or in Chapter 203, Zoning, such term, word
or phrase is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition of
such term, word or phrase as found in said statute, or in this chapter,
unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed from the context of this
chapter.
§ 23-31 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-32
14:51

ARTICLE VII
Traffic Impact Study Reports
§ 23-33. Reports required.
§ 23-34. Contents.
The contents of a traffic impact study report shall be as follows:
A. All applications for the Joint Land Use Board review and approval of
development under this Code (other than minor subdivisions) shall
contain a traffic impact statement in the form required by this article,
unless the statement is specifically waived by the Joint Land Use Board.
B. In addition, a traffic impact statement may be required for a Joint Land
Use Board application depending on the type and size of the
application. Such a determination will be made by either the Board's
traffic consultant or the Joint Land Use Board.
A. A full documentation of existing conditions on adjacent streets
providing direct site ingress/egress, including roadway pavement
width, rights-of-way, parking conditions, pavement conditions, sight
distances, grades and alignment of the roadway(s). Existing traffic
control devices (traffic signals, speed limits, etc.) shall be described, as
well as any pertinent signage or pavement markings. Existing traffic
volumes for peak-hour conditions shall be presented, with the source of
these data denoted.
B. Projections of traffic to be generated by the proposed development for
an average, daily, morning peak hour(s), an average daily, afternoon
peak-hour(s) and any other peak-hour traffic condition deemed
applicable as a result of the type and/or location of the proposed
generator. Traffic generation rates should be based upon the latest
edition of the ITE Trip Generation Handbook or upon local indices
which can be substantiated by supporting documentation. Also, a trip
distribution relating to the site traffic and the assignment of the site
traffic to the adjacent street system shall be provided. The resultant trip
distribution/site traffic assignment shall be fully documented. Any
assumptions regarding the diversion of existing traffic to or from
alternate routes should be clearly specified in the statement.
C. An assessment of the traffic impact of the proposed development,
including a capacity study of each site-impacted intersection or
roadway segment. These capacity studies shall be done for existing
conditions, site predevelopment conditions and site build-out
conditions. The site build-out analysis shall be based on traffic volumes
projected forward to the anticipated build-out year with adjustments for
area-wide growth and seasonal traffic flow variations. Capacity
determinations shall be based upon normally accepted standards and
documentation, with the basis of these capacity analyses clearly
indicated and provided as documentation. In the event the project is
§ 23-33 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-34
14:53
§ 23-35. Approval of reports.
The Board shall approve a traffic impact study report, only if the Board finds
and determines that:
§ 23-36. Submission of reports; revisions.
The number of copies of the traffic impact study and all related
documentation to be submitted to the Joint Land Use Board shall be in
accordance with the checklist adopted by ordinance and utilized within
the Joint Land Use Office. Any alteration or amendment to the application
which would substantially alter specific land uses; site acreage, building
floor area, highway access design or any other feature which would cause a
significant change in the traffic generation rates, patterns or overall impact
shall require the submission of a revised traffic impact study report. In
situations where state or county highways are adjacent to or potentially
impacted by the proposed project, a copy of the report shall be provided
to the Commissioner of Transportation, New Jersey Department of
Transportation, for state highways and the County of Gloucester for county
highways.
§ 23-37. Waivers.
The Board may waive the requirement for a traffic impact study report
totally or partially if sufficient evidence is submitted to the Board to indicate
that the proposed project will have a negligible traffic impact or that a
complete report need not be prepared and submitted in order to evaluate
staged over a period of time, traffic volume projections for each stage,
with corresponding capacity analysis, shall be provided and
documented.
D. A site's traffic volume contribution to the overall background traffic at
each site-impacted intersection and/or roadway segment shall be
determined.
E. A determination of any roadway/intersection deficiencies for existing
and/or future conditions. Specific recommendations for the resolution
of these deficiencies shall also be addressed in the statement. The
statement shall contain a listing of any and all actions to be undertaken
by the applicant to mitigate and traffic problems and, as such, shall be
considered a firm offer by the applicant to undertake said actions,
subject to approval by the Joint Land Use Board. The responsibility for
the traffic mitigation measures will be based on a developer's fair share
of the improvements.
A. The report meets the requirements outlined herein.
B. The applicant has provided sufficient commitments, which shall become
conditions of approval, to ensure that traffic problems will be
minimized.
§ 23-34 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-37
14:54
adequately the specific traffic impact engendered by the development
application. The burden of demonstrating exceptions hereinabove stated
shall at all times rest with the applicant, who must affirmatively
demonstrate to the Board the basis for the waiver request.
§ 23-37 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-37
14:55
Chapter 29
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 14. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
§ 23-37 WOOLWICH CODE § 23-37
14:56
ARTICLE I
Deputy Municipal Clerk
[Adopted 9-15-1975 by Ord. No. 75-6]
§ 29-1. Creation; term of office; compensation; powers and duties.
[Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
There is hereby created the Office of Deputy Municipal Clerk. Said office
shall be filled each year by appointment, by resolution of the Township
Committee. The term for said office shall be one year, commencing on
January 1 of each year and terminating on December 31 of the same year.
The Deputy Clerk shall be paid at the rate as specified by the current Salary
Ordinance of this Township until further specified by amendment to this
article or by amendment to the Salary Ordinance of this Township. During
the absence or disability of the Municipal Clerk, the Deputy Municipal Clerk
shall have all the powers of the Municipal Clerk and shall perform the
functions and duties of such office.
§ 29-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-1
14:57

ARTICLE II
Deputy Building Inspector
[Adopted 3-22-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4]
§ 29-2. Creation; term of office; powers and duties; compensation.
The position of Deputy Building Inspector is hereby created for the
Township of Woolwich. The term of said position shall be one year. The
position shall be filled by appointment by the Township Committee on an
annual basis. The Deputy Building Inspector is hereby authorized to enter
into and inspect any place or building for the purpose of ascertaining
whether the same is in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance
regulating the construction or materials to be used in any such place or
building. The Deputy Building Inspector shall report to and serve under
the direction of the Building Inspector. The Deputy Building Inspector
shall issue no permits. The Deputy Building Inspector shall serve without
compensation unless subsequently authorized by ordinance.
§ 29-2 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-2
14:59

ARTICLE III
Municipal Engineer
[Adopted 4-19-1976 by Ord. No. 76-5]
§ 29-3. Creation; term of office. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
There is hereby established and affirmed the position of Municipal Engineer
for the Township of Woolwich. The term of office shall be one year.
§ 29-4. Compensation.
There shall be no salary paid to the Municipal Engineer, but he shall be paid
for services actually rendered to the municipality at the prevailing rates for
said services or at a fixed fee pursuant to a special agreement made for a
particular project, but in no case shall said fee be based on a percentage of
the cost of said project.
§ 29-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-4
14:61

ARTICLE IV
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-9-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
§ 29-5. Creation.
There is hereby created, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., the
position of Chief Financial Officer within the Township of Woolwich.
§ 29-6. Appointment.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Committee from
among such persons as are qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.
§ 29-7. Compensation.
The Chief Financial Officer shall receive a salary as provided by the Salary
Ordinance of the Township of Woolwich.
§ 29-8. Powers and duties.
The Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Woolwich shall have such
powers and duties as are otherwise required by the laws of the State of New
Jersey for such officers, including but not limited to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et
seq. and N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq.
§ 29-9. Appointment to other positions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the Chief Financial Officer
from holding any other position within the Township, provided that such
appointment is not prohibited by state law.
§ 29-5 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-9
14:63

ARTICLE V
Municipal Administrator5
§ 29-10. Creation of office and title.
The office of the Municipal Administrator for the Township of Woolwich is
hereby created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq.
§ 29-11. Appointment and tenure; appointment of acting
administrator.
§ 29-12. Compensation; compensation for Acting Administrator.
§ 29-13. Qualifications and residency.
A. The office of Municipal Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Township Committee.
B. The Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Township
Committee, provided that he/she may be removed at any time by a 2/3
vote on recommendation of the Mayor or any member of the Township
Committee. The resolution of removal shall become effective three
months after its adoption, unless it is given immediate effect. In that
case, the Committee shall cause to be paid to the Administrator
forthwith any unpaid balance of his/her salary and his/her salary for the
next three calendar months following the adoption of the resolution.
C. During the absence or disability of the Administrator, the Mayor shall
appoint an Acting Administrator to perform said duties.
D. On removal or resignation of the Administrator, the Mayor shall appoint
an Acting Administrator to serve for 90 days or until an Administrator is
appointed pursuant to Subsection A above, whichever is sooner.
A. The Administrator shall be paid a salary fixed and adopted by the
Township Committee in the annual Salary Ordinance.6
B. Unless otherwise provided, no Acting Administrator shall be paid more
than his regular salary while serving in that capacity, but he shall be
reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
his office. If the Committee, by resolution, increases the compensation
of the Acting Administrator during his/her tenure, such increased
compensation shall not exceed the minimum salary provided in the
Salary Ordinance for the position of Administrator.
A. The Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications. Previous responsible, successful
experience in local government and possession of a bachelors degree in
5. Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Administrator, adopted 2-9-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2, as
amended 1-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-1, was repealed 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 00-3.
6. Editor's Note: Said ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 29-10 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-13
14:65
§ 29-14. Duties and responsibilities.
public administration, business administration or municipal
management shall be preferred.
B. The Administrator need not be a resident of the Township or state at the
time of his appointment, but may thereafter reside outside of the
Township only with the approval of the Township Committee.
A. The Township Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of
the Township, responsible to the Mayor and Committee for the
administration of all Township affairs and with the following powers
and duties. He/she shall:
(1) Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices
and agencies of the Township, except as otherwise provided by law.
(2) Recommend to the Mayor and/or Township Committee
appointments and, when necessary for the good of the service,
suspension or removal of department heads and all other
employees, except the Clerk, the Attorney and personnel appointed
by them.
(3) Develop and administer a comprehensive personnel program when
approved by the Township Committee.
(4) Attend all meetings of the Township Committee with the right to
take part in discussion, but not to vote.
(5) See that all laws and all acts of the Township Committee subject to
enforcement by him or by officers and employees subject to his
direction and supervision are faithfully executed.
(6) Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the
Committee.
(7) Submit to the Mayor and Township Committee and make available
to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the Township as of the end of each fiscal year.
(8) Make sure other reports as the Mayor and/or Township Committee
may require concerning the operation of Township government.
(9) Keep the Mayor and Township Committee fully advised as to the
current financial condition and future needs of the Township and
make recommendations to them concerning the affairs of the
Township as he/she deems desirable.
(10) Perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and
Township Committee.
B. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Mayor and the Township
Committee shall deal with the administrative staff only through the
§ 29-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 29-14
14:66
Administrator and shall not give orders or directions to any Township
employee except through him/her.
§ 29-14 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-14
14:67

ARTICLE VI
Department of Municipal Services
[Adopted 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-027]
§ 29-15. Department established.
There is hereby established the Department of Municipal Services.
§ 29-16. Director of Municipal Services.
There is hereby established the position of "Director of Municipal Services"
whose duties are set forth herein. Compensation for the position of
"Director of Municipal Services" shall be set annually in the Woolwich
Township Salary Ordinance.
§ 29-17. Department of Municipal Services Functions.
§ 29-17.1. Duties and responsibilities of Director of Municipal
Services.
The Director of Municipal Services shall have the following duties and
responsibilities, which shall include related duties necessary to administer
the Department not expressly stated herein:
A. The Department of Municipal Services shall encompass administrative
duties in planning and organizing the programs and activities of a
comprehensive public works department, and the Director shall be
considered the Department Head of the Department of Public Works.
B. The Department of Municipal Services shall receive all applications for
zoning permits, and its Director shall issue or deny permits. The
Director shall examine the working plans of proposed buildings for
compliance with state, county, and local zoning laws, ordinances, rules,
and regulations and conduct field work to ensure compliance with
zoning regulations.
C. The Department of Municipal Services shall be the Department
responsible to develop, implement and coordinate the trash and
recycling program of the Township, file all necessary related reports
with the proper person or agency, make recommendations as to the
potential improvement of service, work closely with the Certified
Financial Officer to develop the annual solid waste/recycling budget,
file monthly reports with the solid waste/recycling coordinator liaison of
the Woolwich Township Committee, and communicate with residents
and haulers to respond to resident questions and concerns and other
related duties as required.
A. Act as the overall Department Head of the Department of Public Works.
7. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Solid Waste and Recycling
Program Coordinator, adopted 5-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13.
§ 29-15 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-17.1
14:69
B. Assist the Township Administrator in any and all disciplinary actions of
public works employees.
C. Conduct annual performance evaluation of the Public Works
Superintendent.
D. Execute and plan for the effective utilization of available funds,
personnel, equipment, materials, and supplies.
E. Prepare the operating and capital budgets in conjunction with the
Public Works Superintendent.
F. Assist with the preparation of specifications for department bids.
G. Establish and maintain cooperative working relationships with
contracting, engineering, and state agencies.
H. Prepare reports for the county interlocal salt shed usage.
I. Research, evaluate, and plan for the long-term needs of the Public
Works Department.
J. Develop suitable work programs for the varied functions of the
department.
K. Establish and supervise the maintenance of essential records and files.
L. Prepare plans and specifications or assist in same for work performed
by private contractors and follow through on public works projects
undertaken by private contractors to ensure that such work is
completed properly and in compliance with terms of contract.
M. Communicate to the Township Committee liaison and Township
Administrator the activities and needs of the Department on a monthly
basis.
N. Prepare and file annual state reports.
O. Plan, coordinate, and develop the recycling program for the efficient
collection and disposal of recyclable material.
P. Receive requests from residents for special item pickup and respond to
said requests.
Q. Prepare, oversee and conduct reporting responsibilities to NJ
Department of Environmental Protection regarding the Township's
stormwater management plan and activities.
R. Monitor, prepare and oversee all municipal services agreements in
conjunction with the Township Administrator.
S. Receive and review all applications for zoning permits and issue
permits or denials when applicable.
§ 29-17.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 29-17.1
14:70
§ 29-17.2. Required certifications.
The Director of Municipal Services shall hold and maintain the following
certifications:
§ 29-17.3. Public Works Superintendent.
T. Consult with property owners, developers, professionals, and
contractors on compliance issues.
U. Conduct field inspections to ensure compliance with zoning regulations,
and property maintenance requirements and initiate appropriate
enforcement actions against violators.
V. Interact with athletic leagues and the public at large related to
scheduling, field supplies, field usage, pavilion usage, lighting requests,
and tournaments to enforce Township policies.
W. Ensure compliance of park events with local, state, and federal
legislation, rules, and regulations.
X. Coordinate with the Public Works Department pertaining to park
improvements and maintenance.
Y. Administer closing the park due to inclement conditions.
A. Certified Public Works Manager (CPWM) issued by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
B. Certified Zoning Official issued by the Center for Government Services.
C. Certified Recycling Professional issued by the Center for Government
Services.
D. A candidate for this position must possess at least two of the three
required certifications when hired and must possess all three within
one year from the date of hire.
A. There is hereby established the position of Public Works
Superintendent whose duties are set forth herein. Compensation for the
position of "Public Works Superintendent" shall be set annually in the
Woolwich Township Salary Ordinance.
B. Definition. The Public Works Superintendent performs administrative
duties in planning and organizing the programs and activities of a
comprehensive public works department, oversees and supervises
Department of Public Works employees, develops working plans and
assigns same within the department, investigates and responds to
complaints, schedules employees for ice and snow removal while also
conducting snow and ice removal, inspects equipment and oversees
maintenance of same, assists in annual department budgeting, and any
other duties that may be required.
§ 29-17.1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-17.3
14:71
C. Duties and responsibilities. The job responsibilities for the Public Works
Superintendent shall include, but are not necessarily limited to the
following:
(1) Execute and plan for the effective utilization of available funds,
personnel, equipment, materials, and supplies.
(2) Plan and execute maintenance needs within the park system, road
system and municipally owned open space areas, and assign
applicable personnel to those duties.
(3) Assist the Director of Municipal Services in preparing department
budget and maintain balances each year.
(4) Assist the director in preparing annual capital improvement
budgets.
(5) Give assignments and instructions to individuals and groups and
supervise their work.
(6) Conduct annual public works employee evaluations.
(7) Communicate any and all personnel issues to the Director of
Municipal Services and make recommendations concerning
disciplinary measures, promotions, and hiring of employees.
(8) Supervise employees engaged in various job duties within the
Public Works Department.
(9) Receive after hour phone calls from county dispatch, police and
emergency services and schedule employees as needed to address
immediate needs.
(10) Implement safety programs as per insurance safety guidelines and
PEOSHA regulations and ensure that proper safety precautions are
taken by employees at all times.
(11) Operate equipment, perform maintenance, and assist in labor as
needed.
(12) Schedule employees for snow and ice removal.
(13) Operate snow and ice removal equipment during storms.
(14) Obtain, store, safeguard, and supervise use of needed equipment,
materials, and supplies.
(15)Keep and maintain essential records and files.
(16) Record pesticide and fertilizer use in the park system.
(17) Maintain necessary involvement and communication with
concession stand operations.
(18) Supervise the park ranger position.
§ 29-17.3 WOOLWICH CODE § 29-17.3
14:72
D. Requirements. The Public Works Superintendent shall have at a
minimum three years of supervisory experience in the public works or
construction field. In addition, he/she:
(1) Shall possess and maintain a current New Jersey driver's license.
(2) Shall possess or work towards obtaining a CDL license within six
months.
(3) Shall obtain and maintain certification as a certified public works
manager (CPWM) issued by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs within a reasonable period of time as decided by
the Township Administrator with the approval of Township
Committee.
§ 29-17.3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-17.3
14:73

ARTICLE VII
School Crossing Guard
[Adopted 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 02-11]
§ 29-18. Creation.
The position of Crossing Guard is hereby established in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.1 et seq. within the Township of Woolwich to allow for
the safe and efficient transportation of children walking to and from various
district schools.
§ 29-19. Duties.
To the extent proposed, Crossing Guards' duties and direction shall be
administered by the Chief of Police of the Woolwich Township Police
Department.
§ 29-20. Clothing and supplies.
The Township of Woolwich shall provide for clothing and supplies that are
necessary in order to perform such duties in a safe and efficient manner.
§ 29-21. Term.
Term of appointment shall be a one-year school term. Appointment to such
position may be revoked at any time for cause and after proper hearing
before the Chief of Police.
§ 29-22. Compensation.
Salary for such position shall be defined within the Salary Ordinance of the
Township of Woolwich.8
8. Editor's Note: Said ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 29-18 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-22
14:75

ARTICLE VIII
Director of Community Development
[Adopted 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-33]
§ 29-23. Creation of office and title.
The office of the Director of Community Development for the Township of
Woolwich is hereby created.
§ 29-24. Appointment; term; powers and duties.
A. Appointment and term of office. The office of Director of Community
Development shall be appointed by the Township Committee. The term
of said office shall be one year, commencing with January 1 of each year
or until a successor is appointed. Should the office become vacant
during any term, it shall be filled by a similar appointment, but for the
unexpired term only.
B. Powers and duties. The duties of the Director of Community
Development shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) The principal person responsible for administrative and technical
support of the Joint Land Use Board.
(2) Undertake projects in the areas of community development, land
use matters, commercial development matters and general
oversight of developer's responsibilities to the Township, and any
other matters as may be assigned from time to time by the
Township Committee and/or Administrator.
(3) Enforce the various conditions of approval imposed by the Joint
Land Use Board.
(4) Monitor, audit and review inspections on bonded improvements as
well as charges and claims against escrow for application review
and inspection.
(5) Initiate and enforce rules and regulations in relation to the
enforcement of ordinances.
(6) Initiate necessary legal action against violators of various
municipal ordinances.
(7) Prepare needed reports, establish and maintain records and files,
and assist in the promulgation of municipal ordinances.
(8) Coordinate the efforts of the Joint Land Use Board of Woolwich
Township, and in general undertake such other duties or
responsibilities as may be imposed from time to time with regard to
said Board.
(9) Coordinate the efforts put forth towards development through the
communication and coordination by and through the Land Use
§ 29-23 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-24
14:77
§ 29-25. Compensation.
The Director of Community Development shall be paid a salary fixed and
adopted by the Township Committee in the annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 29-26. Qualifications and residence.
Board, Construction Code Office, Township Engineer and
professionals.
(10) Perform any and all other duties as may be required by the
Township Committee.
A. The Director of Community Development shall be appointed on the
basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. Previous
responsible, successful experience in local government and possession
of a Bachelor's Degree shall be preferred.
B. The Director of Community Development need not be a resident of the
Township or state at the time of his appointment.
§ 29-24 WOOLWICH CODE § 29-26
14:78
ARTICLE IX
Community Safety Coordinator
[Adopted 5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
§ 29-27. Creation of office and title.
The office of the Community Safety Coordinator within the Township of
Woolwich is hereby created.
§ 29-28. Appointment; term of office; powers and duties.
A. Appointment and term of office. The office of Community Safety
Coordinator shall be appointed by the Township Committee. The term
of said office shall be one year, commencing with January 1 of each year.
Should the office become vacant during any term, it shall be filled by a
similar appointment, but for the unexpired term only, and only at the
discretion of the Woolwich Township Committee.
B. Powers and duties. The duties of the Community Safety Coordinator
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) The principal person responsible for the coordination of public
safety within the Township.
(2) Undertake projects, research, development and implementation of
programs to educate the residential and commercial public in the
areas of safety, including, but not limited to, the protection of
personal property and belongings, prevention of identity theft,
planning and instruction on the prevention of crime and crime
awareness and reporting procedures.
(3) Coordinate the efforts of all emergency service providers serving
within the Township, including but not limited to police, fire,
emergency management, and EMS services.
(4) Confer with, monitor and assist the Emergency Management
Coordinator in developing and implementing plans for emergency
response, procedures, evacuations, Homeland Security measures,
etc. And develop and promote programs of public awareness in this
regard.
(5) Evaluate public facilities for safety and crime prevention.
(6) Evaluate commercial properties for safety and crime prevention,
and meet with commercial business owners and employees to
develop and effectuate emergency plans.
(7) Prepare, as needed, reports; establish and maintain records and
files.
(8) Perform any and all other duties as may be required by the
Township Committee and/or Administrator.
§ 29-27 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-29
14:79
§ 29-29. Compensation.
The Community Safety Coordinator shall be paid a salary fixed and adopted
by the Township Committee in the annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 29-30. Qualifications.
A. The Community Safety Coordinator shall be appointed on the basis of
his executive qualifications, general qualifications and knowledge of
safety-related issues.
B. The Community Safety Coordinator may be an employee of the
Township serving in a different, but related, capacity and, by
appointment, directed to serve in dual capacities.
§ 29-29 WOOLWICH CODE § 29-30
14:80
ARTICLE X
Park Ranger
[Adopted 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
§ 29-31. Creation.
There is hereby established the part-time position of Park Ranger who shall
serve no specified term.
§ 29-32. Compensation.
Compensation for the position of Park Ranger is hereby set at a rate of $10/
hour for 2011. Thereafter, a salary shall be set annually in the Woolwich
Township salary ordinance.
§ 29-33. Schedule; duties and responsibilities.
The Park Ranger shall work 15 to 20 hours per week during a schedule
to be set by the Park Director subject to the approval of the Township
Administrator. The job responsibilities shall include, but are not necessarily
limited to, general maintenance of the park, including trash pickup and
cleaning and stocking of the bathrooms, general patrol of the facilities
to provide a Township presence in the park and to deter inappropriate
behavior, and determining when to close access to the fields due to
inclement weather or unsafe conditions.
§ 29-31 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-33
14:81

ARTICLE XI
Qualified Purchasing Agent
[Adopted 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-12]
§ 29-34. Creation.
There is hereby established the part time position of Qualified Purchasing
Agent who shall serve no specific term.
§ 29-35. Compensation.
Compensation for the position of Qualified Purchasing Agent shall be set
annually within the Woolwich Township Salary Ordinance.
§ 29-36. Schedule; duties and responsibilities.
A. An individual shall be considered a qualified purchasing agent pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9b to exercise the supplemental authority as set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3 and 40A:11-4.3 or N.J.S.A. 18A:18A-3 and
18A:18A-4.3 upon meeting the criteria relevant to the individual as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9.
B. To meet the criteria of required training courses set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:11-9b(5), an applicant shall successfully complete the following
courses, provided by the Center for Government Services at Rutgers,
the State University, by the Division of Local Government Services, or,
with the approval of the director, an alternative state university or
county college:
(1) Principles of Public Purchasing I;
(2) Principles of Public Purchasing II;
(3) Principles of Public Purchasing III;
(4) Municipal Finance Administration, or either of the following
courses: Municipal Finance Administration for Municipal Clerks or
Municipal Finance Administration for Purchasing Agents; and
(5) For individuals applying for a qualified purchasing agent certificate
after June 30, 2014, Environmentally Preferable Procurement.
C. There shall be no specific hours of work for the position of Qualified
Purchasing Agent; however, said position shall require the coordination
and certification of all purchases by the Township within the confines of
the Local Public Contracts Law; and abide by the bid thresholds as
contained therein.
D. Prepare, as needed, reports; establish and maintain files.
E. Maintain renewal of state issued certification.
§ 29-34 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-36
14:83
F. Perform any and all other duties as may be required by the Woolwich
Township Committee.
§ 29-36 WOOLWICH CODE § 29-36
14:84
ARTICLE XII
Recreation Coordinator
[Adopted 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-049]
§ 29-37. Creation.
There is hereby established the part-time position of Recreation
Coordinator who shall be appointed by the Township Committee on an
annual basis.
§ 29-38. Compensation.
Compensation for the position of Recreation Coordinator shall be set
annually in the Woolwich Township Salary Ordinance.
§ 29-39. Schedule; duties and responsibilities.
A. The Recreation Coordinator shall work as many hours weekly so as to
effectuate the duties set forth herein, subject to the oversight and
approval of the Township Administrator.
B. The job responsibilities shall include, but are not necessarily limited to,
the following:
(1) Work in conjunction with the Parks and Recreation Committee to
plan and execute programs.
(2) Evaluate program effectiveness.
(3) Attend all Parks and Recreation meetings and other related inperson
meetings to effectuate the responsibilities of Recreation
Coordinator.
(4) Attend all parks and recreation events and programs in a
supporting role to the Parks and Recreation Committee assisting
them with meeting their stated objectives.
(5) Coordinate large recreation committee events with the Woolwich
Township Police Department and the Director of Municipal
Services.
(6) Ensure that all approved media pertaining to Parks and Recreation
programs and activities is distributed in a timely manner.
(7) Ensure compliance of recreation events with local, state and
federal legislation, rules and regulations.
(8) Create and present an annual budget to the Woolwich Township
Committee and Woolwich Township CFO.
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. XII, Park Director, adopted
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-24.
§ 29-37 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 29-39
14:85
(9) Manage expenses and revenues related to the Parks and
Recreation Budget.
(10) Purchase supplies for recreational activities and events.
(11) Create and distribute a Recreation Coordinator monthly report by
the 15th of each month that outlines the previous months activities,
the following months upcoming activities and a financial review
along with any unforeseen barriers to success.
(12) Fundraise, charge and collect reasonable fees from each person,
group or vendor participating in a Parks and Recreation Committee
event or program. Fundraising and the expenditure of funds for the
Parks and Recreation Committee shall be done only with the
advance authority of the Township Committee.
§ 29-39 WOOLWICH CODE § 29-39
14:86
Chapter 31
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE
§ 31-1. Creation.
There is hereby created a Joint Parks and Recreation Committee consisting
of members from the Township of Woolwich and the Borough of
Swedesboro. The Committee has long existed without legal enactment, and
its continuing purpose is to oversee the activities and property maintenance
at the parks and to render advice to the governing body as appropriate.
§ 31-2. Membership. [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
The Parks and Recreation Committee shall be made up of 14 members, with
seven appointed by the Swedesboro Borough Council, and seven appointed
by the Woolwich Township Committee in addition to up to four alternate
members with two appointed by the Swedesboro Borough Council and two
appointed by the Woolwich Township Committee. Alternate members may
fill the seats of only regular members, not in attendance, appointed from
the same Municipality/Borough. All members appointed from the Township
of Woolwich will be appointed by the Mayor. The Township and the Borough
shall each designate one representative of its governing body as a nonvoting
member of the Committee to serve as a liaison. Each member shall be a
resident of the town of the appointing governing body. No member shall
receive any compensation for his/her service. The officers of the Committee
shall be as follows: President, Vice President, Communication Coordinator
and Recording Secretary who shall annually be appointed from among the
membership by a majority vote of the members present at the first meeting
of each year. The Woolwich Township Recreation Coordinator shall be a
nonvoting member of the Parks and Recreation Committee.
§ 31-3. Member and terms; removal and filling vacancies.
A. Appointments initially will be made on staggered year terms of one,
two, and three years. Three members initially will be appointed for oneand
two-year terms. The seventh members shall be appointed for a
three-year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for the term of
three years. The initial terms for the two alternates each from Woolwich
Township and Swedesboro shall be staggered for one- and two-year
terms. Thereafter, each alternate shall be appointed for a two-year
term.
B. Members of the Committee may be removed at any time, for good
cause, by vote of the majority of the members of the governing body
which initially appointed the member. In the event of a vacancy caused
by the death, inability to serve, resignation or removal of any member,
the Mayor shall appoint another person to fill the unexpired term of
such vacancy.
§ 29-39 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 31-4
14:87
§ 31-4. Organizational meeting; election of officers.
The Committee shall conduct an annual organizational meeting within 15
days of the governing bodies' reorganization meeting, at which time the
Committee shall elect its officers.
§ 31-5. Powers and duties of Chair.
The powers and duties of the Chair shall be as follows:
§ 31-6. Powers and duties of Parks and Recreation Committee;
restrictions on concessions and privileges.
§ 31-7. Fundraising.
A. To preside over all meetings of the Parks and Recreation Committee
subject to any bylaws that may be enacted and in compliance with
Robert's Rules of Order.
B. To appoint such subcommittees as may be authorized by the Parks and
Recreation Committee to carry out the objectives and purposes of the
Committee.
A. The Parks and Recreation Committee shall have the power to organize
and oversee any form of recreational, celebratory and/or cultural
activity at the parks that will benefit the health, education and general
welfare of the residents of the Township and Borough. Such powers
shall be exercised only with the approval of the Township Committee.
B. The Parks and Recreation Committee shall have no power to acquire,
develop, regulate, improve or manage land or real property. Real
property shall be titled in the name of Woolwich Township and/or the
Borough of Swedesboro.
A. In order to provide the funds, in whole or in part, necessary to further
its activities, the Parks and Recreation Committee may use and employ
the parks, when available, for such purposes. Fundraising and the
expenditure of funds shall be done only with the advance authority of
the Township Committee.
B. The Parks and Recreation Committee may charge and collect
reasonable fees from each person, group or vendor participating in the
events conducted at the parks.
C. All money received by the Parks and Recreation Committee shall be
paid over to the Woolwich Township CFO and be kept by him/her in a
separate fund to be used only for park-related matters.
D. To the extent the Parks and Recreation Committee is to be funded from
the Municipal budgets, the Borough of Swedesboro shall provide a
contribution at a percentage as agreed to by both participants. The
Borough of Swedesboro may request the Woolwich Township CFO
§ 31-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 31-7
14:88
§ 31-8. Meetings; quorum.
Regular meetings of the Parks and Recreation Committee shall be held
on a monthly basis with a schedule to be set at the annual organizational
meeting. At all meetings a quorum shall consist of a majority of the filled
membership positions of the Parks and Recreation Committee. By way of
example, if 10 members have been appointed, then six members must be
present to conduct business.
§ 31-9. Bylaws.
Chapter 33
PERSONNEL POLICIES
provide an annual reporting of revenue generated and expenses paid
from said Parks and Recreation Fund.
A. The powers and authority of the Parks and Recreation Committee are
fully set forth herein. The Parks and Recreation Committee is
authorized to adopt a set of bylaws, which shall not be inconsistent
herewith.
B. In the event of any inconsistencies between said bylaws and these
provisions, this chapter shall control.
§ 31-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 31-9
33:89

ARTICLE I
Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual
[The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual for Township
officers and employees is on file in the Township offices and
available for inspection during regular business hours.]
PERSONNEL POLICIES § 31-9
33:91

ARTICLE II
Antinepotism Policy
[Adopted 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-04]
§ 33-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — Persons holding the position of Township
Committeeperson.
RELATIVE — Includes spouses, parents, children, siblings, grandparents/
grandchildren, in-laws to the extent of parents or children, brothers and
sisters-in-law, first cousins and aunts or uncles, nieces or nephews and steprelatives.
SUPERVISOR — Any employee of the Township having supervisory duties
and powers over another employee or employees within the respective
department of the Township.
§ 33-2. Purpose.
This policy is not for the purpose of depriving any citizen of an equal chance
for employment with the Township, but is solely intended to eliminate
the potential for preferential treatment of the relatives of governmental
personnel.
§ 33-3. Applicability.
§ 33-4. Restrictions in hiring and promoting employees.
The following restrictions shall apply in the hiring and promotions of
employees to employment positions for the Township of Woolwich.
A. The prohibitions set forth within this article shall apply solely to
employee positions for the Township of Woolwich.
B. This article shall not apply to appointments to the various boards,
committees and authorities of the Township.
C. Subject to the exception in § 33-4D contained herein, this article and
the hiring prohibitions shall be applied prospectively only from the
effective date of the enaction of this article, and shall not in any way be
construed to prohibit or make unlawful any current employment
relationship or situation or the hiring or promotion of any person
currently employed by the Township of Woolwich as of the effective date
of this article.
D. The prohibitions and restrictions contained in § 33-4A and B shall not
apply in the case of seasonal part-time employment.
§ 33-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-4
33:93
§ 33-5. Current employees.
Except as may be otherwise expressly provided for herein, this article
shall not affect the employment of any present Township employees and/
or any existing contractual obligations with employees by the Township of
Woolwich.
A. Supervision. No relative (as defined herein) shall be considered for
employment by the Township of Woolwich or hired to a position of
employment with the Township of Woolwich where that person will be
the supervisor of or be supervised by another relative who is an existing
employee within the same department.
B. Applications. Applications for employment submitted by relatives of
Township employees holding current supervisory positions (hereinafter
“supervisor”) will not be accepted for positions in the same department
of the Township in which the supervisor works or where, through
promotion, such a situation or relationship could exist.
C. Relatives of elected officials. No person who is a relative of any elected
official of the Township of Woolwich (i.e., Township Committeeperson)
shall be considered for employment as an employee of the Township.
This shall not restrict nor prohibit the continued employment of
individuals to a position or positions with the Township where a relative
of an employee is elected as a Township Committeeperson after the
date of the employee’s start of employment with the Township.
D. Promotion of existing employees. Notwithstanding the prospective
application as to the remainder of this article as applied above, no
elected official (Township Committeeperson) or supervisor may
participate in the promotion process or personnel action of any existing
employee who is a relative of such elected official or supervisor.
§ 33-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 33-5
33:94
Chapter 36
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 14. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
§ 33-5 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-5
33:95

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 2-3-1969 by Ord. No. 69-2]
§ 36-1. Creation.
A Police Department has been established and is hereby established in the
Township of Woolwich, in the County of Gloucester and State of New Jersey,
under the name of the "Police Department of the Township of Woolwich."
§ 36-2. Members; Chief of Police. [Amended 2-3-1975 by Ord. No.
75-2; 12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 82-8; 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
A. The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such
number of police officers and others that shall from time to time be
deemed necessary by the Township. The positions authorized in
addition to the Chief of Police are that of Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant,
Detective, Corporal, patrolman, probationary patrolman and special
officers. Each of the officers occupying such ranks shall report directly
to the Chief and be directly subject to his orders, and in addition, unless
otherwise directed by the Chief, shall be subject to the orders of any
superior ranking officer within the Department. The order of rank shall
be in descending order: Chief, Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant,
Detective, Corporal, patrolman, probationary patrolman and special
officer. Appointments and promotions shall be made by action of the
Township Committee after consultation with the Chief and appropriate
authority. All positions hereby created need not be filled at all times, but
only as deemed necessary by the Township Committee. [Amended
5-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-7; 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-11;
6-20-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-24; 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
B. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the appropriate authority for the efficiency
and routine day-to-day operations of the police force, and the Chief of
Police shall, pursuant to policies established by the appropriate
authority:
(1) Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the force
and its officers and personnel.
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the force.
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
(4) Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force, to be exercised under his direction
and supervision.
§ 36-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 36-2
33:97
§ 36-3. Governing body.
§ 36-4. Appointment of members.
All members of the Police Department shall be appointed by the Township
Committee.
§ 36-5. Qualifications of members. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
No person shall be appointed as a permanent officer or member of said
Department unless he is a citizen of the United States, sound in mind and
body, of good health, able to read, write and speak the English language
well and intelligently and of good moral character. He shall not have been
convicted of any indictable offense or any crime or offense involving moral
turpitude. He shall meet the age requirements and other requirements as
established by the statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 36-6. Probationary period. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
Each appointee shall serve a probationary period of six months and shall
be designated as a probationary officer and shall not be considered a
permanent officer of the Police Department during the term of his
probation. Upon satisfactory performance of his duties as a probationary
officer for a period of six months, he may be appointed to the position
of police officer by the Committee upon the recommendation of the
(5) Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by the appropriate authority on the operation of
the force during the preceding month and make such other reports
as may be requested by the appropriate authority.
C. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the Chief of Police and all
members of the Police Department shall, at all times, be subject to and
shall obey and carry out all special emergency directives issued by the
appropriate authority under his power and duty to provide for the
health, safety or welfare of the Township in an emergency situation.
A. The governing body of the Department shall be the Mayor and
Township Committee, whose decisions upon all matters affecting the
Department shall be final. The appropriate authority shall be in general
charge of the Department. The Chief of Police will be held responsible
for the discipline of and for the due performance of duty by all members
of the Department. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6;
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-19]
B. The governing body of the Township of Woolwich, consisting of the
Mayor and Township Committee, be and are hereby appointed as the
appropriate authority, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. [Added
5-19-1998 by Ord. No. 97-18]
§ 36-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 36-6
33:98
appropriate authority. For purposes of seniority and vacation privilege, the
period of probation shall be included in determining the length of service.
§ 36-7. Special police officers; appointment.
The Township Committee shall, at the organization meeting each year, or
at any other time, appoint special police officers for a term not exceeding
such calendar year and may revoke such appointment at any time without
cause or hearing. The powers, rights and duties of such special officers
shall cease immediately at the expiration of the term for which they were
appointed or upon revocation of their appointment. Upon termination of
their appointment, such special officers shall turn in to the Chief of Police
all uniforms and equipment.
§ 36-7.1. Part-time police officers. [Added 4-4-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-02]
The position of part-time police officer is hereby established, subject to
the requirements set forth at § 36-8, § 36-9, § 36-10, and § 36-11. The parttime
police officers shall be appointed at the annual reorganization meeting
each year, or at any other time as necessary, for a term not exceeding
such calendar year. The Township Committee may revoke such appointment
at any time without cause or hearing. The part-time police officers may
serve up to 30 hours/week. They shall be entitled to no benefits, and the
appointment shall not constitute a promise of future employment. The parttime
police officers shall be entitled to an appropriate contribution under
DCRP.
§ 36-8. Special police officers; restrictions and entitlements.
Such special officers shall not be members of the Police Department or
entitled to any rights or privileges of a member of the Police Department,
but when assigned to duty, shall have the same power and authority as a
member of the Police Department and shall be covered at all such times
by insurance of the same nature and amount as a regular member of said
Department.
§ 36-9. Special police officers; qualifications.
Such special officers shall possess the same qualifications as to citizenship
and residence as a member of the Police Department and shall be under the
direction of and subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
§ 36-10. Members to take oath.
Every member of the Police Department and every special police officer,
before entering upon the performance of his duties, shall take and subscribe
an oath or affirmation to bear true faith and allegiance to the government
established in this state under the authority of the people, to support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of New
§ 36-6 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 36-10
33:99
Jersey and to faithfully and justly discharge and perform all the duties of his
office, which oath or affirmation shall be filed with the Township Clerk.
§ 36-11. Compensation.10
The compensation of the members of the Police Department and special
police officers shall be fixed by the Salary Ordinance of the Township
Committee.
§ 36-12. Powers and duties of Township Committee.
The Township Committee is hereby empowered from time to time to make
and establish, amend or repeal, by resolution or ordinance, such rules
and regulations not inconsistent with the laws of the Township for the
government and control of the members of the Police Department as may
be deemed expedient and proper to carry out the objects of this article
and with the view to making the Police Department, and all the officers
and members thereof, efficient, vigilant, prompt and useful to the Township;
such rules and regulations may prescribe the duties of the Chief of Police
and all other officers more specifically than is herein contained and may
prescribe such penalties not inconsistent with law as may be deemed
necessary and expedient for proper regulation of the Police Department.
§ 36-13. Establishing cause for disciplinary action. [Added
11-20-1995 by Ord. No. 95-15]
No permanent member or officer of the Police Department shall be
suspended, removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for
incapacity, misconduct or disobedience of the rules and regulations for the
Woolwich Township Police Department.
§ 36-14. Procedure for disciplinary action. [Added 11-20-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-15; amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
Disciplinary action shall be taken against members of the Police
Department as authorized by statute or in accordance with the rules and
regulations for the Township of Woolwich Police Department adopted by
resolution or ordinance by the Township Committee of the Township of
Woolwich. The appropriate authority, the Chief of Police, any member of
the Township Committee or any prosecutor or special prosecutor appointed
by the Woolwich Township Committee may file a written complaint with
the Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147, setting forth charges against a permanent member
or officer of the Police Department. Said complaint shall be filed with
the Township Clerk, who will immediately forward it to the Township
Committee. A copy of said complaint shall thereafter be served upon the
member or officer so charged, together with notice of a designated hearing
thereon, which shall be held by the Township Committee of the Township
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 43, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 36-10 WOOLWICH CODE § 36-14
33:100
of Woolwich and which shall not be less than 10 nor more than 30 days
from the date of service of the complaint. On the designated date and
any continuances thereafter, the Township Committee of the Township of
Woolwich shall conduct a disciplinary hearing in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-148 and shall have authority to suspend, remove, fine or reduce in
rank any member or officer of the Police Department who may be found
guilty of the charges brought.
§ 36-14.1. Police injury on duty benefits. [Added 6-4-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-10]
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-7, police officers injured on duty who are
unable to perform their regular police duties because of such injury will
be paid a maximum of their regular rate of pay for a period of not in
excess of 52 weeks for each new and separate service-connected
sickness, injury or disability, provided that the examining physician
designated by the Township's worker's compensation insurer certifies
as to such sickness, injury, or disability. Payments made to police
officers under this section are meant to be in the nature of worker's
compensation and any disability benefits paid to police officers
hereunder will be paid over to the Township.
§ 36-14 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 36-14.1
33:101

ARTICLE II
Intermunicipal Police Assistance
[Adopted 11-22-1976 by Ord. No. 76-12]
§ 36-15. Reciprocal agreement established.
The Township of Woolwich hereby establishes a reciprocal agreement with
each and every municipality within the County of Gloucester for
intermunicipal police assistance at times of any and all emergencies. This
article shall become effective as to each and every other municipality within
the County of Gloucester at such times that said municipality has in the past
or may in the future adopt an ordinance providing for the same terms and
conditions as set forth herein.
§ 36-16. Municipal expenses.
The Township of Woolwich hereby agrees to maintain all expenses incurred
by members of its Municipal Police Department for emergency assistance
rendered within or without the boundaries of this community. The Township
of Woolwich shall make no claim for reimbursement from any municipality
for damages, injuries, wages and the like for aid rendered by the members
of its Police Department through any other community adopting an
ordinance with the same terms of this article.
§ 36-17. Intermunicipal police authority.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 et seq, the members of the Police
Department of the Township of Woolwich and any other municipality
passing an ordinance with the same terms and conditions as this article
while on duty rendering assistance to any other municipality shall have the
same powers, authority and immunities as have the members of the police
force of the municipality in which such assistance is being rendered.
§ 36-18. Chief of Police to be senior ranking officer.
At such times that an emergency may occur and intermunicipal police aid is
requested, the Chief of Police of the municipality wherein said emergency
exists shall be the senior ranking officer of all members of any Police
Department which may be rendering assistance within the confines of said
municipality.
§ 36-15 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 36-18
33:103

ARTICLE III
Chief of Police
[Adopted 3-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6]
§ 36-19. Minimum requirements.
The following requirements shall be minimum mandatory requirements for
the Chief of Police for the Township of Woolwich:
§ 36-20. Additional requirements.
In addition to the minimum requirements set forth in § 36-19 above, the
Township Committee, in assessing the qualifications of the applicant, shall
consider whether the applicant possesses the following experience and
knowledge:
A. Be a citizen of the United States of America;
B. Be a graduate of the Police Academy;
C. Possess at least a bachelor's degree, preferably in Police Administration
and/or Criminal Justice;
D. Have a record of recent, progressive experience in law enforcement
and police administration including budget formulation, scheduling,
and staffing, with a minimum of seven years relevant supervisory
experience;
E. Be of good character and reputation;
F. Be in excellent health, having normal vision (correctable) and hearing
and having no disqualifying physical or psychological limitations.
Examinations will be conducted of the final candidate(s) to assure that
the candidate is physically qualified and psychologically qualified for
the position;
G. Possess a valid New Jersey motor vehicle operator's license; and
H. Such other requirements that may be mandated by the laws of the State
of New Jersey or other applicable laws.
A. Thorough knowledge of the principles and practices of modern police
administration and police methods;
B. Thorough knowledge of the standards by which the quality of police
services is evaluated and of the use of police records and their
application to police administration and future planning;
C. Thorough knowledge of the types and uses of communication,
electronic devices, firearms and automotive equipment used in modern
police work;
§ 36-19 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 36-20
33:105
D. Thorough knowledge of the functions of federal, state and local
jurisdictions and authorities as they relate to police work;
E. The ability to plan, lay out and supervise the work of subordinates
performing varied operations connected with police activities to
develop proper training and instructional procedures for subordinates,
and to maintain a high level of discipline and morale;
F. Ability to prepare and present effective oral and written informative
material relating to activities of the Police Department;
G. Ability to provide effective leadership for and maintain harmonious
relationships in the Police Department; and
H. Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with
municipal officials, state and federal authorities, community leaders
and the general public.
§ 36-20 WOOLWICH CODE § 36-20
33:106
ARTICLE IV
Off-Duty Employment
[Adopted 11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-23]
§ 36-21. Policy.
Purpose: For the convenience of those persons and entities that need the
services of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Woolwich Township
Police Department and to authorize the outside employment of Township
police officers while off-duty, the Township hereby establishes a policy
regarding the use of said officers.
A. Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept policerelated
employment for private employers or school districts only
during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere with the
efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the
Township of Woolwich. Acceptance of such employment shall be solely
at the option of the officer. Under no circumstances shall an officer be
required, ordered or directed to accept outside employment. Rules and
standard operating procedures governing the conduct and
establishment of off-duty services shall be established by the Chief of
Police, and all such rules and regulations or special orders governing
the operation of the Police Department shall apply to members of the
Department while working off-duty assignments.
B. Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first obtain
the approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall be granted if, in
opinion of the Chief, such employment would not be inconsistent with
the efficient functioning and good reputation of the Police Department
and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the
officer or officers who are to perform the work. At the time the request
for services is made, an authorized representative of the contracting
unit shall complete the standardized request for services contract. Such
request will include but not be limited to the site location, description of
work to be performed, hours of work and duration of assignment.
§ 36-21 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 36-21
33:107
Chapter 39
RECORDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163. Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 36-21 WOOLWICH CODE § 36-21
39:108
ARTICLE I
Access to Public Records
[Adopted 8-5-2002 by Ord. No. 02-08]
§ 39-1. Public records request form.
§ 39-2. Procedures for requests.
A. The Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich hereby adopts
the Public Records Request Form, a copy of which is attached hereto
and made a part of this article by reference herein,11 and that such
Public Request Form shall be completed in its entirety and submitted in
writing by any member of the general public requesting such
government records as described within P.L. 2001, Chapter 404 N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq.
B. The Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich hereby adopts
the Police Department Request for Public Records, a copy of which is
attached hereto and made a part of this article by reference herein,12
for use by the Police Department, specifically the Police Chief who has
been designated as the Deputy Custodian of Records by Resolution
R-02-126 adopted on July 1, 2002, for matters involving requests for
police-related information and documents.
C. All distributed public request forms shall include the attachment as
included herein, advising the public of their rights under the Open
Public Records Law.13 In addition, in accordance with said law, such
public notification of the rights of the public to appeal a denial of, or
failure to provide requested information, shall be prominently posted
within the Municipal Building.
A. These forms must be completed and remitted to the proper custodian of
records at which time such custodian shall determine the validity of
such request, when such information shall be ready and the estimated
cost for copies of such documents. In addition, the requestor may be
responsible for providing a deposit of 1/2 of the estimated cost of such
documents at the time such request is made. The requestor shall be
provided a copy of the completed Public Record Request Form at the
time such request is received, reviewed and completed by the proper
custodian of records.
B. If received by someone other than the official custodian of records, all
public record request forms shall be initialed by the person receiving
such request, stamped with the date received and the time of such
receipt also noted on the form, and remitted to the proper custodian of
records at the earliest possible time. The custodian of records shall also
11.Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the Township offices.
12.Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the Township offices.
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 39-1 RECORDS § 39-2
39:109
§ 39-3. Fees.
note the date and time received by him/her. In accordance with such
law, access to or denial of access to a government record shall be
determined and made available within seven business days after receipt
of such request by the proper custodian of records.
A. Whenever the nature, format, matter of collation or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined or copied pursuant to the Open Public Records
Law is such that the record cannot be reproduced by ordinary
document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or involves an
extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the
request, the public agency may charge, in addition to the actual cost of
duplicating the record, a special charge that shall be reasonable and
shall be based upon the actual direct cost of providing the copy or
copies or service as well as reasonable administrative fees. Such fees
shall be determined prior to providing such copy or copies and the
requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to the charge
prior to it being incurred.
B. Rates.
(1) The duplication of any copies of normal governmental documents
shall be charged at the statutory rate as follows:
Pages Fee
(each)
1 to 10 $0.75
11 to 20 $0.50
21 and over $0.25
(2) The following exceptions to the above shall apply in terms of cost:
[Amended 8-2-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13]
Document Type Fee
(per copy)
List of property owners within
200 feet
$10.00
Municipal and tax lien searches $10.00
C. Under special circumstances, all other provisions relative to costs and
fees not detailed within this article shall be administered as detailed
within N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 39-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 39-3
39:110
Chapter 40
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 33. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
§ 39-3 RECORDS § 39-3
39:111

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 8-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-16]
§ 40-1. Positions eligible for participation. [Amended 6-6-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-05; 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 40-2. Positions exempt from participation.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 40-3. Implementation and construal.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
A. Municipal Administrator.
B. Court Administrator, Zoning Officer, Recreation Coordinator.
C. Township Solicitor.
D. Township Engineer.
E. Township Prosecutor.
F. Municipal Court Judge.
G. Members of Township Committee.
A. Tax Collector.
B. Chief Financial Officer.
C. Construction Code Official.
D. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
E. Tax Assessor.
F. Municipal Planner.
G. Registered Municipal Clerk.
H. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
I. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 40-1 RECORDS § 40-3
39:113
Chapter 43
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 29.
§ 43-1. Payroll voucher.
The Chief Financial Officer of the township shall present to the Township
Committee for its approval at each regular meeting a voucher drawn to the
order of the Woolwich Township Payroll Account in an amount sufficient to
pay the salaries of all officers and employees who are paid semimonthly
which fall due prior to the next regular meeting of the Township Committee.
§ 43-2. Designation of payroll account.
At the first meeting of the Township Committee in January of each year,
or as soon as possible thereafter, there shall be established by resolution
an account to be designated the "Woolwich Township Payroll Account,"
and from time to time the Chief Financial Officer, upon the receipt of an
approved voucher as specified in § 43-1 hereof for the amount due such
payroll account, shall deposit such amount to the credit of the Woolwich
Township Payroll Account, charging the appropriate budgetary accounts
therewith.
§ 43-3. Withdrawals from Payroll Account.
The Chief Financial Officer shall thereafter draw checks on said Payroll
Account to pay the salaries of officers and employees of the township who
are paid on a semimonthly basis when their salary installments become due.
§ 43-4. Submission of payroll report.
At each regular meeting of the Township Committee, the Chief Financial
Officer shall submit for approval or ratification, as the case may be, a
payroll report setting forth the amounts paid in salaries and compensation
to officers and employees who are paid on a semimonthly basis, for the
period between the preceding regular meeting and the meeting at which the
report is submitted. This payroll report shall be considered by the governing
body and approved if found to be correct.
§ 43-5. Errors or adjustments.
In the case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Chief Financial Officer
shall correct the error or make the adjustment and shall include the
correction or adjustment in her payroll report.
§ 40-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 43-6
43:114
§ 43-6. Overtime or other extra compensation.
Payment of overtime or other extra compensation to the officers and
employees who are paid semimonthly shall be made through the direct
submission of vouchers to the Township Committee by the individual
employee making such claim after such overtime pay or extra payment has
been earned.
Chapter 46
TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM
§ 46-1. Tuition credit for eligible volunteer members.
The Township of Woolwich shall allow tuition credit for eligible volunteer
members, spouses and dependent children according to the terms and
provisions of N.J.S.A. 18A:71-78.11 to 18A:71-78.4.
§ 46-2. Minimum term of service.
Prior to receiving approval for said tuition credit, volunteers must first
agree to serve for a minimum of four years and must sign an agreement
stating such with Woolwich Township.
§ 46-3. Active membership required; proof.
Volunteer members must be considered active members in good standing
of the Volunteer Fire Department or Rescue Squad, and proof to that effect
shall be filed with Woolwich Township by the Chief of the Woolwich Fire
Company/Rescue Squad.
§ 46-4. Issuance of letter of eligibility.
Upon receipt of the above stated agreement and reference, a letter of
eligibility is to be issued to the volunteer by the Woolwich Township Clerk
to be presented to the appropriate institution.
§ 46-5. Verification provided to institution; transcript to be filed;
minimum grade.
All volunteers taking advantage of the tuition credit program must provide
verification to the institution of enrollment that the volunteer has performed
the service required for the tuition credit. Upon completion of each
semester, the volunteer shall submit a transcript to Woolwich Township to
be maintained in a permanent record and shall have maintained a "C" grade
average in order to continue eligibility for the tuition program.
§ 43-6 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 46-6
46:115
§ 46-6. Township not to incur costs.
If at any time the above-stated law shall change whereas a cost shall
be incurred to the Township of Woolwich for the implementation of this
program, this chapter shall then be repealed.
Chapter 48
VOLUNTEER SERVICE APPLICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agricultural Advisory Committee — See Ch. 2.
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 4.
Business Development Advisory
Committee — See Ch. 5.
Conservation Design Ordinance
Committee — See Ch. 10.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 177, Art.
II.
§ 48-1. Title.
There is hereby created a new chapter within the general ordinances of
the Township of Woolwich to be known as Chapter 48, "Volunteer Service
Application Procedure."
§ 48-2. Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide residents of the Township of
Woolwich with information concerning the various vacancies for appointed
municipal boards, commissions, and/or committees, which exist within the
Township. The chapter further provides for a procedure whereby a citizen
can indicate his/her desire to serve on a particular board, commission, and/
or committee. Additionally, the chapter provides for a notification process
so that those citizens who have indicated a desire to hold a position will
be notified when a vacancy occurs on any board, commission, and/or
committee. Finally, this chapter is not intended to apply to a vacancy in
the governing body/Township Committee as the state election laws remain
in full force with regard to a vacancy of an unexpired term of an elected
official.
§ 48-3. Definitions.
The following terms as used in this chapter shall have the meanings set
forth below unless the context within which the term is used clearly
provides for a different meaning:
APPOINTED MUNICIPAL BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND/OR
COMMITTEES — Any and all appointment(s) to a board, commission, and/
or committee within the Township of Woolwich, which is created either by
statutory law or by ordinance or resolution. Examples of such positions
§ 46-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 48-3
46:116
include but are not limited to Joint Land Use Board, Environmental
Commission, Recreation Advisory Committee, or any board, commission,
and/or committee of the Township of Woolwich.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The official or body, which by virtue of
statutory law or by ordinance or resolution is given the authority to appoint
a person to hold a particular position on any board, commission, and/or
committee in the Township of Woolwich.
VACANCY — Any open, unfilled, or unoccupied position within the
Township's appointed municipal boards, commissions, and/or committees,
specifically those positions wherein there is a vacancy to an unexpired term
for said appointment.
§ 48-4. Registry of appointed municipal positions.
The Township Clerk shall be responsible for maintaining a register of all
boards, commissions, and/or committees. Such register shall be made
available on the Township website and at the Municipal Building and shall
set forth at least the following:
§ 48-5. Maintenance of list of vacancies.
The Township Clerk, once notified in writing of a resignation and such
resignation has been accepted by the appointing authority, shall maintain a
current updated listing of all existing vacancies for each appointed board,
commission, and/or committee within the Township of Woolwich. Such list
shall be made available at the Township Clerk's office as well as the
Township website and in the Municipal Building.
§ 48-6. Filling vacancies.
Unless essential for the proper functioning and/or carrying on of business
of the local agency upon which the vacancy has occurred and there are no
named alternates for said board, commission and/or committee, a vacancy
shall not be filled for a period of 30 days from its posting in order to allow
interested persons time to submit applications as provided in § 48-7.
A. Title and purpose of each board, commission, and/or committee;
B. Brief description of each position, powers and duties;
C. The length of term for the position;
D. The name of the person currently holding the position, the expiration
date of his or her term, and the number of vacant seats on the
applicable board, commission, and/or committee;
E. The dates/times and frequency of any meetings which the holder of the
position must attend can also be found on the Township website;
F. The appointing authority for each board, commission, and/or committee
who confirms each appointment.
§ 48-3 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 48-7
46:117
§ 48-7. Application for citizen service.
The Township Clerk shall maintain an application form to be completed by
any person interested in serving on a board, commission, and/or committee.
Such application form shall, at a minimum, include:
§ 48-8. Applications as public records.
An application for citizen service for any board, commission, and/or
committee filed with the Township Clerk shall be a public record. Telephone
and e-mail addresses shall be kept confidential.
§ 48-9. Filing applications.
Any person interested in serving on any board, commission, and/or
committee in the Township of Woolwich may file an application for such
position with the Township Clerk. Such application(s) may be filed at any
time, whether or not there exist any vacancies on the board, commission,
and/or committee. A person may withdraw his or her application at any
time.
§ 48-10. Maintaining applications.
The Township Clerk shall maintain all filed applications for a period of two
calendar years. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to inform the
Township Clerk of any changes to his application, such as telephone number
and/or e-mail address.
§ 48-11. Filling voluntary municipal positions.
Prior to filling a position on any board, commission, and/or committee, the
appropriate appointing authority shall review each application filed for that
position. Each person having submitted an application for an appointment
on any board, commission, and/or committee position under consideration
to be filled shall be notified of said vacancy by the appointing authority.
The appointing authority shall conduct such review, investigation and/or
interviews, as the appointing authority deems necessary or advisable, in
its discretion. After a decision is reached to fill a vacancy of a board,
A. Name.
B. Address.
C. Telephone number.
D. E-mail address.
E. Township board, commission, and/or committee being sought.
F. Qualifications and/or experience.
G. Signature.
§ 48-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 48-11
46:118
commission, and/or committee, all those who have submitted an application
for that position shall be notified of the said decision.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 53
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 53-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations concerning the
operation and maintenance of certain alarm systems within the Township of
Woolwich and to provide penalties upon conviction for violations of any of
the provisions set forth herein.
§ 53-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as
follows:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device which is
designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building,
structure or facility or for alerting others about the commission of an
unlawful act in a building, structure or facility or for alerting others about
the existence of any other condition requiring response of police, fire or
ambulance personnel.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm where an emergency does not
exist or an alarm activated by inadvertence, negligence or an unintentional
or intentional act of someone other than an intruder, and shall include
alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm, device, alarm system or its
related equipment. The term "false alarm" shall not include alarms created
by malfunctioning of the Police Department alarm console or other Police
Department equipment or activations caused by public utility interruptions,
where such interruptions have been reported to the police, or activations
caused by natural disaster or activations caused by testing or repair of any
alarm system or device.
FIRE OR AMBULANCE PERSONNEL — Any one or more units of the
Woolwich Volunteer Fire Companies.[Amended 6-3-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-07]
POLICE — Woolwich Police Department.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Woolwich, County of Gloucester and State of
New Jersey.
§ 53-3. Responsibilities of persons maintaining alarm systems;
enforcement.
§ 48-11 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 53-3
46:119
§ 53-4. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be the responsibility of all persons, entities, firms, corporations
or other groups that maintain alarm systems within the township to
provide current information to the police, consisting of the names and
telephone numbers of responsible persons who may be contacted in
case of emergency or who are authorized to provide services to the
alarm systems. This information is to be filed with the Woolwich Police
Department when the alarm system is initially placed into service and
must be revised immediately whenever changes are necessary.
Likewise, it shall be the responsibility of all persons, entities, firms,
corporations or other groups that maintain alarm systems within the
township to provide current information to the Bureau of Fire Safety of
the Township of Woolwich, which includes the names and telephone
numbers of responsible persons who may be contacted in the case of
emergency or who are authorized to provide services to the alarm
systems.
B. It shall be a violation of this section for each occasion when the police,
fire or ambulance are required to respond to a false alarm as defined
herein.
C. It shall be the responsibility of all persons, entities, firms, corporations
or other groups that maintain alarm systems within the township to
prevent the transmission of false alarms through a program of training
and periodic inspection and maintenance of their respective alarm
system.
D. This chapter may be enforced by the Police Department of the Township
of Woolwich and/or the Fire Official of the Township of Woolwich.
A. For any false alarm, the following penalties shall be applied, whether by
the Woolwich Township Police Department (burglary/emergency) or the
Gloucester County Fire Marshall's Office (fire). [Amended 6-3-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-07]
(1) On the third false alarm in any given calendar year, a warning shall
be issued by the Fire Official (fire) or Police Department (burglary/
emergency) through a letter or electronic notification process to
the owner and/or tenant of the premises on which the false alarm
was sounded.
(2) For the fourth false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine of $50
shall be paid to the Township of Woolwich.
(3) For a fifth false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine of $100 shall
be paid to the Township of Woolwich.
B. Any person, entity, firm, corporation or other group that is found guilty
of violating any of the other provisions of this chapter or guilty of a sixth
or more false alarms in the same calendar year shall be subject to a fine
§ 53-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 53-4
46:120
§ 53-5. Exceptions.
The provision of this chapter shall not apply to the General Alerting Alarms
that may be used by fire companies, ambulance squads or civil defense
agencies to summon response of their members. The provisions of this
chapter further shall not apply to alarm systems that are affixed to motor
vehicles such as police, ambulance and/or fire vehicles.
§ 53-6. Applicability; registration of preexisting alarm devices.
The provisions contained herein shall apply equally to those alarm systems
that were placed in service prior to or subsequent to the effective date of
this chapter. Existing alarm owners shall have 60 days from the effective
date of this chapter to register such alarm devices with the Woolwich Police
Department in accordance with this chapter.
Chapter 56
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 135,
§ 135-1.
of not more than $1,000. This chapter shall be enforceable in the
Municipal Court of the Township of Woolwich.
§ 53-4 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 53-6
46:121

ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 6-20-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4]
§ 56-1. Licenses issued in Township. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-16]
The following alcoholic beverage licenses may be issued within the
Township of Woolwich: club license, plenary retail consumption license
and plenary retail distribution license. The number of licenses authorized
for sale within the Township of Woolwich shall be in accordance with the
population of the Township as stated within N.J.S.A. 33:1 et seq. and N.J.A.C.
13:2 et seq.
§ 56-2. Fees.
The annual fees for said licenses shall be as follows:
§ 56-3. Hours of sale; restrictions on licenses. [Amended 3-15-1999
by Ord. No. 99-6; 2-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
A. Club license: $150 per year.
B. Plenary retail consumption license: $2,000 per year.
C. Plenary retail distribution license: $2,000 per year. [Added
10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-16]
A. Plenary retail consumption license and club license.
(1) No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale of or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or permit the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the premises except
during the hours beginning at 10:00 a.m. and ending at 12:00
midnight on Sundays, and during the hours beginning at 10:00 a.m.
and ending at 2:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday, and during
the hours beginning at 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and ending at
2:00 a.m. on the following day.
(2) Club licenses permitted in this Township shall be limited to the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed
premises by the glass or other open receptacle and only to a bona
fide member of the club or bona fide guest of such member,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:2-8 and N.J.S.A. 33.1-12.5.
B. Plenary retail distribution license. No plenary retail distribution
licensee may sell spirituous liquors in original containers (package
goods) except during the hours beginning at 10:00 a.m. and ending at
9:00 p.m. on Sundays, and during the hours beginning at 9:00 a.m. and
ending at 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday.
§ 56-1 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 56-4
46:123
§ 56-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
§ 56-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 56-4
46:124
ARTICLE II
Open Containers
[Adopted 7-17-1989 by Ord. No. 89-14]
§ 56-5. Possession in public places prohibited; exception.
No person shall have in his possession any open bottle or other container
containing liquor, wine, beer or any other alcoholic beverage while on any
public highway, street, sidewalk, road, parking area or lot, playground,
park or other property owned by, belonging to or over which the Township
of Woolwich has control, or in any vehicle or any public place in the
Township of Woolwich, except those premises duly licensed for the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
§ 56-5.1. Use and possession by minors. [Added 4-1-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-03]
A. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who,
without legal authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes
any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be punished by a fine
of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense. The
Court may, in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend or
postpone for six months the driving privilege of the offender.
(1) Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the Court shall
forward a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first
and last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed by
the Court pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the
imposition of this sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period
of license postponement, including a suspension or postponement
of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence
on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six
months after the person reaches the age of 17 years.
(2) The Court shall, of any person convicted under this section who is
not a New Jersey resident, suspend or postpone, as appropriate,
the nonresident driving privilege of the person, based on the age of
the person and submit to the Division the required report. The
Court shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under
this section. Upon receipt of a report by the Court, the Division
shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of
the suspension or postponement.
B. This section does not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase or
consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 56-5 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 56-5.1
46:125
§ 56-6. Possession in vehicles.
An open bottle or open container containing liquor, beer, wine or other
alcoholic beverages in any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that the
same is in the possession of all of the occupants thereof and in violation
hereof.
§ 56-7. Permission required for public areas.
The Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich, for good cause
shown, may permit the drinking of liquor, wine, beer or any other alcoholic
beverage at public parks or in other public areas or places by a resolution
of the Township Committee, which resolution shall be preceded by a written
request of the organizations seeking such permission, addressed to the
Township Committee, and which resolution shall state the hours within
which such permission is granted and the exact location where such
permission shall be in force. The Township Committee has the right to limit
the beverage to one particular alcoholic beverage.
§ 56-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
C. This section does not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages of any
such person while actively engaged in the performance of employment
by a person who is licensed under N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. or while
actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary
arts or hotel management program at a county vocational school or
post-secondary education institute.
§ 56-5.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 56-8
46:126
Chapter 59
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals in parks — See Ch. 135. Animal fights — See Ch. 138.
§ 56-8 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 56-8
46:127

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Dogs
[Adopted 5-15-1989 by Ord. No. 89-11]
§ 59-1. License required; fee. [Amended 6-19-1989 by Ord. No.
89-13; 2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 90-2]
Every person who shall own, keep or harbor any dog or dogs of licensing
age within the limits of the Township of Woolwich shall obtain a dog license
for each such dog and shall have the same registered and numbered with
the Animal Control Officer, and for each such license shall pay the sum of
$4.80 as a license fee for each and every dog, which shall be in addition to
the tag fee and any other fees required by New Jersey Statutes.
§ 59-2. Harborer deemed owner.
Any person who shall keep or harbor any dog of licensing age, as defined
by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1, for a period of 10 days or more shall, for the purposes
of this article, be deemed to be the owner of the dog or dogs so kept and
harbored.
§ 59-3. Applications.
All applications for dog licenses shall be made to the Animal Control Officer
of the Township of Woolwich, which application shall state the breed, sex,
age, color and markings of the dog or dogs for which licenses and
registrations are sought, and whether it is a long- or short-haired variety;
also the name, street and post office of the owner and the person who shall
keep or harbor such dog.
§ 59-4. Annual licensing and registration; late fee. [Amended
2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 90-2; 4-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall, 10
days after such acquisition or age attainment, "age of attainment" is defined
as six months of age, and annually thereafter prior to March 31 of each
year, apply for and procure from the Animal Control Officer a license and
official metal registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored,
and shall place upon such dog a collar or harness with the registration
tag securely fastened thereto. There shall be an additional late charge of
$10 for any license issued after March 31 of any year unless applied for
within 10 days after acquisition of the dog or within 10 days after the dog's
attaining the licensing age, with the exception of new residents, for which a
forty-five-day extension will be granted. The forty-five-day extension begins
the first day occupancy occurs.
§ 59-1 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 59-5
46:129
§ 59-5. Guide dogs exempt from fee. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-6]
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known
as "service dogs" or dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known
as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs
hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall
not be required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 59-6. Failure to obtain license deemed violation.
Every person who shall own, keep or harbor any dog in the Township of
Woolwich and who shall neglect or refuse to cause such dog to be licensed
in the manner herein provided on or before the 31st day of March in each
year shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 59-7. Running at large.
The running at large of all dogs in the Township of Woolwich, is hereby
prohibited. "At large" shall mean any dog found off the property of the
owner. Any person or persons owning, keeping, processing or harboring any
dog or dogs in said Township of Woolwich who shall suffer or permit the
running at large in said township of any such dogs, whether licensed or
unlicensed, wearing a registration tag or without a tag, shall be guilty of a
violation of this article.
§ 59-8. Leashing.
No dog shall be permitted off the premises of the owner or the person
keeping or harboring such dog unless said dog shall be on a leash held by a
person over the age of 12 years and who shall have complete control of the
dog.
§ 59-9. Placing of registration tag on unlicensed dog.
Any person who shall cause or permit any unlicensed dog to wear a
registration tag shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 59-9.1. Definitions. [Added 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-0114]
ABANDONED ANIMAL — An animal of any age which has been left
unattended, unclaimed, unlicensed, or at large for a period of 72 hours or
more.
ALTERED or STERILIZED — Any method utilized to prevent reproduction of
a dog or cat.
ANIMAL — For the purposes of this chapter, an animal refers to a dog, cat,
or domesticated animal.
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Animals Running at Large,
adopted 3-17-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12, as amended.
§ 59-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 59-9.1
46:130
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — "Certified animal control officer" means a
person 18 years of age or older who has satisfactorily completed the course
of study approved by the Commissioner of Health and Senior Services and
the Police Training Commission as prescribed by Paragraphs (1) through (3)
of Subsection a of Section 3 of P.L. 1983, c. 525 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a); or
who has been employed in the State of New Jersey in the capacity of, and
with similar responsibilities to those required of, a certified animal control
officer pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1983, c. 525 for a period of three
years before January 17, 1987.
ANIMAL HOUSING — A structure used for housing an animal outdoors on
private property or business property.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — A multiple dwelling containing six dwelling units
or more.
AT LARGE — An unrestrained animal off the premises of the owner.
CAT — Any animal of the feline species (Felis catus).
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — An establishment for the treatment, care,
boarding, or training of dogs or cats for a fee, or a place where dogs or
cats are bred for resale or for a fee; and where the business is the primary
source of income; and where such establishment has been currently
inspected and approved for use by the Gloucester County Health
Department and any other applicable State Agencies.
DOG — Any animal of the canine species (Canis familiaris) except dingoes.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of six
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — An animal tamed and adapted to live in close
association with and to the benefit of humans.
LEASHED — Restrained by a leash no greater than six feet in length,
attached to a collar or harness of sufficient strength to restrain the animal
and which shall be held by a person having the ability to control the animal
at hand.
MUNICIPAL HUMANE LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An individual
who has been designated, and authorized by the governing body who shall
have the power and authority within the municipality in which the officer
is designated, or otherwise authorized to act, as a municipal humane law
enforcement officer to:
Enforce all animal welfare and animal cruelty laws of the state and
ordinances of the municipality;
A.
Investigate and sign complaints concerning any violation of an animal
welfare or animal cruelty law of the state or ordinance of the
municipality; and
B.
Act as an officer for the detection, apprehension, and arrest of offenders
against the animal welfare and animal cruelty laws of the state and
ordinances of the municipality;
C.
§ 59-9.1 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 59-9.1
46:131
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any animal, or any
person who has an animal in his/her custody, or any person offering or
allowing access to food, water, or shelter to an animal, or any person
exercising control over an animal or permitting, allowing or suffering an
animal to remain on premises under his/her control, or anyone who takes
an animal out into the public streets, sidewalks or public ways.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation or other entity.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to section 7 of P.L.
1989, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-23).
PROPERTY — A block and lot with an occupied dwelling unit or dwelling
units on it.
SHELTER — An establishment for the confinement of dogs or cats seized
under the provisions of this chapter.
STRAY ANIMAL — An animal having no known owner or custodian or has
no owner information or identification attached.
TETHER — To confine an animal with rope, chain, or similar material by
which an animal is fastened so that it is able to range or feed only within
certain limits.
TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL — Any Township Code Enforcement Official,
Borough/Municipality Police Department Officer, Gloucester County Animal
Control Officer, the Municipal Clerk, or any other official or person assigned
or designated by Mayor and Council.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to section 6 of P.L. 1989, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-22).
§ 59-10. Seizure, impoundment, reclaiming and destruction
procedures; fees. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
And abide by the provisions of Chapter 22 of Title 4 of the Revised
Statutes.
D.
A. The Animal Control Officer appointed for the purpose by the Township
Committee shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken
into custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed or offered for
adoption as provided in this section, any dog or cat running at large in
the Township of Woolwich. This shall include any dog or cat off the
premises of the owner or the person keeping or harboring such dog
unless said dog is restrained on a leash as hereinbefore provided.
B. The owner, if known, of any dog or cat so seized shall forthwith upon
seizure of the dog be served notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16.
C. Any owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog or cat may
claim the dog or cat upon paying all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, with a minimum payment of $35 per day for the first day of
its detention or any part of the first day, and if detained for more than
§ 59-9.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 59-10
46:132
§ 59-11. Potentially dangerous dogs. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-01]
If the municipal court declares any dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall
issue an order pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-24, and a schedule for compliance
which, in part:
one day, by paying $4 for each day thereafter the pet is in the shelter,
and by procuring the necessary license and registration tag, if the same
have not been previously obtained.
D. If the owner or person keeping or harboring the dog or cat fails to claim
the dog or cat at the end of the seven-day period, the Animal Control
Officer appointed for the purpose by the Township Committee may
cause the dog to be destroyed as humanely as possible or offered for
adoption.
A. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
(1) To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to Subsection (2) of this section;
(2) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and
bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping or digging and within a fence of at least six feet
in height separated by at least three feet from the confined area.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the
enclosure to prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude
any release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous dogs
shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the
animal control officer and having a minimum tensile strength
sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the potentially
dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than three feet
from the owner and under the direct supervision of the owner;
B. May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the municipal court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which
may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision requiring the municipality in which the owner resides to be
named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by
the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of
the liability insurance policy.
§ 59-10 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 59-11
46:133
§ 59-12. Outdoor maintenance of animals. [Amended 2-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-01]
Note: May be superseded by N.J.S.A. 4:22-17.
C. Appeal of decision. The owner of the dog, or the animal control officer
in the municipality in which the dog was impounded, may appeal any
final decision, order, or judgment, including any conditions attached
thereto, of a municipal court pursuant to P.L. 1989, c. 307 (N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 et seq.) by filing an appeal with the Superior Court, Law
Division, in accordance with the Rules Governing The Courts of the
State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from courts of limited
jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by conducting a
hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for appeals
from courts of limited jurisdiction.
A. General requirements.
(1) No person shall at any time cause or allow any dog, cat, or
domesticated animal to be kept outside on private or public
property within the Township except that:
(a) The animal shall have access to and be provided with suitable
and edible food of sufficient quantity on a daily basis and
replenished at a minimum of every 12 hours.
(b) The animal shall at all times have access to and be provided
with clean water (cool in summer and unfrozen in winter).
(c) The animal shall have access to an area to defecate or urinate
separate from the areas where it must eat, drink, or lay down.
(d) Fecal matter must be removed on a daily basis and within 24
hours of being deposited.
(e) The primary area where the animal is kept must be located
behind the principal dwelling on the property.
(f) It shall be prohibited to allow any dog, cat, or domesticated
animal to be kept outdoors at any vacant structure or premises
at any time.
B. Animal housing.
(1) No person shall keep, use, or maintain a dog, or domesticated
animal outdoors, other than a cat on any premises unless such
animal has access to housing meeting all of the following
requirements:
(a) The housing shall be provided with five weatherproof sides,
including a top, a bottom and a minimum of three sides. The
housing must have an entrance covered by a self-closing
§ 59-11 WOOLWICH CODE § 59-12
46:134
swinging door or covering or an "L" shaped entrance to
prevent the wind and elements from entering the house.
(b) The housing must be moistureproof, weathertight, and
maintained in good repair.
(c) The housing must be placed in a dry area free of debris, feces,
and standing water.
(d) The housing area shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(e) If multiple animals are present in one location, each animal
must have separate and clean housing.
C. Restraints. In addition to the housing requirements of Subsection B, no
person shall keep, use, or maintain a dog, or domesticated animal,
other than a cat, outdoors on any premises unless such an animal is
either tethered in accordance with Subsection D, or kept within a fence
in accordance with Subsection E.
D. Tethering.
(1) The fastening, chaining, tethering or other restraint system (other
than a fence) of any dog, or domesticated animal, other than a cat
must meet all of the following requirements:
(a) Any restraint system shall be situated and terminate no less
than 10 feet from any adjacent property boundary.
(b) Any restraint system must be situated and terminate no less
than five feet from any fence, pool, wall, vehicle, tree, or any
other object or obstruction upon which any animal may harm
itself.
(c) The tether is to be constructed of a secure, lightweight
material that shall not exceed 1/8 of said animals total body
weight.
(d) The animal must be provided with a properly fitting harness or
buckle type collar. Such collar attaching the tether to the
animal shall be constructed of leather, nylon, or comparable
material. Said collar shall be maintained in good condition.
Metal and choke collars are prohibited.
(e) The tether shall be at least 15 feet in length and not less than
3 1/2 times the length of the animal, whichever is longer, as
measured from the animals nose to the base of its tail.
(f) The tether shall be provided with swivels at both ends and shall
be maintained tangle free.
(g) Tethered animals must be altered or sterilized.
§ 59-12 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 59-12
46:135
§ 59-13. Nuisances; prohibited acts. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-01]
(h) The tethered animal shall have access to adequate animal
housing in accordance with Subsection B of this section.
(i) It shall be prohibited to tether any animal less than six months
of age.
(j) It shall be prohibited to tether animals to barrels, vehicles, any
object which is not stationary, or other objects which may harm
or injure the animal.
(k) The tether area must be kept clean and clear of any debris that
may harm or cause any dog or cat to become entangled.
(l) Any owner who chooses to tether a cat must comply with the
above standards.
E. Fencing.
(1) A fence for the purpose of restraining any dog, or domesticated
animal, other than a cat, must meet all of the following
requirements:
(a) The animal confined within a fence must have adequate space
for exercise and movement, which shall not be less than 100
square feet.
(b) The fencing shall be constructed and maintained as to prevent
the animal from leaving or escaping the fenced area and to
prevent other animals from entering the fenced area.
A. Habitual barking: No person shall own any dog which habitually cries
or barks in a manner which would annoy or disturb a reasonable
person. An "annoyance or disturbance," for the purpose of this section,
shall be defined as barking, howling or crying continuously for a period
of 10 minutes or more or intermittently for 30 minutes or more. A
violation of this section shall subject the owner of the offending dog to
the penalties for a violation of this chapter.
B. Damage to property prohibited. No person owning or in control of a dog
or cat shall allow it to damage any lawn, shrubbery, flowers or grounds
of any public park, public building or other public place within the
Township or upon any private property.
C. Damage or injury to other property, pets, or persons prohibited: It shall
be a violation of this chapter for an owner of a dog or cat to suffer, allow,
or permit the following prohibited acts:
(1) Bite, chase, jump upon, interfere with, or otherwise impede
pedestrian traffic or the mobility of any person on public property
or within a public sidewalk or right-of-way.
§ 59-12 WOOLWICH CODE § 59-13
46:136
§ 59-14. Quarantine of animals. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-01]
§ 59-15. Animal cruelty investigations. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-01]
Gloucester County Animal Control Officers (GCACO), or other designated
person(s) may investigate, and/or require compliance for violations
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:22. In the event that the GCACO, or designated
person(s) sees, or recognizes a potential criminal situation, or the need
arises where a criminal investigation is warranted, the GCACO shall make
(2) Chase, leap upon, interfere with, or otherwise impede the progress
of any bicyclist or other person utilizing self-powered
transportation or motor vehicle or motorized transportation on any
public or private road, public property, or within a public right-ofway.
(3) Bark, growl, or otherwise display aggressive behavior towards a
human being and place in such person a reasonable apprehension
of bodily harm or injury.
(4) To destroy or damage any structure or equipment on any public
park, public building, other public place or upon any private
property.
D. Placement of food outside a residence without a licensed pet
prohibited. No person shall place food for dogs or cats outside of their
home unless they are the owner of a licensed dog or cat and such food is
intended solely for their dog or cat.
A. Biting of person by dog or cat. When any dog or cat bites a person, the
Township Official may order the owner of the dog or cat to confine it,
either on the owner's premises, or at any other reasonable location at
the owner's sole cost and expense which the officer shall designate, for
a period of not less than 10 days.
B. Examination of confined animal. The Officer of the County Board of
Health or Animal Control Officer shall have the right to examine any
dog or cat confined under the provisions of Subsection A, herein at any
time, including daily examinations for a period of 10 days after the dog
or cat has attacked or bitten any person, to ascertain whether the
animal shows signs or symptoms of rabies.
C. Release of animals confined. Following the passage of 10 days as
required by Subsection A herein, and animal so quarantined shall be
released, but only upon the issuance of a certificate of release which
shall indicate that the animal appears to be healthy and free from
rabies. Said certificate shall be maintained by the appropriate Township
official, and a copy shall be provided to the owner and individual bitten
by the animal upon its release.
§ 59-13 TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM § 59-15
46:137
contact/report to the Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer for
further action. The GCACO may continue to contribute to the investigation
as requested or required.
§ 59-16. Enforcement. [Added 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
§ 59-17. Interference prohibited. [Added 2-4-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-01]
No person shall hinder, molest, or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 59-18. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-4-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-01]
Any person found to be in violation or found to have failed to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000; or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the county jail.
Each day of such violation or failure to comply shall constitute a separate
offense and, therefore, are not subject to merger either for the purposes of
the violation or imposition of fines and penalties.
A. The Designated Township Official shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Nothing herein shall prohibit a private citizen from bringing or
signing a complaint for an alleged violation of this chapter.
B. Compliance with requirements. Any owner of an animal within the
Township, by the act of owning such animal does thereby authorize the
Designated Township Official to enter the property where such animal
is kept to investigate any alleged or suspected violation of any provision
of this chapter, or N.J.S.A. 4:22.
§ 59-15 WOOLWICH CODE § 59-18
46:138
Chapter 65
BINGO AND RAFFLES
§ 65-1. Clerk to issue licenses.
The Township Clerk be and is hereby authorized and directed to issue bingo
and raffle licenses under the terms and conditions as follows.
§ 65-2. Investigation of applicants.
The governing body of this municipality shall make an investigation of
the qualifications and merit of each applicant. The Township Clerk is and
shall be charged with the duty and responsibility of making the initial
investigation and reporting thereon, in writing, to said governing body.
§ 65-3. License restrictions.
No license, under either licensing law, shall be:
§ 65-4. Hearings.
No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused by the
governing body until after a hearing is held on due notice to the applicant,
at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications
of the applicant and the merits of the application.
§ 65-5. License form.
Each license shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Control Commission.
§ 65-6. Control and supervision.
The governing body of this municipality shall have and exercise control and
supervision over all games of chance so licensed in accordance with said
licensing laws.
§ 65-7. Participation by minors unlawful.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to participate in
any game or games of chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any
license issued by this municipality.
A. Issued for a period of more than one year.
B. Issued for the holding, operation and conduct of any games of chance
which may be licensed under the other of said licensing laws.
§ 59-18 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 65-8
65:139
§ 65-8. Sunday games.
The governing body may permit a game or games of chance to be conducted
on a Sunday, which permission shall be indicated upon the license issued by
the municipality.
§ 65-9. Purpose and intent.
It is not the purpose or intent of this chapter to include herein all conditions,
restrictions, regulations or rules relating to the licensing and conduct of
games of chance, since the same are and will be fully covered by said Raffles
Licensing Law,15 Bingo Licensing Law,16 Legalized Games of Chance Control
Law17 and the rules and regulations of said State Control Commission, to all
of which any applicant may and should refer.
§ 65-10. Duties of Township Clerk.
The Township Clerk shall, on the behalf of the municipality:
§ 65-11. License fees for raffles.
Municipal license fees for raffles shall be:
A. File with the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission a
certified copy of this chapter within 10 days after the adoption.
B. On or before the first day of October in each year, or at any other time
or times which said Commission may determine, make report to the
Commission of the number of licenses issued in this municipality under
each of said licensing laws and the names and addresses of the
licensees, the aggregate of the license fees collected, the names and
addresses of all persons convicted of violation of each said laws or of
the rules and regulations adopted by the State Control Commission of
all persons prosecuted for such violations and the result of each such
prosecution and the penalties imposed therein during the preceding
calendar year or the period the report is required.
A. Five dollars for each day upon which a raffle is held with respect to
which all tickets or rights to participate are sold only to persons present
at the time of the drawing or allotment of prizes.
B. Five dollars for each $1,000 of the value of prizes awarded in each raffle
with respect to which tickets or rights to participate may be sold in
advance of the occasion or the drawing or allotment of prizes.
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
17.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq.
§ 65-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 65-12
65:140
§ 65-12. License fees for bingo.
Municipal license fees for bingo shall be $10 for each occasion upon which
any game or games are to be conducted under such license.
§ 65-13. Disposition of fees.
All municipal license fees imposed shall become the property of the
municipality.
§ 65-14. Unlicensed games unlawful.
No person, organization, club, company or squad shall conduct, operate,
run, participate in or attend any unlicensed raffle or bingo game in this
municipality.
§ 65-15. Violation of bingo, raffles or legalized games of chance
laws.
No person, organization, club, company or squad shall violate any of the
terms or provisions of any one or more of the following:
§ 65-16. Suspension or revocation of license.
A conviction thereunder shall also be proper grounds, in the discretion of
the governing body, to suspend or revoke the license if any has been issued
and is outstanding.
§ 65-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, organization, club, company or squad convicted of a violation
of any of these provisions shall suffer a penalty of:
Chapter 68
A. Bingo Licensing Law, L. 1954, c. 6.18
B. Raffles Licensing Law, L. 1954, c. 5.19
C. Legalized Games of Chance Control Law, L. 1954, c. 7.20
D. This chapter.
A. If a person, not more than 90 days' imprisonment or a fine of not more
than $500, or both fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the Judge
before whom such conviction is had; or
B. If an organization, club, company or squad, a fine of not more than
$500, at the discretion of the Judge before whom the conviction is had.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq.
§ 65-12 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 65-17
65:141
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 23.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Soil removal — See Ch. 153.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Topsoil — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 65-17 WOOLWICH CODE § 65-17
65:142
ARTICLE I
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 2-7-1977 by Ord. No. 77-5]
§ 68-1. Enforcing agency.
§ 68-2. Schedule of fees. [Amended 5-4-1981 by Ord. No. 81-3;
12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 85-4; 3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 89-4; 4-17-1995
by Ord. No. 95-4; 11-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-15; 2-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-7; 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed
in Subsections A through E herein, plus any special fees, and shall be paid
before the permit is issued.
A. There is hereby established in Woolwich Township a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Woolwich
Township Construction Code Department," consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and
such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. Each construction official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency. Each official shall enforce the subcode corresponding
to his title, subject to the supervision of the Construction Official.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,21 as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies, and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. The Building Subcode fees shall be as follows: [Amended 3-19-2001
by Ord. No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15; 11-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-25; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-19]
(1) Fees for new construction, including additions, shall be based upon
the volume of the structure. Volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall
be in the amount of $0.030 per cubic foot for use groups designated
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 68-1 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 68-2
65:143
as B, H, I-1, I-2, I-3, M, E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and U. Minimum fee for
additions shall be $250.
(a) For use groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1, S-2, the fee
shall be $0.025 per cubic foot.
(b) Commercial farm buildings shall be at $0.0010 per cubic foot,
with the maximum fee not to exceed $1,145 per building.
(2) Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs shall be based on the
estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be $25 per $1,000.
(a) For the purpose of estimating cost, the applicant shall submit
to the Construction Official such cost data as may be available,
produced by the architect or engineer of record, or by a
recognized estimating firm, or by record, or by the contractor.
A bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be submitted.
The Construction Official shall make the final decision
regarding estimated cost.
(b) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed in accordance with
Subsection A(1) and (2) above.
(3) Additional fees:
(a) Swimming pools.
[1] Aboveground: $100.
[2] Below-ground: $250.
(b) Satellite dishes and towers:
[1] Satellite dishes: $50.
[2] Towers: $25 per $1,000; minimum fee: $50.
(c) Modular homes: $25 per $1,000 for site work.
(4) Minimum fee: $50.
B. The Plumbing Subcode fees shall be as follows: [Amended 3-19-2001
by Ord. No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15; 11-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-25; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-19]
(1) Minimum fee: $50.
(2) For the following devices, the fee shall be as indicated:
Device Fee
Water closet, bidet, urinal $12
Bathtub $12
§ 68-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 68-2
65:144
Device Fee
Sink (any type) $12
Lavatory $12
Shower, floor drain $12
Washing machine $12
Dishwasher $12
Commercial dishwasher $12
Water heater $12
Domestic boiler, furnace $12
Hose bibb $12
Water cooler $12
Garbage disposal $12
Any other fixtures connected to
plumbing system
$12
Drinking fountain $12
Air conditioner $12
Water softener $12
Radiator $12
Urinals $12
Ranges (gas) $12
Water liner $12
Solar system $60
Underground lines
(wastewater)
$60
Underground lines (gas) $60
Rough slab $60
Aboveground lines (vacuum
and chemical)
$60
Water-cooled air-conditioning
unit
$60
Lawn sprinkler systems $60
Gas service connection $60
Sewer connection $60
Sewer pump $60
Refrigeration unit $60
Indirect connection $60
Fuel oil piping $60
Service station delivery system $60
§ 68-2 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 68-2
65:145
Device Fee
Sewer ejector $60
Gas piping, each connection $60
Gas service $60
Grease trap $60
Utility service connections $60
Interceptor/separator $60
Backflow preventor $60
Jacuzzi $60
Oil separator $60
Water connection $60
Hot-water boiler $60
Steam boiler $60
Gas-suspended heater $60
Gasoline piping $60
C. The Electrical Subcode fees shall be as follows: [Amended 3-19-2001
by Ord. No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15]
(1) Minimum fee: $50. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46;
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
(2) For from one to 50 receptacles or fixtures, the fee shall be in the
amount of $50; for each 25 receptacles or fixtures in addition to
this, the fee shall be in the amount of $15; for the purpose of
computing this fee, receptacles, switches, fluorescent fixtures,
convenience receptacles or similar fixtures and motors or devices
of less than one kilowatt or less. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
(3) For each motor or electrical device greater than one horsepower
and less than or equal to 10 horsepower, and for transformers and
generators greater than one kilowatt and less than or equal to 10
kilowatts, the fee shall be $15. [Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-19]
(4) For each motor or electrical device greater than 10 horsepower
and less than or equal to 100 horsepower; for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel less than or equal to 200 amperes;
and for all transformers and generators greater than 10 kilowatts
and less than or equal to 45 kilowatts, the fee shall be $50.
[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-19]
(5) For each motor or electrical device greater than 50 horsepower
and less than or equal to 100 horsepower; for each service panel,
§ 68-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 68-2
65:146
service entrance or subpanel greater than 200 amperes and less
than or equal to 1,000 amperes; and for transformers and
generators greater than 45 kilowatts and less than or equal to
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $75. [Amended 12-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
(6) For each motor or electrical device greater than 100 horsepower;
for each service panel, service entrance or subpanel greater than
1,000 amperes; and for each transformer or generator greater than
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $175.
(7) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors except those
plug-in appliances shall be counted, including control equipment,
generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current.
(8) For in-ground swimming pools, bonding in the amount of $85.
[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-19]
(9) For aboveground swimming pools, bonding in the amount of $85.
[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-19]
(10) For photovoltaic systems, the fee shall be based on the designated
kilowatt rating of the solar photovoltaic system as follows: [Added
11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-4322; amended 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-19]
(a) One to 50 kilowatts, the fee shall be $50.
(b) Fifty-one to 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $100.
(c) Greater than 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $500.
(11) Specific fees. Notwithstanding Subsection C(2) through (7) above,
the following fees shall apply and supersede and replace the above
fee schedule to the extent there is an overlap: [Amended
11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-25; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-46; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
Device Fee
Dishwasher $12
Garbage disposal $12
Baseboard heat units $12
Thermostats $12
Water softener $12
Drinking fountain $12
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C(10) as C(11).
§ 68-2 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 68-2
65:147
Device Fee
Clothes washer $12
Ranges $50
Ovens $50
Surface units $50
Dryer $50
Water heater $50
Air-conditioning unit $50
Intercom panel $50
Burglar alarm $50
Central heat $50
Heat pumps $50
Whirlpool/mpa $50
Exterior light standards, one to
five
$75 (each additional, $15)
D. The Fire Protection Subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) Fire protection and other hazardous equipment. Sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas- and oil-fired appliances not connected to
the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems, incinerators and
crematoriums.
(a) The fee for 20 or fewer heads or detectors shall be $50; for 21
to and including 100 heads or detectors, the fee shall be $80;
for 101 to and including 200 heads or detectors, the fee shall
be $235; for 201 to and including 400 heads or detectors, the
fee shall be $325; for 401 to and including 1,000 detectors, the
fee shall be $750; for over 1,000 heads or detectors, the fee
shall be $950. In computing fees for heads and detectors, the
number of each shall be counted separately, and two fees, one
for heads and one for detectors, shall be charged. [Amended
3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-15; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-19]
(b) Standpipes, hose cabinets, systems fees. [Amended
3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-15]
[1] The fee for each standpipe shall be $250.
[2] The fee for hose cabinet shall be $50. [Amended
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-19]
§ 68-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 68-2
65:148
[3] The fee for each independent pre-engineered system, CO
suppression system, halogen suppression system, foam
suppression system, wet chemical systems and dry
chemical systems shall be $100 per system. [Amended
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
(c) The fee for each gas or oil-fired appliance which is not
connected to the plumbing system shall be $45. [Amended
11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-25; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-46]
(d) The fee for each incinerator shall be $300.
(e) The fee for each crematorium shall be $300.
(f) Carbon dioxide systems, dry chemical and halogen JEP systems
shall be $50. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46;
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
(g) New tanks: [Amended 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-05;
6-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-46; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
Type Fee
1 to 500 gallons $50
501 to 1,000 gallons $75
Each additional 1,000 gallons
thereafter
$25
(2) Minimum fee: $50. [Amended 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-05;
6-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-46; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
E. Miscellaneous.
(1) The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $75 for a
structure of less than 5,000 square feet in area and less than 30
feet in height, for one- or two-family residences (Use Group R-3 of
the Building Subcode) and structures on farms, including
commercial farm buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), and $100 for
all other use groups. The fee for a permit for removal of
underground storage tanks shall be $75 per tank. [Amended
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-19]
(2) The fee for each carbon dioxide system shall be $85.
(3) The fee for dry chemical system (cooking) shall be $85.
(4) The fee for dry chemical system (comparable) shall be $85.
(5) The fee for a halogen JEP system shall be $85.
§ 68-2 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 68-2
65:149
(6) The fee for a permit for the removal of the building or structure
from one lot to a new location on the same lot shall be $25 per
$1,000 of the sum of the estimated costs for moving. [Amended
3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15;
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-19]
(7) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be $25 for the first
square foot of the surface area of the sign. In the case of doublefaced
signs, the area of the surface of only one side of the sign shall
be used for purposes of the fee computation. The first square foot
shall be $25 and $1 per square foot after the first square foot.
[Amended 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-15; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
(8) Minimum fee [Subsection E(1) through (7) above]: $50. [Amended
3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15;
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-19]
(9) Certificates of occupancy. The fee for certificates of occupancy
shall be as follows:
(a) The fee for certificate of occupancy granted for new
construction shall be 10% of the total construction fees,
provided the minimum shall be $45. [Amended 11-20-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-25; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46]
(b) Certificate of continued occupancy shall be $175.
(10) Certificate of approval: $45. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-46]
(11) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $100 for Class I structures and $50 for
Class II and Class III structures. The fee for resubmission of an
application for a variation shall be $100 for Class I structures and
$25 for Class II and Class III structures. [Amended 3-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15; 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-19]
(12) For cross connections and backflow preventers that are subject to
testing, requiring reinspection every three months, the fee shall be
$50 for each device when they are tested (once annually) and $100
for each device when they are broken down and tested (once
annually). [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46]
(13) Annual permit requirements shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(c)5; and ii(1) and (2).
(a) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures in Use
Groups R-3 and R-4 shall be $50 for each device.
§ 68-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 68-2
65:150
(b) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures in use
groups other than R-3 and R-4 shall be $260 for each device.
(14) The fees for elevator device inspections and tests shall be as set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.
(15) Partial permits for footings and foundations [per N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.16(g)]: R-3 shall be $25 per $1,000 estimated cost of footing
and foundation and are not credited to total construction permit.
[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-46; 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-19]
F. Surcharge fees on new construction and report.
(1) In order to provide for the training, certification and technical
support programs required by the Act,23 an enforcing agency,
including the Department when acting as the local agency, shall
collect a surcharge fee to be based upon the volume of new
construction within the municipality. Said fee shall be accounted
for and forwarded to the Bureau of Housing Inspection in the
manner herein provided.
(2) Amount. This fee shall be in the amount of $0.00334 per cubic foot
volume of new construction. Volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. All other construction
(alterations and renovations) shall be $1.70 by per $1,000 of value
of construction, with a minimum of $1. Pre-engineered systems of
commercial farm buildings are exempt from this fee. [Amended
11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-25; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-19]
(3) The municipality shall, in addition to the fees described in
Subsection F(1) above, collect the above fees as part of its usual
responsibilities.
(4) Remitting and reporting. The municipality shall remit fees to the
Bureau on a quarterly basis, in conjunction with a report number
R-840A State Training Fee Report, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.5(d). Fees remitted shall be for the quarter. Checks shall be
made payable to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey."
G. Plan review fee.
(1) The fee for plan review shall be 5% of the fee for a construction
permit and shall be paid at the time of granting the permit.
(2) Whenever a permit is received based on an approved prototype
plan, the permit fee shall be reduced by the amount of the plan
review fee.
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 68-2 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 68-2
65:151
§ 68-3. Construction Code Assistants. [Added 10-19-1981 by Ord.
No. 81-6]
Construction Code Assistants may be hired as needed by the Township
Committee. Construction Code Assistants shall serve at the pleasure of the
Township Committee, and their employment may be terminated at any time
with or without cause. Certain assistants may be needed for particular jobs
or particular short periods of time, and in such cases their employment will
be for very short durations. On the other hand, under some circumstances
certain assistants may be needed for longer periods of time. In any event,
the employment of all assistants shall automatically terminate on December
31 of the year in which appointed or reappointed. The Construction Official
or appropriate Subcode Official shall be responsible for the supervision of
any such personnel. The categories of Construction Code Assistants are as
follows:
H. Exemption. The only exemption to fees is for municipal buildings or use
of a building for municipal purposes. [Amended 3-19-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-05; 6-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15]
A. Building Inspectors. Building Inspectors are authorized to carry out
field inspection and plan review work pursuant to the regulations,
subject to the limitations specified herein:
(1) Building Inspector with a specialty in high-rise and hazardous
structures (HHS). Building Inspectors HHS are authorized to
review plans and carry out field inspection activities for structures
in Class I, II and III (as designated under the Uniform Construction
Code).
(2) Building Inspector with a specialty in industrial and commercial
structures (ICS). Building Inspectors ICS are authorized to review
plans for structures in Class II and III and to carry out field
inspection activities for structures in Class I, II and III.
(3) Building Inspector with a specialty in residential and small
commercial structures (RCS). Building Inspectors RCS are
authorized to review plans for structures in Class III and to carry
out field inspection activities for structures in Class I, II and III.
(4) Housing and Code Enforcement Official with a specialty in code
enforcement as directed by the Property Maintenance Code to
carry out field inspections, with the proper licensure to enforce
Property Maintenance Code and the New Jersey State Hotel and
Multiple Dwelling Law.24 [Added 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19]
B. Electrical Inspectors. Electrical Inspectors are authorized to carry out
field inspection and plan review work pursuant to the regulations
subject to the limitations specified herein.
24.Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
§ 68-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 68-3
65:152
(1) Electrical Inspector with a specialty in high-rise and hazardous
structure (HHS). Electrical Inspectors HHS are authorized to
review plans and carry out field inspection activities for structures
in Class I, II and III.
(2) Electrical Inspector with a specialty in industrial and commercial
structures (ICS). Electrical Inspectors ICS are authorized to review
plans for structures in Classes II and III and to carry out field
inspection activities for structures in Class I, II and III.
C. Fire protection. Fire Protection Inspectors are authorized to carry out
field inspection and plan review work pursuant to regulations subject to
the limitations specified herein.
(1) Fire Protection Inspector with a specialty in high-rise and
hazardous structures (HHS). Fire Protection Inspectors HHS are
authorized to review plans and carry out field inspection activities
for structures in Class I, II and III.
(2) Fire Protection Inspector with a specialty in industrial and
commercial structures (ICS). Fire Protection Inspectors ICS are
authorized to review plans for structures in Class II and III and to
carry out field inspection activities for structures in Class I, II and
III.
(3) Fire Protection Inspector with a specialty in residential and small
commercial structures (RCS). Fire Protection Inspectors RCS are
authorized to review plans for structures in Class II and to carry out
field inspection activities for structures in Class I, II and III.
D. Plumbing Inspector. Plumbing Inspectors are authorized to carry out
field inspection and plan review work pursuant to the regulations
subject to the limitations specified herein.
(1) Plumbing Inspectors with a specialty in high-rise and hazardous
structures (HHS). Plumbing Inspectors HHS are authorized to
review plans and carry out field inspection for structures in Class I,
II and III.
(2) Plumbing Inspector with a specialty in industrial and commercial
structures (ICS). Plumbing Inspectors ICS are authorized to review
plans for structures in Class II and III and to carry out field
inspection activities for structures in Class I, II and III.
E. Elevator Inspector. Elevator Inspectors are authorized to carry out the
elevator inspections and tests required by the regulations.
F. Mechanical Inspector. Mechanical Inspectors are authorized to carry
out the mechanical inspections required by the mechanical subcode.
G. Trainees. Trainees acquiring inspection experience shall only perform
their services under the direct supervision of a person who is a holder
of a license of the type required by N.J.A.C. 5:23-5.1 et seq.
§ 68-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 68-3
65:153
H. Administrative Secretary. An Administrative Secretary shall be
responsible to the Construction Official for normal secretary activities,
including but not limited to typing, filing and mailing reports. In
addition, the Administrative Secretary may collect permit fees, deliver
permits and sign the name of the Construction Official to permits, when
so authorized by the Construction Official, but only after approvals for
the permit have been issued by all appropriate subcode officials and the
Construction Official.
I. Permit Clerk. A Permit Clerk may collect permit fees and deliver
permits and sign the name of the Construction Official to permits when
so authorized by the Construction Official, but only after approvals for
the permit have been issued by all appropriate subcode officials and the
Construction Official.
§ 68-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 68-3
65:154
Chapter 71
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street excavations and openings — See Ch.
159, Art. II.
§ 71-1. Closing streets.
Permits involving the removal of a structure shall specify the time within
which the removal shall be made, and if such removal involves the crossing
and closing of public streets, roads or highways, the closing of such streets,
roads or highways shall not exceed the period of time allowed in the permit,
and the street shall only be closed with the written permission of the Chief
of the Woolwich Fire Department. The term "removal" as used herein shall
mean the change of location without taking down the structures; the term
"demolition" shall mean removal by taking down.
§ 71-2. Notice to service companies.
The owner contractor must notify all service companies, in writing, when
wires or other apparatus may be affected by the moving of the buildings
across the streets, roads or highways.
§ 71-3. Surety bond.
When any building is to be moved over a public thoroughfare, the Township
Committee shall have the right, if in their opinion it is necessary, to have
the owner or owners or contractor first execute a surety bond indemnifying
the township against all damages or expense which might accrue because
of the removal of such building.
§ 71-4. Violations and penalties.25
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 72
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 36. Building construction — See Ch. 68.
25.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 68-3 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 71-4
71:155
§ 72-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Building Numbering
Ordinance of the Township of Woolwich."
§ 72-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require the clear display of authorized and
assigned building numbers in the Township of Woolwich in order to assist
the general public and emergency service, public and private, in identifying
any property in case of emergency or otherwise.
§ 72-3. Applicability.
All residential, commercial or industrial buildings existing or to be placed
or erected within the Township of Woolwich shall display identification
numbers as provided herein and in accordance with the specifications
provided herein.
§ 72-4. Determination and assignment of building numbers.
Building numbers shall be determined and assigned by the 911 Coordinator
in conjunction with the Woolwich Township Planning and Construction Code
Departments. The owner of any building requiring a building number for
which such building such number has not been assigned as of the effective
date of this chapter will be notified by the Township Construction Code
office when such number is assigned to said building.
§ 72-5. Requirements.
The owner of each and every building which now fronts or which may
hereinafter front upon any public or private street that has been assigned
a number prior to the effective date of this chapter shall, within 90 days of
the final passage of this chapter, and at his own expense, cause the number
assigned to such building to be permanently and conspicuously placed in
accordance with the specifications set forth in this chapter. The owner of
any building that has not been assigned a number prior to the effective date
of this chapter shall, within 30 days after notice of such assigned number,
comply with the requirements of this section.
§ 72-6. Specifications.
Building numbers shall be reflective, Arabic numbers in colors contrasting
to the post, 3 1/2 inches in height, and mounted in a secure fashion to a post
facing and visible from the street of the numbered address as required by
this chapter.
§ 72-7. Location of post and placing of numbers.
§ 71-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 72-7
72:156
§ 72-8. Certificate of occupancy.
Any building erected, repaired, altered or modified after the effective date
of this chapter shall have the certificate of occupancy withheld until it is
determined if it will be assigned a building number, and if a building number
is assigned, same will be affixed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 72-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons convicted of a violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 and/or 90 days in
jail. Each day the violation occurs shall be deemed a separate violation. For
A. The owner shall securely affix the numbers required by this chapter
upon a post of treated wood, metal, plastic or PVC plastic. The post
shall measure at least four inches by four inches by six feet. All posts
shall be installed so that at least 24 inches are inserted into the ground
and at least 48 inches are above the ground. The post shall be installed
no less than four feet nor more than 12 feet from the edge of the
roadway pavement and no less than two feet nor more than three feet
from the house side (building side) edge of a driveway entrance.
(Residences shall be addressed according to the roadway that the front
door enters from and exits onto.) The numbers are to be placed two
inches from the top of the post, on at least two sides of the post (as
opposed to front and back) so that they will be free from obstruction
such as trees, bushes and grass and equally visible for a reasonable
distance to operators of vehicles traveling in either direction along the
roadway on which the building is numbered. (NOTE: In the Weatherby
Development, there shall not be a new four-inch-by-four-inch pole
installed. The resident shall number their residence according to the
provisions of this chapter, using the white four-inch-by-four-inch PVC
pole provided by the builder, installed per this chapter. [Amended
8-6-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-31]
B. To the extent that the property owner does not reside at a property
owned by them in Woolwich Township, the requirements for posting of
house numbers in this chapter shall apply to those residents renting
and/or residing at the owned property. [Added 11-13-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-14]
C. Although the township recommends the installation of a post for
numbering purposes, in cases where the residence's mailbox conforms
to the basic area location as specified above the mailbox post or mailbox
can be numbered in lieu of the posting requirements. The mailbox or
mailbox post must be numbered according to the same specifications
contained within § 72-6 above and must be clearly and visibly placed
and equally visible for a reasonable distance to operators of vehicles
traveling in either direction along the roadway on which the building is
numbered. [Added 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 00-14]
§ 72-7 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 72-9
72:157
purposes of this chapter, the Woolwich Township Police Department shall be
the enforcing officer.
Chapter 74
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
§ 74-1. Purpose; legislative authority.
It is found that the existence or occupation of any building or buildings
or parts thereof in the township which are so old, dilapidated or have
become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use are inimical to the welfare
and dangerous and injurious to the health and safety of the people of
the township and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or
demolition of such building or buildings or part thereof. There exists in
the township buildings which are unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use, due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or
other calamities, lack of ventilation, lack of sanitary facilities or due to other
conditions rendering the building or buildings or part thereof unsafe or
unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the safety or otherwise inimical
to the welfare of the residents of the township. The township has the
power pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq., as amended, to exercise its
police powers to repair, close or demolish or cause or require the repairing,
closing or demolition of such building or buildings or part thereof in the
manner herein provided.
§ 74-2. Definitions.
The following terms whenever used or referred to in this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context, shall have the following
meanings:
ASSISTANT PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer designated as assistant to the
Public Officer.
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof, whether used for
human habitation or otherwise, and includes outhouses and appurtenances
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing living facilities
for one or more persons.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the township
relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other activities concerning
buildings in the township.
§ 72-9 WOOLWICH CODE § 74-2
74:158
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer who is authorized by this chapter to
exercise the powers prescribed for him or her.
§ 74-3. Public Officer and Assistant Public Officer.
A. Appointment.
(1) The Public Officer, who shall be appointed for a term of one year,
shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the Township
Committee.
(2) The Assistant Public Officer, who shall be appointed for a term of
one year, shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Township Committee, and when so appointed, he or she shall
exercise all of the powers prescribed for the Public Officer at the
direction of the Public Officer or in the event of the disability or
temporary absence of the Public Officer.
B. Duties.
(1) The Public Officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following
powers, in addition to others herein granted:
(a) To investigate the building conditions in the township in order
to determine which buildings therein are unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use.
(b) To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence.
(c) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making
examinations, provided that such entries shall be made in such
manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the
persons in possession.
(2) The public officer may request the Substandard Housing
Committee to assist him or her in determining whether a building
under this chapter shall be demolished or repaired pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, but the final order or determination in
any case shall be deemed to be the order or determination of the
Public Officer.
(3) The Public Officer shall delegate and fix the duties of such officers,
agents and employees as he or she deems necessary to assist him
or her in carrying out the purposes of this chapter, subject to the
confirmation by resolution of the Township Committee, and may
delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter
to such officers, agents and employees as he or she may designate.
§ 74-2 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 74-4
74:159
§ 74-4. Notice of violation; hearing.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the township charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use or whenever it appears to
the Public Officer, on his or her own motion, that any building is unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use, the Public Officer shall, if his or her
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Public Officer or his or her designated
agent, at a place therein fixed, not less than seven days nor more than 30
days after the service of the complaint, and that the owner and parties in
interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to
appear in person or otherwise give testimony at the place and time fixed in
the complaint, and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall
not be controlling in hearings before the Public Officer.
§ 74-5. Service of notice or order.
Complaints or orders issued by the Public Officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Public Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and the Public Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving
of the complaint or order upon these persons may be made by publishing
the same once in a newspaper printed and published in the township or,
in the absence of a newspaper, in one printed and published in the County
of Gloucester and circulating in the township. A copy of the complaint or
order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the
complaint or order. A copy of the complaint or order shall be fully recorded
or lodged for record with the County Clerk of the County of Gloucester.
§ 74-6. Order for abatement or demolition.
If the public officer shall determine after such notice and hearing that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use, he or she shall state, in writing, his or her findings of fact in support
of his or her determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof and parties in interest an order as follows:
A. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have the
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time, as specified in the order of removal.
§ 74-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 74-7
74:160
§ 74-7. Failure to comply; abatement or demolition by township.
§ 74-8. Costs to become lien.
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter, determined in favor of the township,
the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or vacating and
closing or removal and demolition, if any, and the amount of the balance
thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale
of materials derived from the building or from any contract for removal
or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property
upon which the cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished
by the Public Officer, he or she shall sell the materials of the building.
There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof
the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such
credits or if the sum total of the costs exceeds the total of the credits, a
detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be
filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of
tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds the costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Public Officer,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by the court and shall
be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the court to the persons
found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of the court. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power
of the township to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal
or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party
in interest, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate,
may proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the
municipal lien certificate.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Public
Officer may cause the building to be repaired, altered or improved or to
be vacated and closed, provided that the Public Officer shall not incur
any expense to repair, alter or improve any building without the
approval, by resolution, of the Township Committee.
B. The Public Officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
building so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use. The use or occupation of
this building is prohibited and unlawful."
C. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Public Officer may cause the building to be removed or
demolished, subject to the approval, by resolution, of the Township
Committee.
§ 74-7 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 74-9
74:161
§ 74-9. Conditions constituting unfit buildings.
The Public Officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use if he or she finds that conditions exist in
the building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of
the occupants of the building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or
other residents of the township. Such conditions may include the following,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
§ 74-10. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Public Officer pursuant
to this chapter may, within 30 days after the posting and service of the
order, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.8, appeal for injunctive relief to restrain
the Public Officer from carrying out the provisions of the order. A decision
on the appeal shall be at the discretion of the court. The remedy herein
provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by an order of the Public
Officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for action taken pursuant
thereto, or because of noncompliance by any person with any order of the
Public Officer.
§ 74-11. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 79
CURFEW
§ 79-1. Curfew established. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-17]
A. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities.
B. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
C. Dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years, regardless
of his place of residence, to ride, loiter, run through, wander, stroll
through or remain on or about any of the streets, highways, roads,
roadways, alleys, playgrounds, parks or other areas or in other quasipublic
place or any other place open to the public in the Township of
Woolwich after the hour of 10:00 p.m. prevailing time, in the evening
hours, and before 6:00 a.m. prevailing time, unless accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian or some other duly authorized and accredited
custodian of at least 21 years of age who exercises such control over
said minor with consent of parents or legal guardian, either on foot or
§ 74-9 WOOLWICH CODE § 79-1
74:162
§ 79-2. Permitting minors to violate curfew unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or duly authorized and
accredited custodian, as defined in this chapter, having lawful custody of
any minor under the age of 18 years to allow or permit any such minor
to ride, loiter, run through, wander, stroll or remain on any of the streets,
highways, roads, roadways, alleys, parks or other areas or in any quasipublic
place or any place open to the public in the Township of Woolwich in
violation of this chapter except as hereinafter provided.
§ 79-3. Owners and operators of public places. [Amended 6-6-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-06]
It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or operator of any quasi-public or
other place open to the public within the Township of Woolwich to suffer
or permit any minor under the age of 18 years to remain on or about such
premises during such times that are in violation of § 79-1.
§ 79-4. Abuse of purpose or spirit of provisions.
Any abuse of the purpose or spirit of this chapter shall constitute a violation
of the provisions of this chapter, punishable as hereinafter provided. This
section shall apply with respect to all such violations of said purpose or
spirit of any kind, whether said violation is by parent or legal guardian
and abusing the discretion conferred upon them by this chapter or other
persons having lawful custody of the minor.
§ 79-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any minor child who shall
be gainfully and lawfully employed, or to any minor child who shall be a
bona fide student of a school, college or university of evening instruction, or
to any child who shall be in attendance at an evening function sponsored by
religious or school organization, or who shall be in attendance at a properly
supervised recreational program during the time necessarily required to
travel between such minor's residence and said place of assembly. In such
situations the minor shall take the safest and most direct route of travel
between said minor's residence and any of the aforesaid places.
by any form of conveyance, except as hereinafter provided. [Amended
6-6-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-06]
B. It shall further be unlawful for a juvenile of any age under 18 years
within the discretion of Woolwich Township to be in any public place
during the hours when the juvenile is required to be in attendance at
either a public or nonpublic school unless the juvenile is accompanied
by a parent or guardian or is carrying written permission from the
juvenile's educational authority allowing the juvenile to be in a public
place.
§ 79-1 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 79-6
74:163
§ 79-6. Emergencies.
Should any emergency arise necessitating a minor under the age of 18
years being dispatched on an errand requiring his presence upon any street,
highway, road or roadway or other place or area opened to the public
during the hours to which the use thereof by such unattended minor child
is prohibited hereunder, such child shall have in his or her possession
a writing signed by a parent or legal guardian or some duly authorized
and accredited custodian of at least 21 years of age, stating the nature
of the errand, the necessity thereof, the place or designation at which the
mission is to be accomplished, the time such message was executed and the
approximate time required for the errand. Any abuse of the purpose or spirit
of this section shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 79-7. Enforcement.
Every member of the Woolwich Township Police Department, including
special officers, are hereby authorized and empowered to take the custody
of any such minor who may be in the act of violating the provisions of this
chapter. Such officer shall notify the parent or person having legal care
and custody of such child of the violation of this chapter and the penalty
therefor of a second or subsequent violation and shall report said violation
to the Chief of Police of the Township of Woolwich, who shall cause a
record thereof to be made. Said child shall be released immediately into the
custody of such parent or person having his or her legal care or custody.
§ 79-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 87
DRUG-FREE AND DRUNK-DRIVING-FREE ZONES
§ 79-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 79-8
87:164
ARTICLE I
School Zones
[Adopted 5-23-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6]
§ 87-1. Adoption of Map. [Amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-21]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map entitled "Woolwich Township
Drug-Free School Zone," dated February 2005, produced by Schoor
DePalma, Municipal Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as its official
finding and record of the location and boundaries of the areas within 1,000
feet of property used for school purposes which is owned by or leased to
any elementary or secondary school or school board in Woolwich Township,
Gloucester County, New Jersey.
§ 87-2. Amendments to Map.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 87-1
of this article shall continue to constitute its official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes in Woolwich Township until such time, if
any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and Drug-
Free School Zones.
§ 87-3. Notification of changes in location and boundaries.
The School Board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 87-4. Copies of Map and provisions.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 87-1 of
this article and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the Map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a
true copy of such Map and of this article shall be provided without cost
to the Gloucester County Clerk and to the office of the Gloucester County
Prosecutor.
§ 87-1 DRUG-FREE AND DRUNK-DRIVING-FREE § 87-5
87:165
§ 87-5. Map as evidence. [Added 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2126]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 87-1
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state, and that
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned or leased to
such schools or school board;
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by (or leased to) a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9,
1987, that being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101. (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 87-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the
absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the
result of any charges in the location and boundaries of such property
which have not been incorporated into an approved map, shall not be
deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not
owned by or leased to a school or a school board or that such property
is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
26.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 87-5,
Violations and penalties, as § 87-6.
§ 87-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 87-6
87:166
§ 87-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
§ 87-6 DRUG-FREE AND DRUNK-DRIVING-FREE § 87-6
87:167

ARTICLE II
Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones
[Adopted 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-21]
§ 87-7. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5, the
map entitled "Drunk-Driving-Free Map, Township of Woolwich, Gloucester
County, New Jersey, prepared by Schoor-DePalma Engineers, dated
February 2005," is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and
record of the location of school crossings and the location of areas within
the Township of Woolwich of property which is used for school purposes
and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board, or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 87-8. Map to constitute official findings.
The Drunk-Driving-Free Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 87-7 of
this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location of school crossings and the location of boundary areas on
or within 1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board, which is used for school purposes until
such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions
or deletions with respect to the location of school crossings and the location
of boundaries or areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, which is used
for school purposes.
§ 87-9. Changes in locations or boundaries.
The school board or chief administrative officer in the case of any private or
parochial school is hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation
to promptly notify the office of the Township Engineer and the Township
Solicitor of any changes or contemplated changes in the location or
boundaries of any property owned or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board which is used for school purposes or of any additions
or deletions to school crossings.
§ 87-10. Copies of maps.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 87-7 of this article
and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy to any person, agency
or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along with
a certification that such copy is a true copy of such map approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is further directed that a true copy of
such map and this article shall be provided without cost to the Gloucester
County Clerk and to the office of the Gloucester County Prosecutor.
§ 87-7 DRUG-FREE AND DRUNK-DRIVING-FREE § 87-11
87:169
§ 87-11. Map as evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to this
article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of the State of
New Jersey, and pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of real property which is owned or leased to such
schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location of all school crossings in the Township of Woolwich.
§ 87-11 WOOLWICH CODE § 87-11
87:170
ARTICLE III
Drug- and Drunk-Driving-Free Parkland
[Adopted 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
§ 87-12. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5, the
map entitled "Drunk-Driving-Free Map, Township of Woolwich, Gloucester
County, New Jersey, prepared by Schoor-DePalma Engineers, dated
February 2005," is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and
record of the location of parkland within the Township of Woolwich which
is used for recreational purposes and which is owned by the Township of
Woolwich and within 1,000 feet of such park property.
§ 87-13. Map to constitute official findings.
The Drug- and Drunk-Driving-Free Map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 87-12 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location of boundary areas on or within 1,000 feet of
property owned by the Township of Woolwich known as the Locke Avenue
Park facility, which is used for recreational purposes, until such time, if any,
that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location of parkland and the location of boundaries or areas
on or within 1,000 feet of property owned by the Township of Woolwich
which is used for recreational purposes.
§ 87-14. Copies of map.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 87-12 of this article
and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy to any person, agency
or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along with
a certification that such copy is a true copy of such map approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is further directed that a true copy of
such map and this article shall be provided without cost to the Gloucester
County Clerk and to the office of the Gloucester County Prosecutor.
§ 87-15. Map as evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to this
article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of the State of
New Jersey, and pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of parkland within the municipality.
§ 87-12 DRUG-FREE AND DRUNK-DRIVING-FREE § 87-15
87:171
(2) That such parkland property is and continues to be used for public
recreation.
(3) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such park property.
§ 87-15 WOOLWICH CODE § 87-15
87:172
Chapter 90
(RESERVED)
Chapter 92
(RESERVED)
Chapter 95
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 87-15 (RESERVED) § 87-15
90:173

ARTICLE I
Application and Appeal Fees; Deposits; Guaranties; Contributions
[Adopted 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-1127]
§ 95-1. Escrow deposits.
In addition to the initial fees or charges, the Township of Woolwich shall
require escrow review deposits in accordance with the provisions of the
fee and deposit schedule set forth in § 95-8.4. The Chief Financial Officer
of the municipality shall make all of the payments to professionals for
services rendered to the municipality or approving authority for review
of applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements or other purposes under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The application review and inspection charges
shall be limited only to professional charges for review by outside
consultants when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of the
expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the municipality. The
only cost that shall be added to any such charges shall be actual outof-
pocket expenses of such professionals or consultants, including normal
and typical expenses incurred in processing applications and inspecting
improvements. No applicant shall be charged for any municipal, clerical or
administrative functions, overhead expenses, meeting room charges or any
of the municipal costs and expenses except as provided for specifically by
statute, nor shall a municipal professional add any such charge to his bill.
§ 95-2. Scope of reimbursed services.
The municipality shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the review of
applications, both as to completeness and as to content, and for the review
and preparation of documents such as, but not limited to, drafting
resolutions, developer's agreements, and necessary correspondence with
the applicant or applicant's professionals.
§ 95-3. Deposit of escrow funds; refunds.
Deposits received from any applicant in excess of $5,000 shall be held by
the Chief Financial Officer in a special interest-bearing deposit account;
and upon receipt of bills from professionals and approval of said bills as
hereinafter provided for, the Chief Financial Officer may use such funds to
pay the bills submitted by such professionals or experts. The municipality
shall not be required to refund an amount of interest paid on a deposit
which does not exceed $100 for the year. If the amount of interest exceeds
$100, the entire amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded
to him by the municipality annually or at the time the deposit is repaid
or applied for the purposes for which it was deposited, as the case may
be, except that the municipality may retain for administrative expenses a
sum equivalent to no more than 33 1/3% of that entire amount, which shall
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. I, Land Use
Application and Appeal Fees; Escrow Deposits, adopted 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06.
§ 95-1 (RESERVED) § 95-3
90:175
be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses. All sums not
actually so expended shall be refunded to the applicant within 90 days
after the final decision by the appropriate municipal agency with respect
to such application, upon certification by the Board Secretary that such
application has been finally decided. The Township's professionals shall
notify the Board Secretary and Finance Department of any outstanding
unpaid balances regarding a specific development application within 30
days of the identification of the escrow shortage.
§ 95-4. Payments; statement.
§ 95-5. Payments required prior to issuance of permits.
No zoning permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy or any other
types of permits may be issued with respect to any approved application
for development until all bills for reimbursable services have been received
A. Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications, review
and preparation of documents and inspection of improvements shall be
pursuant to a voucher from the professional, which voucher shall
identify the personnel performing the service, and each date the
services were performed, the hours spent to one-quarter-hour
increments, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All professionals
shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality
on a monthly basis in accordance with the schedules and procedures
established by the Chief Financial Officer. The professional shall send
an informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the
Chief Financial Officer of the municipality simultaneously to the
applicant and to the municipal agency for which said service were
performed.
B. The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant a
monthly statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative balance
of the escrow account. This information shall be provided as permitted
by the law. If an escrow account or deposit contains insufficient funds to
enable the municipality or approving authority to perform required
application reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief Financial
Officer shall provide the applicant with a notice of the insufficient
escrow or deposit balance, with a copy sent to the Township
professionals. In order for work to continue on the development or the
application, the applicant shall, within 14 business days, post a deposit
to the account in an amount to be agreed upon by the municipality or
approving authority and the applicant. In the interim, any required
health and safety inspections shall be made and charged back against
the replenishment of funds. Once the replenishment escrow funds are
received by the Township from the applicant, the Board Secretary shall
advise the Township professionals of the additional deposit so that the
work on the development or the application can recommence.
§ 95-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 95-5
90:176
by the municipality from professional personnel rendering services in
connection with such application and payment has been made.
§ 95-6. Close-out procedures.
§ 95-7. Scope of charges.
All professional charges for review of an application for development,
review and preparation of documents or inspection of improvements shall
be reasonable and necessary, given the status and progress of the
application or construction. Review fees shall be charged only in connection
with an application for development presently pending before the approving
authority or upon review of compliance with the conditions of approval, or
review of a request for modification or amendment made by the applicant.
A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval by any
state governmental agency and not under municipal jurisdiction except to
the extent consultation with a state agency is necessary due to the effect of
state approvals on the subdivision or site plan.
§ 95-8. Limitation of inspection fees.
Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a subdivision
or site plan or required by an approving resolution. Professionals inspecting
improvements under construction shall charge only for inspections that are
reasonably necessary to check the progress and quality of the work, and
such inspections shall be reasonably based on the approved development
plans and documents.
A. The following close-out procedures shall apply to all deposits and the
escrow account established under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. and shall commence after the approving authority has granted final
approval and signed the subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of
application review escrows and deposits, or after the improvements
have been approved in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, in the case
of improvement inspection escrows and deposits.
B. The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the Chief
Financial Officer of the municipality and the approving authority that
the application or the improvements, as the case may be, are
completed. After receipt of the certified notice, the Board Secretary
shall advise the Township professionals that the improvements or
application is completed. After receipt of that notice, the professional
shall render a final bill to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality
within 30 days and shall send a copy simultaneously to the applicant
and the Board Secretary. The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality
shall render a written final accounting to the applicant on the uses to
which the deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of the final bill. Any
balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including interest
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, shall be refunded to the
developer along with the final accounting.
§ 95-5 (RESERVED) § 95-8.1
90:177
§ 95-8.1. Substitution of professionals.
If the municipality retains a different professional or consultant in the place
of a professional originally responsible for development application review,
or inspection of improvements, the municipality or approving authority
shall be responsible for all time and expenses of the new professional to
become familiar with the application or the project, and the municipality or
approving authority shall not bill the applicant or charge the deposit or the
escrow account for any such services.
§ 95-8.2. Estimate of cost of improvements.
The cost of the installation of improvements for the purposes of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 shall be estimated by the Municipal Engineer based on
documented construction costs for the public improvements prevailing in
the general area of the municipality. The developer may appeal the
Municipal Engineer's estimate to the County Construction Board of Appeals,
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127.
§ 95-8.3. Appeals.
A. An applicant shall notify, in writing, the governing body with copies of
the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the professional
whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by a professional for
a service rendered to the municipality in reviewing applications for
development, review and preparation of documents, inspection of
improvements, or other charges made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
The governing body or its designee shall, within a reasonable time,
attempt to remediate any disputed charges. If the matter is not resolved
to the satisfaction of the applicant, the applicant may appeal to the
County Construction Board of Appeals, established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-127, any charge to an escrow account or deposit by any
municipal professional or consultant, or the cost of the installation of
improvements estimated by the Municipal Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4. An applicant or his authorized agent shall submit the
appeal in writing to the County Construction Board of Appeals. The
applicant or his authorized agent shall simultaneously send a copy of
the appeal to the municipality, approving authority, and any
professional whose charges are the subject of the appeal. An applicant
shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the informational
copy of the professional's voucher required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c),
except that if the professional has not supplied the applicant with an
informational copy of the voucher, then the applicant shall file his
appeal within 60 days from receipt of the municipal statement of
activity against the deposit or escrow account required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2(c). An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing series of
charges by a professional during a period not exceeding six months to
demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or inaccurate
charges. An applicant making use of this provision need not appeal each
charge individually.
§ 95-8.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 95-8.3
90:178
§ 95-8.4. Fee and review escrow schedule.
The following fee schedule shall apply with respect to the filing of all
applications for development or appeals before the Joint Land Use Board
and/or the Woolwich Township Committee:
B. Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the rules and procedures
established by the County Construction Board of Appeals.
C. During the pendency of any appeal, the municipality or approving
authority shall continue to process, hear and decide the application for
development and to inspect the development in the normal course and
shall not withhold, delay or deny reviews, inspections, signing of
subdivision plats or site plans, the reduction or the release of
performance or maintenance guaranties, the issuance of construction
permits or certificates of occupancy, or any other approval or permit
because an appeal has been filed or is pending under this subsection.
The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality may pay charges out of
the appropriate escrow account or deposit for which an appeal has been
filed. If a charge is disallowed after payment, the Chief Financial Officer
of the municipality shall reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the
amount of any such disallowed charge or refund the amount to the
applicant. If a charge is disallowed after payment to a professional or
consultant who is not an employee of a municipality, the professional or
consultant shall reimburse the municipality in the amount of any such
disallowed charge.
A. Minor subdivision: a nonrefundable application fee of $275 for a lot line
adjustment or the creation of one lot in addition to the retained lot, plus
an additional nonrefundable fee of $125 for each additional lot created
or recreated; a review escrow deposit in the amount of $2,000 shall be
posted for each additional lot that is created ($4,000 for 2 lots and
$6,000 for 3 lots); the review escrow deposit shall be $1,500 for a lot
line adjustment when no additional lots are created.
B. Preliminary major subdivision: a nonrefundable application fee of $500
for up to 25 lots, a nonrefundable application fee of $1,000 for Lots
26-100, a nonrefundable application fee of $1,500 for Lots 100-500, a
nonrefundable application fee of $2,000 for in excess of 500 lots; a
review escrow deposit in the amount of $2,000 shall be posted, plus
$500 per lot (1-10), plus $200 per lot (11-60), plus $150 per lot
(61-110), and plus $100 for each lot in excess of 110.
C. Final major subdivision: a nonrefundable application fee of $450 for up
to 25 lots, a nonrefundable application fee of $800 for Lots 26-100, a
nonrefundable application fee of $1,200 for Lots 100-500, a
nonrefundable application fee of $1,750 for in excess of 500 lots; a
review escrow deposit in the amount of $2,000 shall be posted, plus
$500 per lot (1-10), plus $200 per lot (11-60), plus $150 per lot
(61-110), and plus $100 for each lot in excess of 110.
§ 95-8.3 (RESERVED) § 95-8.4
90:179
D. Conceptual review: a nonrefundable application fee of $100; a review
escrow deposit in the amount of $1,500 shall be posted; any and all
funds from the review escrow deposit remaining after conceptual
review will be transferred into the escrow account for any subsequent
application.
E. Use variance or variance sought under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: a
nonrefundable application fee of $400; a review escrow deposit in the
amount of $2,000 shall be posted.
F. Bulk and/or other variances: a nonrefundable application fee of $200; a
review escrow deposit in the amount of $1,000 shall be posted.
G. Conditional use (special exception): a nonrefundable application fee of
$300; a review escrow deposit in the amount of $1,250 shall be posted.
H. Minor site plan: a nonrefundable application fee of $250; a review
escrow deposit in the amount of $1,000 shall be posted.
I. Preliminary site plan: a nonrefundable application fee of $500 for all
preliminary site plan applications; for a residential development site
plan with structures, a review escrow deposit in the amount of $2,500
for 0-5 units, $6,000 for 6-20 units, $8,500 for 21-49 units, $11,500 for
50-100 units, and $19,000 for 101-1,000 units shall be posted; for a
commercial/industrial development site plan without structures, a
review escrow deposit in the amount of $5,000 for 0-3 acres, or $7,500
for in excess of 3 acres, shall be posted; for a commercial/industrial site
plan with structures, a review escrow deposit in the amount of $2,000
for 1,250 - 2,500 square feet, or $5,500 for 2,501-20,000 square feet, or
$8,000 for in excess of 20,000 square feet shall be posted.
J. Final site plan: a nonrefundable application fee of $750 for all final site
plan applications; for a residential development site plan with
structures, a review escrow deposit in the amount of $2,500 for 0-5
units, $6,000 for 6-20 units, $8,500 for 21-49 units, $11,500 for 50-100
units, and $19,000 for 101-1,000 units shall be posted; for a
commercial/industrial development site plan without structures, a
review escrow deposit in the amount of $5,000 for 0-3 acres, or $7,500
for in excess of 3 acres shall be posted; for commercial/industrial site
plan with structures, a review escrow deposit in the amount of $2,000
for 1,250 - 2,500 square feet, or $5,500 for 2,501-20,000 square feet, or
$8,000 for in excess of 20,000 square feet shall be posted.
K. Zoning Board component of Joint Land Use Board interpretation: a
nonrefundable application fee of $150; a review escrow deposit in the
amount of $750 shall be posted.
L. (Reserved)28
28.Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, regarding sign variance fees, was repealed 4-16-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-04.
§ 95-8.4 WOOLWICH CODE § 95-8.4
90:180
M. General development plan: a nonrefundable application fee of $1,000; a
review escrow deposit in the amount of $5,000 per each component
plan, plus $500 per each report/schedule.
N. Zoning Officer permits and appeals: a nonrefundable fee of $40 for the
Zoning Officer's review of a project presented for a zoning permit; if
there is an appeal of the Zoning Officer's determination with respect to
the zoning permit, a nonrefundable application fee of $50 is required to
process the appeal to the Zoning Board component of the Joint Land
Use Board, and a review escrow fee in the amount of $750 shall be
posted for the Joint Land Use Board's professionals' review of the
appeal.
O. In the event that there are multiple separate components involved in
one application (i.e., a use variance, bulk variance, minor subdivision
and/or site plan at the same time of submission of an application), then
the maximum nonrefundable fee to be paid to the Township shall be the
amount of the highest individual component fee, as delineated above,
plus an additional one-time fee of $150 total to cover all of the other
separate components of the application. Escrow shall be posted
according to each and every separate component submission of the
application as delineated above.
P. TDR transactions: a nonrefundable application fee of $200 and review
escrow deposit in the amount of $1,000 submitted on forms authorized
by the Joint Land Use Board; for all TDR transactions, per transaction,
landowner or existing sending and receiving area lot, whichever is
greater; includes an application for TDR credit appeal, enrollment,
assignment or reassignment, use and extinguishment or disenrollment.
[Added 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Q. TDR review: a nonrefundable application fee of $200 and review escrow
deposit on the amount of $1,000 submitted on forms authorized by the
Joint Land Use Board; for administration and/or Joint Land Use Board
Solicitor review of deed restrictions, easements, survey, title, TDR
credit appeal, and requests for credit adjustments affected by variances
and/or subdivision of an existing or proposed single-family detached
house, farmstead or lot. [Added 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
R. Waiver of site plan: a nonrefundable application fee of $250; a review
escrow deposit in the amount of $1,000 shall be posted. [Added
4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
§ 95-8.4 (RESERVED) § 95-8.4
90:181

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)
(RESERVED) § 95-8.4
90:183

ARTICLE III
Affordable Housing Development Fees
[Adopted 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-24]
§ 95-9. Purpose.
§ 95-10. When effective; authority to spend fees.
§ 95-11. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent-affordable development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act, which has primary jurisdiction for the
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or a court of competent jurisdiction and have
a COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c.46, Sections 8 and 32 through 38. Fees
collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low- and moderate-income housing. This article shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees,
codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
B. The Township of Woolwich shall not spend development fees until
COAH has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
§ 95-9 (RESERVED) § 95-11
90:185
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning considerations in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or equitable owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 95-12. Residential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within the Township of Woolwich district(s), residential developers,
except for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed
value for residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
§ 95-11 WOOLWICH CODE § 95-12
90:186
§ 95-13. Nonresidential development fees.
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
(4) Developers of specific types of residential development, for
example developments with one or two owner-occupied dwelling
units, residential structures demolished and replaced as a result of
a natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time the final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or marketrate
development shall be subject to the development fee of 2.5%,
unless otherwise exempted below.
§ 95-12 (RESERVED) § 95-13
90:187
§ 95-14. Collection procedures.
(2) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by Woolwich Township as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
A. Residential. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-26]
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the construction official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit notifies the local assessor of any and all requests for the
scheduling of a final inspection on property which is subject to a
development fee.
(3) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
(4) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
§ 95-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 95-14
90:188
(5) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
(6) Should Woolwich Township fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount
due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(7) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(8) Appeal of development fees. A developer may challenge residential
development fees imposed by filing a challenge with the County
Board of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Board, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by Woolwich Township. Appeals from a determination of
the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
B. Nonresidential.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the construction official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption, to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
(3) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
§ 95-14 (RESERVED) § 95-14
90:189
§ 95-15. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
(5) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
(7) Should Woolwich Township fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount
due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(8) The developer shall pay 100% of the calculated development fee
amount prior to the municipal issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for the subject property.
(9) Appeal of development fees. A developer may challenge
nonresidential development fees imposed by filing a challenge with
the Director of the Division of Taxation. Pending a review and
determination by the Director, which shall be made within 45 days
of receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an
interest-bearing escrow account by Woolwich Township. Appeals
from a determination of the Director may be made to the tax court
in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
§ 95-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 95-15
90:190
§ 95-16. Use of funds.
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Woolwich Township's
affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, Woolwich
Township shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of
a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the bank,
and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as
provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
D. All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Township of Woolwich's
fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to, preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the approved spending
plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Woolwich Township for past
housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
§ 95-15 (RESERVED) § 95-16
90:191
§ 95-17. Monitoring.
Woolwich Township shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring
forms included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with Woolwich Township's housing program, as
well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include downpayment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The use of development fees in this manner may entitle
Woolwich Township to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.7.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. Woolwich Township may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses
of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 95-16 WOOLWICH CODE § 95-17
90:192
certified by COAH or approved by the court. All monitoring reports shall be
completed on forms designed by COAH.
§ 95-18. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for Woolwich Township to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its judgment of compliance unless
Woolwich Township has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and has
received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If Woolwich
Township fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees
prior to the expiration of the judgment of compliance, it may be subject
to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund.
Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey Affordable
Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.222
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Woolwich Township shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final site
plan approval after the expiration of its judgment of compliance, nor shall
Woolwich Township retroactively impose a development fee on such a
development. Woolwich Township shall not expend development fees after
the expiration of its judgment of compliance.
§ 95-17 (RESERVED) § 95-18
90:193
Chapter 99
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 68, Art.
I.
§ 99-1. Local enforcement. [Amended 1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-01]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally
enforced in the Township of Woolwich by the County of Gloucester.
§ 99-2. Agency designation. [Amended 1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-01]
The local enforcing agency shall be the County of Gloucester.
§ 99-3. Powers and duties of agency. [Amended 1-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-01]
The County of Gloucester shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of Woolwich, other than owneroccupied
one- and two-family dwellings and those that are incidental or
auxiliary to the agricultural use of a farm property, and shall faithfully
comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act29 and the
Uniform Fire Code.
§ 99-4. Life hazard uses. [Amended 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
The County of Gloucester established by § 99-2 of this chapter shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 99-5. (Reserved)30
§ 99-6. (Reserved)31
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: Former § 99-5, Organization, was repealed 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01.
31.Editor's Note: Former § 99-6, Appointments; terms of office; removal, was repealed
1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01.
§ 95-18 WOOLWICH CODE § 99-7
90:194
§ 99-7. Appeals. [Amended 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the County of Gloucester shall have the right to
appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals at Gloucester County.
§ 99-8. Additional required inspections and fees.
A. In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required.
B. Inspection and fee schedule for all buildings as defined and classified in
the Uniform Fire Code of New Jersey other than owner-occupied oneand
two-dwellings and those that are incidental or auxiliary to the
agricultural use of a farm property shall be as follows: [Amended
9-16-2002 by Ord. No. 02-13]
Building Type Inspection Fee
Assembly1
For occupancies under 100 $35
Building Type Inspection Fee
Business
One and two story with less than 5,000 square
feet
$25
One and two story with 5,000 square feet or
more
$50
Three to five story with less than 10,000 square
feet
$75
Three to five story with more than 10,000
square feet
$100
Building Type Inspection Fee
Factory
F-1 under 12,000 square feet $150
F-2 under 12,000 square feet $75
Building Type Inspection Fee
Mercantile
One and two story with less than 5,000 square
feet
$50
One and two story with 5,000 square feet or
more
$75
Three to five story with less than 10,000 square
feet
$100
§ 99-7 (RESERVED) § 99-8
90:195
§ 99-9. Permits for activities and uses. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-4; 3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 89-3; 9-16-2002 by Ord. No. 02-13]
The permit fees for certain activities and uses shall be as required by
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c), as it is amended and supplemented from time to time,
except that the permit fee for the discharge of fireworks shall be $25 for
nonprofit organizations only.
§ 99-10. Notice of violation. [Amended 1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-01]
The County of Gloucester shall mail or deliver to the Chief of the Woolwich
Fire Company a copy of each notice of violation of the Fire Prevention Code
and shall consult with the Chief at least monthly, or as needed, regarding
any suspected violations that have come to the attention of the County of
Gloucester or have come to the attention of the Woolwich Fire Company.32
Building Type Inspection Fee
Mercantile
Three to five story with 10,000 square feet or
more
$125
Building Type Inspection Fee
Residential
R-2, 3 to 6 units $25 per building
R-2, 7 to 12 units $50 per building
R-2, 13 to 20 units $75 per building
R-2, over 20 units $100 per building
R-3 other than owner-occupied $10 per building
Building Type Inspection Fee
Storage
S-1 under 12,000 square feet $150
S-2 under 12,000 square feet $75
Building Type Inspection Fee
Mixed Uses
Full fee shall be charged for main use and half
fee for other uses
NOTES:
1Assembly places for churches, social and fraternal organizations and
other organizations conducted not-for-profit shall be exempt from
inspection fees if used solely as a meeting place and not more than
once a week on average.
§ 99-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 99-11
90:196
§ 99-11. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
§ 99-12. Pallet yard operations and storage, including wood
chipping operations.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PALLET — A portable platform of wood or other material for handling,
storage or movement of materials and packages in warehouses,
factories, or vehicles, including those portable platforms in partial
disrepair.
WOOD CHIPPING — Pallets or other wood products such as
construction lumber, stumps or trees, which are ground, chipped or
pulverized.
B. Yard maintenance and storage.
(1) Outside storage of pallets shall be piled with due regard to stability
of piles and in no case higher than 12 feet.
(2) Wood chipping shall be piled no higher than 12 feet, with side
slopes no greater than 60°.
(3) Driveways shall be so spaced that maximum grid systems for
pallets is not over 50 feet by 150 feet. Grid systems for wood-chip
piles being no larger than 30 by 90 feet in length and width. Pile-topile
clearance of at least 30 feet at the base of the piles shall be
provided.
(4) Driveways shall have a minimum width of 15 feet and an allweather
surface capable of supporting fire department apparatus.
(5) Where the yard has earth or crushed stone drives, boundary posts
with signs designating stack limits shall be provided to indicate
yard area and alley limits. In paved yard areas, painted boundary
limits can be used instead of posts and signs.
(6) The entire yard shall be surrounded by a suitable fence at least six
feet high to prevent access by unauthorized persons.
(7) An adequate number of gates shall be provided in the surrounding
fence or other barrier so as to permit ready access of fire
32.Editor's Note: Original Section 11, added 3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 89-3, regarding pallet yard
operations and wood chipping, which immediately followed this section, was deleted
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6. See now § 99-12, Pallet yard operations and storage, including
wood chipping operations.
§ 99-11 (RESERVED) § 99-12
90:197
§ 99-13. Operating funds. [Added 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
The enforcing agency established by this chapter is the County of
Gloucester and shall be under the direct supervision and control of the
County Fire Official.
apparatus. The number and placing of such gates for each pallet/
chipping yard shall be determined by the Fire Department.
C. Smoking, weeds and debris.
(1) Smoking shall be prohibited. Large "NO SMOKING" signs shall be
posted throughout all buildings. Large "NO SMOKING" signs shall
be painted on exterior buildings' walls and on signs erected at
driveway edge.
(2) Weeds shall be kept down throughout the entire yard and shall be
sprayed as often as needed with a satisfactory weed killer or cut or
grubbed out. Dead weeds shall be removed.
(3) Debris such as loose portions of pallets and chippings shall be
removed regularly from piling areas and not less frequently than
quarterly. Proper housekeeping shall be maintained at all times.
D. Buildings in outside storage areas. Piles are not to be less than 15 feet
from any buildings. Buildings of wood-frame construction or housing
hazardous operations or storage of flammable liquids, the distance shall
be increased to at least 50 feet.
E. Portable fire extinguishers. At least one portable fire extinguisher with
a minimum Class 4A rating shall be provided within 50 feet of travel
distance to any machine producing shaving, chips or sawdust. Fire
extinguishers shall be property protected against freezing, where
necessary. A minimum of one Class 4A rating portable fire extinguisher
shall be provided on all vehicles operating on the pile and a minimum
Class 20BC rating portable fire extinguisher in the vehicle for the
vehicle.
F. Inside storage of idle pallets, wood shavings or chips.
(1) There shall be no inside storage of wood shavings or chips and
areas producing such and shall be cleaned on a regular basis.
(2) Inside storage of pallets shall conform with NFPA 13.
§ 99-12 WOOLWICH CODE § 99-13
90:198
Chapter 103
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading plans — See Ch. 109.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Soil removal — See Ch. 153.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 158.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Topsoil — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 99-13 (RESERVED) § 99-13
90:199

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authority; Findings; Purpose and Objectives
§ 103-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1. et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations
designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich,
Gloucester County, New Jersey does hereby ordain as follows.
§ 103-2. Findings of fact.
§ 103-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize private and public losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Woolwich are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief; and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood insurance control
projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 103-1 (RESERVED) § 103-3
90:201
§ 103-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 103-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 103-4
90:202
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 103-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.[Added 8-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-13]
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.[Added 8-15-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-13]
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual-
or-greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99 or AH.[Amended 8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For Zones
VE and V1-30, the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus
wave effect (BFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a
one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.[Added 8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
§ 103-5 (RESERVED) § 103-5
90:203
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an
area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.[Amended
8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses.[Added 8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.[Added 8-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-13]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 103-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 103-5
90:204
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.[Added 8-15-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-13]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.[Added 8-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-13]
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 103-5 (RESERVED) § 103-5
90:205
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.[Amended
8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvements
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 103-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 103-5
90:206
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of a structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:[Amended
8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited from
this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.[Added 8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 103-5 (RESERVED) § 103-5
90:207

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 103-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Woolwich, Gloucester County, New Jersey.
§ 103-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 103-8. Penalties for noncompliance. [Amended 8-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-13]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated, located,
extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions
of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction therefor, be fined not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not
more than 90 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition, shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Township of Woolwich from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 103-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter or
other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Woolwich,
Community No. 340217, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Gloucester County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated January
20, 2010.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Gloucester County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 34015C0063E,
34015C0064E, 34015C0066E, 34015C0068E, 34015C0069E,
34015C0132E, 34015C0151E, 34015C0152E, 34015C0153E,
34015C0154E, 34015C0156E, 34015C0157E, 34015C0158E;
whose effective date is January 20, 2010.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and Maps are on file at 120
Village Green Drive, Woolwich Township, New Jersey 08085.
§ 103-6 (RESERVED) § 103-10
90:209
§ 103-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 103-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body;
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Woolwich, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 103-10 WOOLWICH CODE § 103-11
90:210
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 103-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 103-7.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Construction Official and may include, but not be limited to plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 103-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 103-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 103-17B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway and assure that the
encroachment provisions of Section 5.3[1] are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 103-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
§ 103-12 (RESERVED) § 103-14
90:211
Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 103-17A Specific standards, Residential
construction, and § 103-17B, Specific standards, Nonresidential
construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section
4.1(3).
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 103-15.
F. Substantial damage review. [Added 8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
§ 103-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 103-14
90:212
§ 103-15. Variance procedure.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 103-17A, Specific standards, residential construction, and B,
Specific standards, nonresidential construction.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The Woolwich Township Joint Land Use Board shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) The Woolwich Township Joint Land Use Board shall hear and decide
appeals when it alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Woolwich Township Joint
Land Use Board, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
Woolwich Township Municipal Court, as provided.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Woolwich Township Joint
Land Use Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
§ 103-14 (RESERVED) § 103-15
90:213
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 103-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Woolwich Township Joint Land Use Board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 103-15A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
§ 103-15 WOOLWICH CODE § 103-15
90:214
or victimization of the public as identified in § 103-15A(4) or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 103-15 (RESERVED) § 103-15
90:215

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 103-16. General standards. [Amended 8-15-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-13]
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 103-16 (RESERVED) § 103-16
90:217
§ 103-17. Specific standards. [Amended 8-15-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-13]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 103-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard or in § 103-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements having fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of
each enclosed area having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(2) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities and
§ 103-16 WOOLWICH CODE § 103-17
90:218
sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation plus
one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive;
(2) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM, all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated above
the depth number specified in feet plus one foot above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least three feet if no depth number is specified), and
require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities either:
(1) Elevation.
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's
DFIRM to elevate above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
feet if no depth number is specified), and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
(2) Floodproofing.
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is
more restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 103-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 103-16A(2).
§ 103-17 (RESERVED) § 103-17
90:219
§ 103-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 103-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 103-19. (Reserved)
§ 103-20. Severability. [Added 8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 103-21. Enactment. [Added 8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 103-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 103-17 WOOLWICH CODE § 103-21
90:220
A. Adoption. This chapter shall be effective on August 15, 2016, and shall
remain in force until modified, amended or rescinded by Township of
Woolwich, Gloucester County, New Jersey.
§ 103-21 (RESERVED) § 103-21
90:221
Chapter 109
GRADING PLANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction Code — See Ch. 68,
Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 95.
Site Plan Review — See Ch. 149.
Soil removal — See Ch. 153.
Subdivision of Land — See Ch. 163.
Topsoil — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 109-1. Review and approval of grading plan required.
A building permit shall not be issued until a grading plan has been reviewed
and approved by the Township Engineer in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 109-2. Applicability.
The requirements set forth herein shall apply for the development of all
lots within the Township of Woolwich, whether for residential or commercial
purposes, and when there is an application for development before a
development review board of the Township. Expressly excluded from the
requirements set forth herein is the construction of proposed additions and/
or buildings, having at grade or floor level, a total of 600 square feet or less.
§ 109-3. Grading plan requirements.
The developer of a tract of land in the Township must provide grading plans
for each lot proposed to be developed. The grading plans shall contain all
the information required below in the grading plan checklist, which shall
be made available to all applicants in the form that follows. The developer
must submit a completed grading plan checklist with the application for
development.
§ 109-4. Grading plan checklist.
The following shall be the grading plan checklist.33 The applicant must
complete this checklist and supply the required information.
§ 109-5. Grading standards.
The grading plan must conform to the following standards:
A. All grading shall be done in such a way as to not result in any adverse
effects to adjacent properties. The plan shall not increase the amount of
33.Editor’s Note: Said checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 103-21 WOOLWICH CODE § 109-5
109:222
water which drains onto adjoining lots. For properties where a drainage
problem already exists, the drainage plan shall reduce the impact on
adjoining tracts to the greatest extent possible by causing the surface
water to drain to nearby streets, into approved drainage facilities or
into other accepted devices. All lots shall be graded to direct surface
water runoff away from structures and toward the frontage road or
other defined drainage paths.
B. Lawn areas shall be sloped away from the buildings and structures at a
minimum of 5% for the first 10 feet from a foundation wall. A minimum
slope of 1% should be maintained in all other lawn areas. A minimum
slope of 2% shall be maintained for all swales. Swales are normally
placed at the edge of both lots so that water will flow from the back of
the house to the curb. Water also may be directed to flow on
neighboring lots where easements are applicable to the curb or to the
source where the water will be discharged.
C. All slopes shall be no greater than 3:1.
D. Driveway grades shall not exceed 12%.
E. No grading shall occur within five feet of a property line unless
necessary to direct drainage off the site and into acceptable drainage
facilities in accordance with these standards. When an applicant
proposes to grade over an adjoining property line, written permission/
agreement from the adjoining property owner must be obtained and a
waiver from the minimum requirements must be obtained. Where an
applicant proposes to grade over an adjoining property line, written
permission in the form of an agreement for easement shall be recorded
in the Gloucester County Clerk’s Office, from the adjoining property or
developer, and a copy shall be filed with the Building Office of the
Township of Woolwich, and the Planning Board or Zoning Board of the
Township of Woolwich, where a subdivision or a variance shall have
been approved. The document between the parties must be notarized in
order to file and record. (The office of the County Clerk acts as a
registrar of deeds and all other recorded documents, and the right to
grade on an adjoining property becomes an easement or right against
the adjoining property).
F. The top of any excavation of slope shall be no closer than five feet to an
adjoining property and shall not provide for water runoff to the
adjoining property unless an agreement shall have been provided and
recorded as indicated under § 109-5E.
G. If a retaining wall is proposed, construction details must be provided. In
cases where a retaining wall is higher than 48 inches, calculations
prepared by a licensed professional engineer must be submitted
certifying the stability of the structure.
§ 109-5 GRADING PLANS § 109-6
109:223
§ 109-6. Approval procedures.
Each person to whom this chapter applies must obtain approval of his/her
grading plan in the following manner.
A. The Township Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment is
designated the Board to receive, review and determine site plans, for
purposes of establishing drainage and other issues relating to
applications for development. Grading is a part of a site plan
application. In the event any grading plan submitted under this chapter
shall not be approved by the Township Engineer, an application for site
plan with either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
wherever jurisdiction shall lie, shall be submitted for purposes of a final
determination.
B. The Township Engineer will oversee the grading operation during
normal site inspections, and shall inspect the final grade, with written
notice to the applicable board and to the developer. The final grade
inspection shall be 14 working days preceding the issuance of any
certificate of occupancy. Notification to the Township Engineer shall not
be less than 48 hours prior to rough grading by any applicant/
developer.
C. Following completion of all grading and drainage work, the applicant
must submit two copies of an as-built survey, prepared by a New Jersey
licensed surveyor or professional engineer, with final grades, and
request a final inspection. If any discrepancy exists between the
grading plan and actual construction, the developer will be required to
perform any necessary site work to correct the deficiency. All as-built
site work must be done in conformity with the approved grading plans.
Any significant deviations may be approved only by the relevant
approving agency.
D. Following completion of all work, the Township Engineer shall conduct
the final inspection and notify the Construction Official, in writing,
whether the final construction is in compliance with the approved
grading plan and that a certificate of occupancy may be issued. The
Construction Official shall issue the certificate of occupancy only if all
conditions for the approved grading plan have been satisfied.
E. All grading work shall be completed within 180 calendar days from the
issuance of the grading permit. The grading permit and building permit
shall be issued simultaneously. The 180 days shall be counted from
approval of the actual final grading plan.
(1) For lots separately handled for grading permits, an individual plan
shall be filed for each lot.
(2) Unless all lots are intended to be completed at one time, individual
lot permits shall be issued for each individual construction permit.
§ 109-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 109-7
109:224
§ 109-7. Permit and review fees.
The person to whom this chapter applies must pay the following fees for
application, review and inspection of the site.
Chapter 113
HAZARDOUS WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 155.
A. Application fee: $35.
B. A flat fee in the amount of $300 shall be paid at the time of submission
of a grading plan (per lot) and a sum of $100 in the event upon
submission of any revised grading plan. These fees are flat fees and
constitutes by this chapter the actual fee charged to the Township of
Woolwich by its Engineer.
C. Inspection fees. A flat inspection fee of $200 per lot for subdivisions
shall be submitted by the applicant to be utilized for the payment of the
Township Engineer’s inspection of the site in accordance with this
chapter.
D. Reinspection. A flat fee of $100 shall be paid to the Township of
Woolwich for any reinspection of a grading plan in the event the initial
inspection shall reveal errors/omissions and construction not in
accordance with the filed plan. Each reinspection shall be charged at
the flat rate of $100 and shall be paid at the time of the request for any
reinspection.
E. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the grading plan shall
have been submitted and finally approved as built.
F. All fees paid under this chapter shall be paid to the Treasurer of
Woolwich Township.
§ 109-7 HAZARDOUS WASTE § 109-7
113:225

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 4-6-1981 by Ord. No. 81-1]
§ 113-1. Definitions.
The following words, whenever used in this article, shall, for the purpose of
this article, have the following meanings:
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals composing any
community of interest, firm, partnership, corporation, political subdivision
or authority.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance which is, in its
production and/or disposal, regulated by any governmental agency for the
purpose of protecting health, safety or welfare of citizens from the actual
or potential threat imposed by noncompliant production and/or disposal
of such substances, and shall specifically include chemical waste, sewage,
septage or any other chemical or biological wastes.
REGULATED VEHICLE — Any vehicle duly authorized by the Board of
Public Utilities or other regulating agency of the State of New Jersey.
TRANSPORTATION — Movement from one location to another by use of a
vehicle or container upon public streets or highways.
§ 113-2. Unauthorized transport.
No person shall transport a potentially dangerous substance through the
Township of Woolwich unless transportation is made on a duly regulated
vehicle which prominently displays a certificate of approval from an
appropriate governmental agency.
§ 113-3. Requirements of authorized disposal.
§ 113-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
Any person who violates any provision of this article by transporting
potentially dangerous substance in an unregulated vehicle or who disposes
A. No person shall dispose of, dump or place any potentially dangerous
substance into any manhole, pipe, sewage line or any other receptacle/
field or stream/lot situate within the Township of Woolwich.
B. The only authorized disposal facility for sewage and septage within the
County of Gloucester shall be the Gloucester County Utilities Authority
or any other agency authorized by law to accept such substances. Other
potentially dangerous substances not authorized to be disposed of at
the Gloucester County Utilities Authority shall be disposed of only with
the agency authorized by law to dispose of such potentially dangerous
substances.
§ 113-1 HAZARDOUS WASTE § 113-4
113:227
of a potentially dangerous substance in a place other than authorized shall
be fined as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 113-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 113-4
113:228
ARTICLE II
Cleanup and Removal Costs
[Adopted 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-31]
§ 113-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEANUP AND REMOVAL COSTS — All costs associated with a discharge
within the boundaries of the Township of Woolwich which shall include
labor and material for the removal of hazardous substances or taking of
reasonable measures to prevent or mitigate damages to the public health,
safety or welfare of the residents of the Township of Woolwich, including
the lands, private and public, therein.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the release, spill, leak, emission, dump or disposal of hazardous
substances into the waters or lands within the Township of Woolwich, or
outside of the Township when damage may result to the waters or lands
inside of the Township.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — All elements and compounds, including
petroleum products, as set forth within N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b as amended.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, companies,
association, societies, firms, partnerships or joint-stock companies.
§ 113-6. Purpose.
In consequence of the increasing threat of the public and the environment
due to the discharge of hazardous substances, the Township of Woolwich is
and may be required to incur expenses in the cleanup and removal of such
substances. It is the opinion of the Mayor and Township Committee of the
Township of Woolwich that expenses incurred for extraordinary measures
required in the cleanup and removal of such substances is not a service
contemplated within the tax assessments. As such, extraordinary safety
measures are required for the protection of the health and welfare of
the Township residents. The costs of such action should be borne by the
party responsible for the discharge of hazardous substances. This article is
designed to recover the costs of Fire Department and other safety personnel
and the use of equipment employed in dealing with the discharge of
hazardous substances.
§ 113-7. Payment of costs; hearing.
A. Any person who shall discharge hazardous substances within the
Township of Woolwich shall be strictly liable for all cleanup and removal
costs incurred by the Township of Woolwich or agencies or employees
thereon.
§ 113-5 HAZARDOUS WASTE § 113-7
113:229
B. Upon assessment of cleanup and removal costs, the person assessed
may within 10 days of receipt of such assessment make a written
request for a hearing before the Township Committee exclusively upon
the reasonableness of the amount assessed.
C. In addition to the above, the person responsible shall be liable for all
reasonable attorneys fees and costs incurred in the collection of
cleanup and removal costs.
§ 113-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 113-7
113:230
Chapter 115
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 74.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 99.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 143.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 115-1. Enforcement officers.
The Construction Official of the Township of Woolwich or his designee be
and is hereby designated as the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by
the within chapter, in addition to the Gloucester County Health Department
to exercise the power prescribed by the within chapter.
§ 115-2. Standard adopted.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1948 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et
seq.), the New Jersey State Housing Code, as approved by the Department
of Community Affairs and filed in the Secretary of State's office, is hereby
accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used as a guide in
determining whether dwellings in this municipality are safe, sanitary and fit
for human habitation and rental. A copy of the New Jersey State Housing
Code is annexed to this chapter and three copies of the same have been
placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and are available to all
persons desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 115-3. Inspections authorized.
The Construction Official or his designee or the Gloucester County Health
Department are, as the case may be, hereby authorized and directed to
make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units, and premises located within the Township of Woolwich in
order that they may perform their duty of safeguarding the health and
safety of the occupants of dwelling and of the general public. For the
purpose of making such inspections, the Construction Official or his
designee or the Gloucester County Health Department, as the case may
be, is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable
times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises. The owner
or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit, or the
person in charge thereof, shall give the Construction Official or his designee
or the Gloucester County Health Department, as the case may be, free
access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises
at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination
and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the
owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling
or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all times for the purpose of making
§ 113-7 HOUSING STANDARDS § 115-3
115:231
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the
provisions of the ordinance or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or
any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 115-4. Notice of violations.
A. Whenever the Construction Official or his designee or the Gloucester
County Health Department, as the case may be, determine that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, they shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
a) be put in writing; b) include a statement of the reasons why it is
being issued; c) allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act
it requires; and d) be served upon the owner or his agent, or the
occupant, as the case may require, provided that such notice shall be
deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such
occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy
thereof is sent by certified mail to his last known address or if a copy
thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling
affected by the notice or if he is served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required under the laws of this state. Such notice
may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Construction Official or his designee
or the Gloucester County Health Department, as the case may be,
provided such person shall file in the office of the Construction Official
and/or the Gloucester County Health Department a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Construction Official or his designee
or the Gloucester County Health Department, as the case may be, shall
set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
10 days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that,
upon application of the petitioner, the Construction Official or his
designee or the Gloucester County Health Department, as the case may
be, may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond
such ten-day period, if in their judgment the petitioner has submitted a
good and sufficient reason for such postponement. After such hearing,
the Construction Official or his designee or the Gloucester County
Health Department, as the case may be, shall sustain, modify, or
withdraw the notice, depending upon their findings as to whether the
§ 115-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 115-4
115:232
§ 115-5. Rules and regulations.
The Construction Official or his designee or the Gloucester County Health
Department, as the case may be, are hereby authorized and empowered
to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as they may deem
necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter,
provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter, nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede
any of the provisions thereof. The Construction Official or his designee or
the Gloucester County Health Department shall file a certified copy of all
rules and regulations which they may adopt in their office and in the office
of the Clerk of the Township of Woolwich.
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Construction Official
or his designee or the Gloucester County Health Department, as the
case may be, sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be
an order. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically
become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in
the office of the Construction Official or the Gloucester County Health
Department, as the case may be, within 10 days after such notice is
served. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and
decision of the Construction Official or his designee or the Gloucester
County Health Department, as the case may be, shall be summarized,
reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the
office of the Construction Official or the Gloucester County Health
Department. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice
or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved
by the decision of the Construction Official or his designee or the
Gloucester County Health Department, as the case may be, may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided
by the laws of this state. Whenever the Construction Official or his
designee or the Gloucester County Health Department, as the case may
be, finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action
to protect the public health or safety, they may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as they deem necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such
order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the
Construction Official or his designee or the Gloucester County Health
Department, as the case may be, shall be afforded a hearing as soon
as possible. After such hearing, depending upon their findings as to
whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Construction
Official or his designee or the Gloucester County Health Department,
as the case may be, shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or
revoke it.
§ 115-4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 115-6
115:233
§ 115-6. Prohibition.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:28-1, established hereby as the standard, and fit for human
habitation.
§ 115-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter and each day the same is violated shall be deemed
and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 117
INSURANCE
§ 115-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 115-7
115:234
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-1734]
§ 117-1. Conditions for payment of claims; anticipated costs of
demolition.
§ 117-2. Requests of certificate of search.
Any request for an official certificate of search for municipal liens shall
specify that the search concerns fire-damaged property.
§ 117-3. Appeals.
If an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall issue a draft payable to the Court
of record to be held by the Court in an interest-bearing escrow account
in the state or federally chartered bank, savings bank or savings and loan
association in the state in an amount totaling 75% of the full amount of
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq., no insurance company authorized
to issue fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey shall pay to a
claimant any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damages on any real
property located within the Township of Woolwich pursuant to any fire
insurance policy, until such time as:
(1) All taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges
levied and assessed and due and payable appearing on the official
certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12
shall have been paid either by the owner of such real property or by
the insurance company; and
(2) The insured person submits an official certificate, on a form
prescribed and certified by the Municipal Clerk and the Tax
Collector of the municipality, that demolition is not required or that
the costs of demolition or anticipated demolition have been paid; or
(3) The municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a
resolution adopted pursuant to § 117-4 of this chapter.
B. If a demolition has not yet occurred on date of receipt of a request for
an official certificate of search pursuant to this section, the insurer shall
provide on that certificate an estimate of the anticipated costs of
demolition. The insured, on notice, shall pay the anticipated cost of
demolition to the municipality which shall hold the funds in an interestbearing
escrow account in a state or federally charted bank, savings
banks or savings and loan association in this state.
34.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Fire Insurance Claims, adopted
3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 9-4.
§ 117-1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 117-3
115:235
the lien or charge being contested, but not to exceed the proceeds payable
under its insurance policy, and the insurance company shall issue a draft
payable to the municipality for the remaining 25% of the lien or charge
being contested with the full amount paid by the insurance company to the
Court and the municipality not to exceed the proceeds payable under its
insurance policy pending termination of all proceedings, at which time such
moneys and all interest accruing thereon at a rate paid on interest-bearing
accounts in state or federally chartered banks, savings banks or savings and
loan association to the state shall be disbursed in accordance with the final
order or judgment of the court.
§ 117-4. Installment payments.
The Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich may, by resolution,
enter into an agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property
situated in the Township of Woolwich to pay in full all delinquent taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-19 or for the redemption of a tax sale lien by installment payments
pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey or for the payment in full of any anticipated costs of demolition
by installment if the Township Committee is satisfied that the claim for fire
damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property.
§ 117-5. Payment of demolition costs, liens.
Unless a resolution is received in accordance with § 117-4 by an insurance
company writing fire insurance policies, such insurance company is hereby
authorized and required, prior to the payment of any claims for fire
damages in excess of $2,500, to pay the amount of the anticipated
demolition costs to the Township of Woolwich in the manner provided
by § 117-1 and to pay to the Township of Woolwich the amount of the
liens appearing on the official certificate and such other recorded liens or
related charges as may be certified to the insurance company. If an appeal
is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than an appeal on
the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the
insurance company shall issue a draft payable to the court of record, to
be held by the court in an interest bearing escrow account in a state or
federally chartered bank, savings bank, or savings and loan association
in the state, in an amount totaling 75% of the full amount of the lien or
charge being contested, but not to exceed the proceeds payable under its
insurance policy, and the insurance company shall issue a draft payable
to the municipality for the remaining 25% of the lien or charge being
contested, with the full amount paid by the insurance company to the Court
and the municipality not to exceed the proceeds payable under its insurance
policy, pending termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys
and all interest accruing thereon, at a rate paid on interest bearing accounts
in state or federally chartered banks, savings banks or savings and loan
associations in the state, shall be disbursed in accordance with the final
order or judgment of the court.
§ 117-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 117-5
115:236
Chapter 125
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 135,
§ 135-1.
Solid waste — See Ch. 155.
§ 125-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning Officer, Fire Official and police
officers and/or the Department of Public Works Superintendent. Said
officials shall be empowered to enforce this chapter and shall be collectively
designated as the "Township Enforcement Officer."
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including
but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or detachable tab of
any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any garbage,
trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden
waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or
other packaging or construction material.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the disposing of litter.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any area that is used or held out for use by the public,
whether owned or operated by public or private interests.
§ 125-2. Litter receptacles required in certain public places.
A. Litter receptacles shall be required at the following public places within
the Township of Woolwich:
(1) Buildings held out for public use.
(2) Bus stops.
(3) Parks.
(4) Drive-in restaurants.
(5) Street vendor locations.
(6) Self-service refreshment areas.
(7) Construction sites.
(8) Gas service station islands.
§ 117-5 LITTERING § 125-2
125:237
§ 125-3. Placement of litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter, rubbish or trash in public receptacles or in authorized
private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon private property.
§ 125-4. Sweeping litter into gutters.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, catch basin, street or
other public place within the township the accumulation of litter, rubbish
or trash from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway.
§ 125-5. Throwing litter from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter, rubbish or trash upon any street, other public place or upon private
property within the township.
§ 125-6. Trucks causing litter.
§ 125-7. Litter in parks and playgrounds.
(9) Shopping centers.
(10) Parking lots.
(11) Special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals and festivals.
B. The proprietors of any places listed in Subsection A or the sponsors of
any special events shall be responsible for the providing and servicing
of litter receptacles so that adequate containerization is available.
A. No person shall drive, move or park any truck or other vehicle within
the township unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of the load, contents or litter from dropping, sifting, leaking,
escaping or being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other
public place.
B. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the township,
the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in or on any street,
alley or other public place litter, rubbish, trash or foreign matter of any
kind.
C. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects have
fallen or escaped which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle
or otherwise endanger travelers on public property shall immediately
notify the Woolwich Police Department and shall pay the costs of
cleaning if performed by the Township of Woolwich or its agents.
§ 125-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 125-7
125:238
§ 125-8. Litter on private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter, rubbish or trash on any occupied or
vacant private property within the township, whether owned by such person
or not, except that the owner or person in control may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such manner that litter, rubbish or trash
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, other public place or any private property.
§ 125-9. Dumping of solid waste.
No person shall permit the discarding or dumping of any household or
commercial solid waste in any place not specifically designated for the
purpose of solid waste storage or disposal.
§ 125-10. Storage of bulky household items.
No person shall store or permit the storage of any bulky household waste,
including household appliances, furniture or mattresses, in areas zoned
residential, except in a fully enclosed structure.
§ 125-11. Storage of tires.
No person shall store or permit the storage of tires, except in a fully
enclosed structure.
§ 125-12. Keeping of inoperable vehicles restricted.
No person shall keep or permit the keeping on streets, vacant lots and
residential lawns, except in a fully enclosed structure, any motor vehicle,
trailer or semitrailer which:
A. No person shall throw or deposit litter, rubbish or trash in any park or
playground within the township except in public receptacles and in
such a manner that the litter, rubbish or trash will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park,
playground, any street or other public place.
B. Where public receptacles are not present, all litter, rubbish or trash
shall be carried away from the park or playground and properly
disposed of elsewhere by the person responsible for its presence.
A. Is missing tires, wheels, engine or any essential parts;
B. Displays extensive body damage or deterioration;
C. Does not display a current, valid state license plate; or
D. Is wrecked, disassembled or partially disassembled.
§ 125-7 LITTERING § 125-13
125:239
§ 125-13. Construction sites.
No property owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction or
demolition site shall permit the accumulation of litter or debris before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of the construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable and nonflyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such frequency as to
prevent spillage.
§ 125-14. Open or overflowing waste disposal containers.
No residential, commercial or industrial property owner, lessee, tenant or
other occupant shall permit open or overflowing waste disposal containers
or bins on his or her property.
§ 125-15. Distribution of advertisements, handbills or unsolicited
materials.
§ 125-16. Duties of merchants.
§ 125-17. Maintenance of property.
A. No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed to any dwelling or
building or place or cause to be placed upon any motor vehicle any
advertisement, handbill or unsolicited material of any nature unless the
item or material is securely placed at each dwelling or on each motor
vehicle so that it will not be carried or deposited by the elements to
another portion of the property, any street, sidewalk, other public place
or private property.
B. In the event that the material is distributed by any person who has not
attained the age of 18 years, the person requesting or authorizing the
distribution of the item or materials shall be responsible for compliance
with this chapter.
A. No person owning, occupying or operating a place of business shall
sweep into or deposit in any gutter, catch basin, street or other public
place within the township the accumulation of litter, rubbish or trash
from any buildings or lot, public or private sidewalk or driveway.
B. The owner or managing agent, lessee, tenant or other occupant shall
keep the entire business premises free from all litter, rubbish or trash.
C. In shopping centers or other business premises that contain common
areas and/or common parking, the owner or managing agent shall keep
such common areas free from all litter, rubbish or trash.
A. Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in charge of any
structure shall keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and curb
abutting the building or structure free from obstruction and nuisances
§ 125-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 125-17
125:240
§ 125-18. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner, managing agent, lessee, tenant or person in control of any
private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter,
rubbish or trash; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit
storage of litter, rubbish or trash in authorized receptacles for collection.
§ 125-19. Clearing of litter on private property.
§ 125-20. Posting of signs.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works is authorized to post
appropriate signs stating the prohibition against littering and the fine of
$100.
§ 125-21. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, rights-of-way, back yards, courts
and alleys free from all litter and other offensive material.
B. Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of the premises free of litter. All sweepings shall be collected and
properly containerized for disposal.
A. Notice to remove. The Township of Woolwich Enforcement Officer is
authorized and empowered to notify the owner or agent of owner of any
private property within the township to properly dispose of litter,
rubbish or trash located on the owner's property which is unsightly or
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be
by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to said owner at
his last known address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent to comply with the notice within 10 days after receipt,
or within 15 days after the date of the notice, in the event that the same
is returned by the post office because of inability to make delivery,
provided that the notice was properly addressed, the Enforcement
Officer is authorized and empowered to cause the disposal of the litter,
rubbish or trash.
C. Charge included in tax bill. When the township has caused the removal
of unsightly or dangerous litter, rubbish or trash, or has paid for its
removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6%
per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by
the owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of the property
on the next regular tax bill forwarded to the owner of the township and
shall be due and payable at the time of the payment of the bill.
§ 125-17 LITTERING § 125-21
125:241
Chapter 127
LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicabs — See Ch. 171. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 182.
§ 127-1. Scope and compliance.
Any limousine service with a principal place of business located within
the Township of Woolwich shall establish compliance in all respects with
N.J.S.A. 16-13 et seq. The limousine company is responsible to update the
Township's records any time a limousine is taken out of service or a new
limousine or limousines is/are added to the fleet.
§ 127-2. Fees.
§ 127-3. Insurance.
As part of the application process, the limousine company shall establish
full compliance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, governing insurance policies on
limousines.
Chapter 128
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 128, Loitering, adopted 5-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-14, as
amended, was repealed 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11.]
Chapter 135
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 138.
A. Any such limousine company shall submit a one-time fee in the amount
of $100, along with its application for a limousine license.
B. The limousine company shall pay an additional fee of $10 for each
limousine owned and operated by the limousine company.
§ 125-21 WOOLWICH CODE § 127-3
125:242
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 96-18]
§ 135-1. Prohibited conduct.
A. While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner and, in particular, no person
shall:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving materials, public utilities or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards (whether temporary or permanent),
monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition.
(3) Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs, plants or
other wood or materials or make any excavation by tool, equipment
or other means.
(4) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind
(whether permanent or temporary) or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special
written permit issued hereunder.
(5) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or
otherwise disturb grassed areas or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(6) Climb any tree or walk or stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(7) Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
(8) Hunt, molest, kill, wound, trap, abuse, shoot, pursue or throw
objects at or have in his/her possession any animal, reptile or bird
found within any park, nor shall their habitats be disturbed, except
where specifically designated and permitted. No person shall
purchase, sell, accept or give away any such animal, reptile, bird or
eggs except as may be specifically provided for and permitted.
(9) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in
any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into
§ 135-1 LITTERING § 135-1
125:243
such water any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which
may result in the pollution of said waters.
(10) Have brought in, dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, garbage, refuse or organic or
inorganic solid or liquid waste.
(11) Drive or park any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads
or parking areas or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary parking areas by the Township of
Woolwich. Motorized vehicles, with the exception of such vehicles
being used by a rescue squad, Fire Department, Police Department
or such other vehicle with permission from the Township of
Woolwich or the Borough of Swedesboro, shall be prohibited from
driving said vehicle on any paths intended to be walking or jogging
trails. In addition, within the parking areas there shall be
designated “No Parking” areas to allow for the emergency access
of emergency vehicles into the interior of such park in the event of
an emergency. Such “No Parking” areas shall be strictly enforced,
and violators shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article
1. [Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13; 5-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-14]
(12) Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park areas. No motor vehicle shall be
parked in said park areas from 1/2 hour after sunset until sunrise,
except as otherwise permitted. Vehicles over four tons are
prohibited from entering park properties unless authorized to
perform work for the Township of Woolwich or the Borough of
Swedesboro relative to the Locke Avenue Park. [Amended
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1]
(13) Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
(14) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees
or in any place or position where a person may trip over or be
injured by it.
(15) Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in any park,
except in such places as may be specifically designated for such
activities.
(16) Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether
motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places
designated for boating by the Township of Woolwich. Such activity
shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or
will hereafter be adopted.
(17) Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
(18) Shoot into park areas from beyond park boundaries. No persons
shall carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles,
§ 135-1 WOOLWICH CODE § 135-1
125:244
spring guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons
or devices potentially inimical to wildlife or dangerous to human
safety or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank
cartridges or any kind of trapping device, except as may be
specifically permitted. No person shall fly model airplanes or shoot
rockets of any kind. [Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
(19) Violate the regulation that use of individual fireplaces, together
with tables and benches, follows the generally accepted rule of
"First come, first served."
(20) Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(21) Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose
of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after
closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used
or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer,
camp trailer, camp wagon or the like, except in those areas
designated by the Township of Woolwich for those purposes.
(22) Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails, where permitted.
Horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained and
ridden with due care and shall not be allowed to graze or go
unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
(23) Bring alcoholic beverages or drink the same at any time except in
such areas and under such regulations as may be designated and
permitted by the Township of Woolwich.35
(24) Have in his/her possession, set or otherwise cause to explode,
discharge or burn any fireworks, firecrackers or explosives or
flammable materials or discharge them or throw them into any
such areas from lands or highways adjacent thereto.
(25) Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into
areas clearly marked by the Township of Woolwich by signs bearing
the words "Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area." All domestic
animals in those areas where such animals are permitted shall be
adequately restrained at all times, and owners shall be responsible
for cleaning up after their animal. [Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-13]
(26) Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or
private, except in such areas and under such regulations as may be
designated and permitted by the Township of Woolwich.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 56, Alcoholic Beverages, § 56-5.
§ 135-1 LITTERING § 135-1
125:245
(27) Build, or attempt to build, a fire except in such areas and under
such regulations as may be designated by the Township of
Woolwich. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, paper or other
flammable material within any park or on any highways, roads or
streets abutting or contiguous thereto. Smoking is strictly
prohibited within all Township parks. [Amended 10-21-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-14]
(28) Gamble, participate in or abet any game of chance except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Township of Woolwich.36
(29) Go onto the ice on any waters except such areas as are designated
as skating fields, and provided that a safety signal is displayed.
(30) Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
(31) Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor place any stand,
cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such
article or thing. Exception is made for any permittee or licensed
concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of
the Township of Woolwich.
(32) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be
erected any sign on any parklands or roads in any park.
(33) Golf or organize or participate in any sport that may cause damage
to any area or sporting field within such facility. [Added
11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
(34)No person shall drive recklessly or use excessive speed over 10
mph within the limits and boundaries of public park areas within
the Township of Woolwich. All posted signs within said park areas
are to be obeyed. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-8; amended
8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
(35) Under no circumstances shall any person use or import any foreign
objects for skateboarding, such as ramps, jumps or otherwise, onto
park grounds. In addition, no person shall engage in any behavior
while using skateboards or other that in any way could pose a
threat of injury to others within park boundaries. Skateboarding is
allowed within park boundaries on the paved walking path only,
subject to the above. [Added 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 02-14]
(36)UAVs. [Added 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 65, Bingo and Raffles.
§ 135-1 WOOLWICH CODE § 135-1
125:246
§ 135-2. Public use and availability of park and recreation areas.
§ 135-3. Permits for special events.
(a) Utilize UAVs in park lands, all, or a portion of which, are
improved, in a manner that:
[1] Disturbs or harasses wildlife;
[2] Interferes with official law enforcement, fire or medical
services, or other emergency operations;
[3] Flies directly over people, vessels, vehicles, structures, or
sports playing fields;
[4] Flies outside of the visual sight of the operator;
[5] Uses flammable liquids for fuel; or
[6] Launches any form of projectile.
(b) For the purpose of this section, a UAV is defined to include all
such equipment as may be defined by state and federal
regulations, and shall generally include, but not be limited to,
an aircraft without a human pilot aboard.
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening
and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for
the public information and shall be determined from time to time by
resolution of the Township of Woolwich.
B. No person shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion,
age, sex or handicap, be excluded from participation in, be denied the
benefits of or be otherwise subjected to discrimination in any park
facility, program or activity.
C. Discrimination on the basis of residence, including preferential
reservation, membership or annual permit systems, is prohibited except
to the extent that reasonable differences in admission and other fees
may be maintained on the basis of residence in any park.
A. Permits for special events/activities in parks and recreation areas must
be obtained by application to the Woolwich Township Director of
Municipal Services in accordance with policies and procedures
established by the Township of Woolwich. [Amended 10-4-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-22; 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
B. In addition to other standards set forth by the Township of Woolwich,
the following standards shall apply with regard to the issuance of use
permits by the Township of Woolwich:
§ 135-1 LITTERING § 135-3
125:247
§ 135-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(1) The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park.
(2) The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation.
(3) The proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will
not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(4) The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
date and hour requested in the application.
C. Within 14 days after the receipt of an application for permit, the
Township of Woolwich shall apprise an applicant, in writing, of its
reasons for refusing a permit and provide for an appeal process.
D. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
E. The person(s) to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for all loss,
damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the
negligence of the person(s) to whom such permit shall have been
issued. The Township of Woolwich shall have the right to require any
permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to
members of the general public arising as a result of such permitted
activities in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by
the Township of Woolwich prior to the commencement of any activity or
issuance of any permit.
F. Revocation. The Township of Woolwich shall have the authority to
revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or
upon good cause shown.
A. The Township of Woolwich or its designated agents shall, in connection
with its disputes imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
B. The Township of Woolwich or its designated agents shall have the
authority to eject from the park area any person(s) acting in violation of
this chapter.
C. The Township of Woolwich or its designated agents shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the
park or used in violation of this chapter.
D. This chapter shall also be enforced by the Woolwich Police Department
of the municipality.
§ 135-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 135-4
125:248
§ 135-5. Applicability.
This chapter is in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other ordinance
involving or effecting any of the subject matters contained in this chapter.
E. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
§ 135-4 LITTERING § 135-5
125:249

ARTICLE II
Athletic Fields and Recreational Use
[Adopted 10-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-22]
§ 135-6. Purpose.
This article embodies the policies and procedures which govern recreation
facility use and users in order to ensure proper care and maintenance
of athletic fields and other recreational facilities, owned by the Township
of Woolwich, and to assure fair and efficient access to those facilities.
The primary use of municipal recreation areas and facilities is for public
recreation and athletic activities. Municipal facilities may be made available
for such activities if not in conflict with repair, rehabilitation or maintenance
of the fields or facility. Factors to be considered in determining permission
for use, as well as permission for type of use, are current capital
improvements or rehabilitation, regular maintenance, extent of wear and
tear to be caused by current or proposed use, coordination of uses, efficient
scheduling, location of facility, and availability of services at a particular
facility. All facility users shall comply with all applicable federal, state and
local laws; such user shall pay all the costs, expenses, fines, penalties
and damages which may be imposed by the municipality by reason of, or
arising out of, the user's failure to fully and promptly comply with all legal
requirements, and observe all the provisions of this policy.
§ 135-7. List of facilities governed.
§ 135-8. Priority of use by category. [Amended 3-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-02]
Permits for field/facility use are issued by category (and in priority order)
in which the organization or event is placed. Category 1 user/event has
priority over Categories II, III and IV user/event.
A. The outdoor athletic fields and outdoor recreational facilities within the
Township of Woolwich are listed as follows:
(1) Township recreation areas.
Location Field/Facility
Locke Avenue Park and High Hill
Park
Baseball fields
Athletic fields
Soccer fields
Basketball court
PMC property Practice fields
B. This policy also applies to other fields/facilities not listed above, now
and in the future.
§ 135-6 LITTERING § 135-8
125:251
§ 135-9. Allocation of fields and facilities.
A. Category I permit use.
(1) Swedesboro Woolwich Teams in established Leagues or Clubs.
These teams are independent organizations that have been
established to serve the recreational and/or athletic interest of the
participants. A minimum of 90% of the host team must be residents
of Swedesboro and/or Woolwich Township. Independent
organizations that have used the facility during a prior year shall
have priority over an applicant who has not used the facility in a
prior year.
B. Category II permit use.
(1) Swedesboro/Woolwich-based organizations. These groups are
made up of residents of Swedesboro and/or Woolwich Township, or
businesses located in Swedesboro and/or Woolwich Township who
request the use of facilities on an occasional basis when space is
available. A minimum of 90% of the group must reside or work fulltime
in Swedesboro and/or Woolwich Township.
C. Category III permit use.
(1) Organizations not affiliated with Swedesboro/Woolwich. These
groups are made up of persons consisting of a group that is less
than 90% of Swedesboro and/or Woolwich Township residents, or
who do not work full-time in Woolwich Township.
D. Category IV permit use.
(1) Camps and clinics. Camps and clinics attended by participants from
Swedesboro/Woolwich (at least 90%) may use the fields free of
charge if they do not charge a fee for attendance. Camps and
clinics that charge a fee for attendance and those without 90%
attendance from Swedesboro/Woolwich shall pay a fee as set forth
at § 135-12. Camp and clinic applications will be reviewed and
assessed based on availability as relative to rolling blackout dates.
Additionally, requests must be made in accordance with the
designated field use map.
E. Category V tournaments. Organized tournaments conducted for a
period of time up to three days.
F. Category VI use of pavilion. Swedesboro/Woolwich-based
organizations. A minimum of 90% of the group must reside or work fulltime
in Swedesboro and/or Woolwich Township.
G. Category VII use of pavilion (private). Private use of the pavilion for
birthday parties, private functions, and similar events.
A. The fields/facilities use a schedule created by the Director of Municipal
Services that will establish the opening and closing dates for field/
§ 135-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 135-9
125:252
§ 135-10. Facility use rules and regulations.
facilities use, as well as the period of time affected by that schedule.
The schedule will serve as a permit for use of the facility named.
Responsible officials within the Township (police, emergency services,
Public Works Department, and others) will receive a copy of the fields/
facilities schedule. [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
B. Communication is the key to efficient maximization of use of scarce
recreational facilities. Consistent with that goal, any assigned user
must notify the Director of Municipal Services or the Director's
designee, of expected nonuse of a particular facility, at a particular
time. Every effort should be made to do so at least seven calendar days
in advance. This nonuse policy does not apply to weather cancellations.
[Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
C. Notes concerning scheduling.
(1) Priority of assignment is made based upon the categories
established above. Priority is given within a particular sport's
designated season. In-season sports have equal status to each
other; out-of-season sports have equal status to each other.
Recognizing that most sports have some program on more than an
in-season basis, consideration should be made to accommodate the
out-of-season sport's minimum necessary allocation for games as a
first priority and practices as a second priority. Assignment of
particular fields will be done with an effort towards accommodating
such use rather than simply on a preference basis; efficient,
coordinated use is the goal.
(2) Game delays. Youth sports activities are often subject to delays due
to late-arriving opponents and/or officials, or emergencies. In such
cases, use may extend beyond the normal time. Likewise, overtime
and extra innings can require additional time. Other users take
their starting time subject to previous team's right to complete
their games and with the knowledge that termination of the activity
is not solely within the control of the representative. However,
practices may not delay the start of the next user session.
(3) Field closings due to weather. Fields may be closed to all users for
an extended period time of more than one day by the Department of
Public Works and, at times, Director of Municipal Services. These
conditions include, but are not limited to, field under water, severe
damages that make it unsafe/unplayable, field reconstruction and
the need to rest fields. Information on field closings can be
accessed by the Director of Municipal Services. It is the
responsibility of league presidents and athletic directors to notify
their coaches and players. Destruction or damage done to any
playing field due to use in unsatisfactory conditions may be cause
for forfeiture of permit at the discretion of the Township of
Woolwich. [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
§ 135-9 LITTERING § 135-10
125:253
§ 135-11. Field modifications. [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-03]
Any proposed changes to fields or parks should be submitted to the Director
of Municipal Services to consider impact upon facility use. Those requested
changes, along with a recommendation, will then be forwarded to the
Woolwich Township Committee for consideration. This would include the
development of active recreation areas from property not currently used
for that purpose. It may include the installation of fields, fences, structures,
scoreboards, permanent stands and permanent and temporary lighting. It
would not include the replacement of any current structure (an old backstop
with a new one of roughly the same size) or the repair or replacement
of existing fencing. These types of items will be the responsibility of the
Township Committee. The placement location of all movable items (portable
bases, soccer goals, batting cages, blocking sleds, temporary fencing, etc.)
will be the responsibility of the league, organization or club using the
facility.
§ 135-12. Permit costs.
A. Athletic fields/facilities may not be used before 8:00 a.m. or after dusk,
except where lights are utilized. The Township has a 10:00 p.m. lightsout
time for all outdoor facilities. Practices and games should be
scheduled to end before this time with the lights to be turned off as soon
as the players and spectators leave the field.
B. All trash must be placed in proper receptacles. Users are expected to
leave the facility in the same condition in which it was found, or better.
C. Warm-ups for the next scheduled event must be performed so as not to
interfere with existing events and so as not to endanger the welfare of
all participants, spectators and facilities.
D. All managers, coaches, or persons in charge of a group using the fields
will be responsible for the conduct of all participants, spectators and
others connected with the activity, including visiting teams and
opponents.
E. Picnics, birthday parties and other events. [Amended 3-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-02]
A. Woolwich Township athletic and recreation fields permit costs are as
follows: [Amended 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-17; 3-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-02]
(1) Category I. $5 per participant, per team, per thirteen-week season
(cost includes practice and game scheduling). The Category I fee
shall be capped at 500 participants, such that the athletic league or
club shall remit $5 per participant up to and including 500
participants, and no additional fee shall be due for participants in
excess of 500.
§ 135-10 WOOLWICH CODE § 135-12
125:254
(2) Category II. Permit fees waived.
(3) Category III. $10 per participant, per team, per thirteen-week
season (cost includes practice and game scheduling).
(4) Category IV. 5% of gross revenue per camp/clinic for those groups
that charge participants a fee. For camps/clinics without 90%
attendance from Swedesboro/Woolwich that do not charge
participants a fee, field use will be subject to the fees set forth for
Category V.
(5) Category V. For the use of one to three fields for all or part of a
three-day period (Friday, Saturday, Sunday): $800. For the use of
four or more fields for all or part of a three-day period (Friday,
Saturday, Sunday): $1,300. A $300 deposit is required at time of
application for grooming. An organization can elect to groom their
own fields by checking "No" above. Deposit will be returned upon
inspection of DPW that fields were left in as good or better
condition as from first rental day.
(6) Category VI. Swedesboro/Woolwich-based organizations. A
minimum of 90% of the group must reside or work full-time in
Swedesboro and/or Woolwich Township. No fee. [Added
2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
(7) Category VII. Use of pavilion (private). Private use of the pavilion
for birthday parties, private functions, and similar events. No fee.
[Added 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
B. Collection of fees. Fifty percent of total fees are due upon submission of
field usage form, and the remaining 50% is due upon field usage
acceptance.
§ 135-12 LITTERING § 135-12
125:255

ARTICLE III
Vehicular Traffic Within Park Property
[Adopted 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
§ 135-13. Regulations established.
While in any public park or recreation area of the Township of Woolwich,
the following vehicular regulations are hereby established and shall be
enforced in accordance with § 135-4 of the Code of the Township of
Woolwich:
A. A speed limit of 10 miles per hour shall be established and enforced
within said park and recreation areas.
B. All vehicles shall be parked only in designated parking stalls provided,
unless otherwise approved by the Woolwich Township Committee and/
or Police Department by special permit during special events. "No
Parking" areas are hereby established and shall be designated within
said parks by signage stating "No Parking."
C. Within Locke Avenue/High Hill Park, there is hereby established a stop
intersection, where the driveway meets with the pedestrian path at the
property line of High Hill Park and PMC property, where stop signs
shall be erected at both sides of said intersection.
§ 135-13 LITTERING § 135-13
125:257
Chapter 138
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 56.
Bingo and raffles — See Ch. 65.
Curfew — See Ch. 79.
Loitering — See Ch. 128.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 135.
§ 135-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 135-13
125:258
ARTICLE I
Standards of Conduct
[Adopted 7-9-1945]
§ 138-1. Paupers.
No pauper shall return to the Township of Woolwich after having been
legally removed therefrom without a certificate from the municipality to
which each pauper was so removed or leave his place of legal settlement;
and no person shall go from door to door or place himself in the streets,
highways or roads within the Township of Woolwich to beg, crave charity or
collect alms; nor shall any person wander about said township and lodge in
any hotel, inn or other public house or houses or house of entertainment,
marketplace, barns or other places or in the open air without giving a good
account of the reason for so doing; nor shall any person wander about said
township and beg or solicit charity under pretense of having been soldiers,
sailors, marines or seafaring men or of loss by fire or other casualty or by
war or by other pretense or things; and no person shall leave or threaten
to leave his or her family to be maintained by the Township of Woolwich or
become chargeable thereto; nor shall any person without sufficient property
or means for his or her subsistence and support live idle, but shall engage
in some honest employment and provide for himself, herself or his or her
family; and no person shall use or pretend to use or have any skill in
physiognomy, palmistry or like crafty science; nor shall any person pretend
to tell destinies or fortunes.
§ 138-2. Disorderly houses.
No person shall keep or maintain within the Township of Woolwich a
disorderly house or a house of ill fame or allow or permit any house,
shop, store or other building owned or occupied by him or her within the
Township of Woolwich to be used as a disorderly house or a house of ill
fame, to be frequented or restored to by riotous or disorderly persons,
prostitutes, gamblers or vagrants.
§ 138-3. Gambling devices; animal fights.
No person shall set up, keep or maintain or permit to be kept or maintained
in any house or premises, public or private, within the Township of
Woolwich, any faro table, faro bank, roulette wheel, slot machine, writing
game or other device or game of chance for the purpose of gaming or any
cock pit or other place for animals to fight, nor shall any person hold or
permit to be held in any building or upon any premises any dog fight or cock
fight for a purse or prize money.
§ 138-4. Games of chance.
No person shall deal, play or engage in faro, roulette or other game of
chance either as banker, player, dealer or otherwise for the purpose of
gaming, within the Township of Woolwich.
§ 138-1 LITTERING § 138-5
125:259
§ 138-5. (Reserved)37
§ 138-6. (Reserved)38
§ 138-7. (Reserved)39
§ 138-8. Weapons.
No person shall conduct himself in or about the Township of Woolwich
having concealed upon him or her any picklock, key, crow, jack, bit or
other instrument with an intent to break or enter into any building; or
shall have upon him or her any pistol, hanger, cutlass, bludgeon or other
offensive or dangerous weapon with or without intent; nor shall any person
be apprehended having upon him or her, whether concealed or not, any
of the foregoing articles or things with intent to assault any person; nor
shall any person be found in or near any dwelling house, warehouse, stable,
barn, coachhouse, garbage, smoke house or any place or public resort or
assemblage for business, worship, amusement or other lawful purpose with
intent to steal any goods or chattels; provided, however, that this section
shall not apply to law officers or other persons duly authorized under
certain statutes of this state to carry proper weapons.
§ 138-9. Public nudity; lewd behavior.
No person shall appear in any street, road, highway or public place in the
Township of Woolwich in a state of nudity or in a dress not belonging to
his or her sex, unless such dress be worn during an established period
of masquerade, in which event such dress or costume must be reasonably
modest, or in an indecent or lewd dress; nor shall any person make any
indecent exposure of his or her person or be guilty of any lewd or indecent
act or behavior; nor shall he or she sell or offer for sale any indecent or lewd
book, picture or thing; nor shall he or she perform any indecent or improper
or lewd play or other representation.
§ 138-10. Projectiles; discharge of firearms.
No person shall throw any stick or stone or other article or thing at or
shoot any revolver, pistol, gun, air gun or sling shot or other device at any
public property or private property not his or her own which may injure
such property or person using or owning the same.
§ 138-11. False fire alarms.
No person shall give any false alarm of fire within the Township of
Woolwich.
37.Editor’s Note: Former § 138-5, Loitering, was repealed 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11.
38.Editor's Note: Former § 138-6, Intoxicated persons, was repealed 10-6-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-22.
39.Editor's Note: Former § 138-7, Noise and other disturbances, was repealed 8-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-11.
§ 138-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 138-12
125:260
§ 138-12. Support of family.
No person, being a husband or father, wife or mother, shall desert or
willfully refuse or neglect to provide for his or her family; provided,
however, that any wife or mother shall not be obliged to provide for and
maintain her children or family where the husband is living and capable of
providing maintenance and support.
§ 138-13. Sunday prohibitions.
No person, firm or corporation or other organization shall conduct or
operate within the Township of Woolwich on the Christian Sabbath, or first
day of the week, commonly called "Sunday," any amusement park, motionpicture
theater, show house, play house, dance hall, poolroom, shooting
gallery, baseball or football park, bowling alley or any other establishment
wherein persons collect for purposes of amusement, pleasure, incitement
and the playing of sports, past times and diversions, either directly or
indirectly, whether such place or establishment is conducted within a tent
or building or not, where any person, firm, corporation or organization
interested hopes or expects to receive or derive, or does or will in fact
derive therefrom, gain or profit, or where the place or establishment is in its
purpose or effect a commercial enterprise, or which can be shown to be a
scheme to produce income or profit to its operators (whether or not a profit
is actually gained).
§ 138-14. Trespassing.
No person shall take or remove within the Township of Woolwich, by
trespass, property which the trespasser knows to belong to another; nor
shall any person unlawfully take, remove, receive, conceal, convert or in any
way dispose of property not his or her own within the limits of the Township
of Woolwich; nor shall any person break or enter any building within said
township without due and legal warrant or other proper authority for such
breaking and entering.
§ 138-15. Unnecessary or unusual noise. [Amended 6-18-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-21]
A. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which does or is likely
to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace
or safety of others, within the limits of the Township at any time unless
during emergency situations, or as otherwise noted. [Amended
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
B. Definition of noise.
(1) The following acts are hereby declared to be examples of loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noise in violation of this section:
§ 138-12 LITTERING § 138-15
125:261
(a) Horns and signaling devices: the sounding of a horn or
signaling device on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle, on any street or public place except when required by
law, or when necessary to give timely warning of the approach
of the vehicle, or as warning of impending danger to persons
driving other vehicles or to persons on the street. No person
shall sound a horn or signaling device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which emits an unreasonably
loud or harsh sound, or for an unnecessary or unreasonable
period of time. No person shall use any signaling device except
one operated by hand or electricity. The use of any horn,
whistle or other device operated by engine exhausts is
prohibited. The use of any signaling device when traffic for any
reason is held up is prohibited.
(b) Radios, televisions, phonographs or any such media emitting
sound: the playing, use or operation of a radio receiving set,
television, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine
or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants or with louder volume than necessary
for convenient hearing for persons who are in the room,
vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is operated
and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any
such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. emanating from a
structure or vehicle in which it is located so that it is clearly
audible across a residential real property line shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section. [Amended
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
(c) Loudspeaker; amplifiers for advertising: the using, operating
or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker,
sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing
or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets
for the purpose of commercial advertising or for any other
purpose, with the following exceptions: such sound as may
attract attention but which will not disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of the inhabitants, provided such sound is
produced and caused to be produced only between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Such sound shall not be audible in any
location for a period of longer than five minutes in any hour,
except by special permit from the Township Committee.
(d) Yelling, shouting: yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place, which annoys or disturbs
the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling,
§ 138-15 WOOLWICH CODE § 138-15
125:262
hotel, motel or other type of residence of any persons in the
vicinity.
(e) Animals, birds: the keeping of animals or birds which, by
causing frequent or long-continued noise, disturb the comfort
or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
(f) Whistles: the blowing of any whistle, except to give notice of
the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger,
or upon request of proper Township authorities, or as may be
required by general law or ordinance.
(g) Exhaust: the discharge into the open air of the exhaust of a
steam engine, internal combustion engine or motor vehicle,
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises.
(h) Defect in vehicle or load: the use of an automobile, motorcycle
or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner that it
creates loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or
other noises.
(i) Loading, unloading, opening boxes: the creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any
vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates
and containers.
(j) Construction or repair: the carrying out of excavation,
demolition, construction, repair or alteration work, other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. weekdays and
Saturdays, the carrying on of construction, repair or alteration
work by a homeowner on his/her own dwelling or property,
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. In the
case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public health or
safety, the Township engineer may grant a permit for
excavation, demolition, construction, repair, alteration work
for a period not to exceed three days, which may be renewed
for additional periods of three days, while the emergency
continues by the terms of which permit such work may be
carried on during the hours specified in the permit.
(k) Courts, schools, churches: the creation of excessive noise on a
street adjacent to a school, institution of learning, church or
court while in use which unreasonably interferes with the
working of the institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys
the students, teachers and administrators, congregation.
(l) Drums: the use of any drum or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention, by creation of noise, to any
performance, show or sale.
§ 138-15 LITTERING § 138-15
125:263
§ 138-16. Violation of school laws.
Any parent, guardian or other person having charge and control of any child
between the age of seven and 16 years who shall fail to comply with the
provisions of the school laws of this state relating to his or her duties shall
be deemed to have violated the provisions of this article.
(m) Hawkers, peddlers: the shouting and crying of peddlers,
hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
(n) Pile drivers, hammers: the operation, other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, of any pile
driver, steam shovel, bulldozer or other earth-moving
machinery, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist
or any other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or
unusual noise.
(o) Blowers: the operation of any blower or power fan or any
internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes
noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless
the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is
equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.
(p) Outside alarms: the user of any alarm system emitting an
audible or visible response shall, at the time such system is
installed, cause to be installed an automatic timing device
which shall deactivate such alarm so that it will be activated
for no more than 15 minutes. All outside alarms shall be
registered with the Police Department with an emergency
phone number, as well as an alternate phone number, where
someone with responsibility in relation to the alarmed
premises may be contacted at any time by the Police
Department.
(q) Public sales, taxicabs. Public outcries shall be prohibited at or
for any public sale or auction, or to advertise any goods, wares
or merchandise for sale, or to attract any attention, or to gain
passengers for any cab, taxicab, hack or omnibus.
(2) The above enumeration is intended to give typical illustrations of
prohibited noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
C. Nothing in this section shall prevent acceptable agricultural
management practices as set forth in the Township's Right to Farm
Ordinance.40
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning, § 203-18.
§ 138-15 WOOLWICH CODE § 138-17
125:264
§ 138-17. Obstructing streets and sidewalks.
No person shall in any manner obstruct any of the public streets, roads
or sidewalks within the Township of Woolwich so as to endanger public
safety, nor make or cause to be made any excavations therein, without
proper authority or permit from the Township Committee of the Township
of Woolwich.
§ 138-18. Vehicles with spikes or disks.
No person shall operate any farm tractor, cut-harrow, disc-harrow or any
other vehicle with spikes or disks on its traction surface on or across any of
the township roads which will in any way injure the surface of said roads.
§ 138-19. Advertising signs.
No billboard, signpost or advertising sign of any kind shall be erected within
the Township of Woolwich without first obtaining consent of the Township
Committee.
§ 138-20. Use of land as dump.
No person shall permit his land to be used for the purpose of a dump
without first obtaining the consent of the Township Committee.
§ 138-21. Use of land as trailer camp.
No person shall permit his land to be used as a trailer camp without first
obtaining consent of the Township Committee.
§ 138-22. Piggeries.
No piggery shall be established within the limits of the Township of
Woolwich without first obtaining the consent of the Township Committee.
This section shall not prevent any owner or occupant of a farm in this
township from keeping or raising pigs or hogs for his own use.
§ 138-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
§ 138-17 LITTERING § 138-23
125:265

ARTICLE II
Public Nuisances
[Adopted 8-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1941]
§ 138-24. Purpose.
There is a need within the Township of Woolwich to provide residents with
safe, sanitary, and secure public streets and meeting places, and a need
to protect the right of residents to use and enjoy their property and/or
property to which the public is invited without unreasonable interference
or disruption by any activities proscribed by this article. This article is
intended to meet this need and provide guidance in its enforcement as it is
a matter concerning the general safety and welfare of the public.
§ 138-25. Definitions.
NUISANCE — The use of property or rights by one in a manner which
causes another or others to be materially annoyed, inconvenienced or to
sustain injury or damage, or which similarly impairs or affects the health,
safety, comfort, sense of decency, morals, or exercise of rights by the person
or persons so impaired or affected.
PUBLIC — Affecting or likely to affect persons in a place to which the public
or a substantial group has access; among the places included are, but not
limited to highways, streets, open space, parks, rights-of-way, easements,
transport facilities, schools, prisons, apartment houses, places of business
and/or amusement, or any neighborhood.
§ 138-26. Enforcement.
A. Any police officer, special officer duly appointed by Township
Committee, or Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to issue a citation or take into custody any such person who
may be in the act of violating the provisions of this article. Under
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-17, the Woolwich Township Municipal Court has
jurisdiction of violations of municipal ordinances. All fines and/or
punishment in terms of imprisonment or community service must be
made pursuant to the applicable general provisions regarding
violations of the general code (up to $1000, 90 days in jail, 90 days of
community service, or any combination made pursuant to order by the
Municipal Court Judge).
B. When an alleged violation of this article occurs pertaining to a
nuisance, the person(s) or business entity found or believed to have
caused or allowed any nuisance of any kind to exist in the Township
shall receive notice to abate same, and same shall be abated within the
time prescribed within such notice. If same is not abated within the
41.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Public Nuisances, adopted
3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7, as amended.
§ 138-24 LITTERING § 138-26
125:267
§ 138-27. Unlawful acts or prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful, and shall become a public nuisance, for any person or
entity:
appropriate time, then the following will occur in the discretion of the
enforcing officer:
(1) A summons shall be issued, and said person or corporation shall be
subject to the penalties as set forth herein via Municipal Court; or
(2) An authorized representative of the Township, including but not
limited to Public Works employees, shall cause the condition to be
corrected, and a reasonable cost of the abatement shall be charged
against the property on which the condition occurred. The amount
so charged shall become a lien upon the land and shall be added to
and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate
as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as taxes.
A. To maintain a nuisance by:
(1) Conduct which is either unlawful in itself or unreasonable under all
the circumstances, he knowingly or recklessly creates or maintains
a condition which endangers the safety and health of a good
number of persons; or
(2) He knowingly conducts or maintains any premises or place where
persons gather for purposes of engaging in unlawful conduct.
B. To place or deposit in or upon any street, alley, road or right-of-way, or
in or upon any public or private property any dead animals or part of
same, any filth from cesspools, septic tanks, or catch basins, any
garbage, trash or debris or any other foul or offensive or obnoxious
matter or substance.
C. To allow or permit any liquid or solid waste from any septic tank,
seepage pit or cesspool to be deposited and left exposed in or upon any
lawn or lot, public or private, within the Township of Woolwich.
D. To allow or permit to exist any offensive or decomposing solid or fluid
matter or substance or any hazardous material to be placed or leak onto
or into any ground surface, roadway, stream, lake or other body of
water or any other lot or land, public or private, within the Township of
Woolwich.
E. To cause or allow any litter, trash, or debris or the like to be generated,
owned or located on a property in the actual or constructive possession
of a property owner, landlord, tenant or other occupant which
thereafter is caused, allowed or permitted to remain on said property or
§ 138-26 WOOLWICH CODE § 138-27
125:268
adjacent property, by any act or omission to act whatsoever, whether
willfully, by act of nature or through neglect.
F. To allow noxious weeds or unhealthy vegetation above what is
permitted in connection with the applicable property maintenance code
and ordinances.42
G. To make any indecent or lewd act, exposure, or exhibition of any kind in
or upon any street, road, highway, or place, public or private, in the
Township of Woolwich, including but not limited to:
(1) Exposing to public view his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(2) Urinating or defecating in public places or streets, or on the lawns
or yards of private homes and residences, or in the public view.
H. To revel, quarrel, fight, brawl, or otherwise engage in disorderly
conduct so as to disturb the public peace and quiet.
I. To interfere or annoy the comfort or general well-being of the
inhabitants of this Township, including but not limited to:
(1) Placing dirt, stones, concrete debris, or mulch in a public street,
road, right-of-way, or in a public dedicated open space area so as to
create a safety hazard;
(2) Discharging stormwater from rainspouts or liquids from sump
pumps directly or indirectly out onto a public street, road, right-ofway,
or lot;
(3) Placing dumpsters or enclosures for debris in a public road, rightof-
way, or a public dedicated open space area (dumpster would be
permissible in driveway or in a rear/sideyard a minimum five feet
from property line); and
(4) Placing trailers in a public street, right-of-way, or a public
dedicated open space area (trailer would be permissible in
driveway or in rear/sideyard a minimum five feet from the property
line).
J. To make, create, cause, or discharge any air pollution, fumes, gas,
emissions, foul odors and the like, which cause or threaten the health,
safety, welfare, and property of any of the residents of the Township.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Property Maintenance.
§ 138-27 LITTERING § 138-27
125:269
Chapter 140
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, VENDORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 135.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 138.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 159.
§ 140-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHARITABLE, NONPROFIT AND PHILANTHROPIC — Includes political,
patriotic, religious, service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or
fraternal corporations, organizations, associations, societies and the like
not organized for private gain. Examples of nonprofit organizations include
veterans groups and organizations which assist the poor, the aged, the sick,
the physically disabled or mentally retarded or which aid victims of fire,
flood or similar catastrophes. This enumeration is intended to be typical and
shall not be construed as exclusive. All applicants shall provide satisfactory
proof of nonprofit status upon request, including but not limited to evidence
of tax exemption.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes alms, food, clothes. money, subscription or
property of any nature or kind.
MERCHANDISE — Includes anything or any service sold or offered for
present or future sale by a vendor, including but not limited to merchandise,
goods, food, seasonal items, home repair services, flowers or greens.
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, VENDOR or TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any
person, who goes from house to house or front place to place offering or
exposing merchandise or services for present or future sale, prophesying or
preaching, or who engages in any of the foregoing activities from a location
on the street or other public place. Included in the definition are persons
who go from house to house or place in place collecting information,
financial contributions or distributing literature.
PERSON or ORGANIZATION — Any natural person, individual, firm, copartnership,
corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class or league and principal or agent thereof.
SOLICIT AND SOLICITATION — The request, directly or indirectly, of
money, credit, property, financial assistance and other things of value on
the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial
assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable and
philanthropic purpose as defined in this chapter. Solicitation shall be
§ 138-27 WOOLWICH CODE § 140-1
125:270
deemed to be complete when made, whether or not the person making the
same receives any contribution.
§ 140-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote orderly business practices,
protect public safety and health, prevent unfair business practices, promote
the quiet enjoyment of public and private lands and to provide for the
appropriate use of land of the Township of Woolwich in accordance with
the Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance by the regulation of
conduct and the imposition of license fees.
§ 140-3. License and compliance required.
§ 140-4. Exemption of certain persons from fees.
The requirements of this chapter, insofar as same shall apply to fees for
peddlers, solicitors, vendors and transient merchants, shall be held not to
include the following persons, who are hereby expressly exempt from its
application:
A. No person duly licensed under this article shall hawk, peddle or solicit
except during the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 30 minutes after sunset. No
one shall be permitted to solicit or canvass on Sunday. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-18]
B. It shall be unlawful for any merchant to operate from any particular
location unless such location complies with all zoning and site plan
requirements of the Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance
and all necessary approvals have been granted for such location by the
Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. Except as provided in § 140-4 below, any person claiming an exemption
from the license required by this chapter under state or federal law will
not be allowed to do business in the Township unless at least 10
working days before beginning business activity:
(1) They submit sufficient proof of their eligibility for exemption.
(2) They complete the application process as otherwise required by
this chapter in order that they may be identified and regulated as
allowed by law.
(3) They appear of good character as evidenced by lack of criminal
convictions in crimes of theft, fraud, burglary or the like.
A. Person honorably discharged from the military services of the United
States possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity with N.J.S.A.
45:24-9 and 45:24-10.
§ 140-1 LITTERING § 140-4
125:271
§ 140-5. Application for license.
Any person desiring a license pursuant to this chapter shall file with the
Township Clerk an application to be supplied by the Clerk. The application
shall be completed in triplicate and filed with the Clerk at least 30 days
prior to the first day of the proposed activity. The applicant shall furnish the
following along with the completed application:
B. Any person who is an exempt fireman of a volunteer fire department, as
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10, possessing a license in
conformity with said law.
A. (Reserved)43
B. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been charged with
or convicted of any crime or disorderly persons offense or violation of
any municipal ordinance other than a traffic violation and the nature,
dates and places of such offenses and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor.
C. An original letter addressed to the Township Clerk from the firm for
which the applicant purports to work, authorizing the applicant to act
as its representative.
D. A list of all towns in New Jersey in which the applicant has conducted
business in the last 12 months, setting forth the specific dates.
E. A statement of whether the applicant has been refused or had revoked a
similar license at any time.
F. Original social security card.
G. A current driver's license.
H. A New Jersey sales tax certificate.
I. Federal taxpayer identification number.
J. Proof of insurance where insurance is required by this chapter.
K. An instrument in writing nominating and appointing the Clerk his true
and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service
of notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any
matters connected with or arising out of license. It shall also contain
recitals to the effect that the applicant consents and agrees that service
of any notice of process may be made upon such agent and, when so
made, shall be as valid as if personally served upon the applicant
according to the laws of this or any state and waiving all claim or right
of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of
service.
43.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding fingerprints of applicants, was repealed
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-18.
§ 140-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 140-5
125:272
§ 140-6. Investigation of applicant; hearing.
When the application is properly filled out and signed by the applicant, it
shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to investigate the statements made
therein. After investigation, the Chief shall indicate approval or disapproval
in writing upon the application. In case of disapproval of an application,
the applicant may appeal to the Township Committee. Committee shall set
a time and place for a hearing, which hearing shall be held within 10 days
after appeal is taken by the applicant; at which time the applicant will
be given an opportunity to present his reasons why the license should be
issued. The decision of Committee shall be final.
§ 140-7. Issuance of license badge or card; fees.
§ 140-8. Revocation; hearing upon request.
L. For transient merchants, the specific location of operation and a
certificate from the Zoning Officer stating that all zoning and site
review requirements of the Development Regulations and Zoning
Ordinance have been complied with for the subject location and that all
necessary approvals have been granted for such location by the
Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment and the written
permission of the owner of the premises for the use of same.
A. The completed application shall be referred to the Chief of Police who
shall review same within five business days of receipt. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-18]
B. The Chief of Police shall endorse on such application his approval or
disapproval with his reasons for same and return the application to the
Township Clerk, who shall notify the applicant.
C. The Township Clerk, upon the payment of the prescribed license fee,
shall execute and deliver to the applicant his license.
D. A separate license must be obtained for every agent or employee
working for any person.
A. Licenses will be in the form of a card bearing a number, the name of the
Township, the word "peddler" or "solicitor" or other suitable inscription,
the date of issue and the date of expiration.
B. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of the
calendar year during which they were issued. Upon granting of a
license, the licensee shall pay the sum of $25 for the time he intends to
do business in the Township. The license shall be for the year it was
issued or any portion thereof. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-18]
C. Any person or organization subject to this chapter shall complete a new
application for a license after 12 months has passed since the last
application.
§ 140-5 LITTERING § 140-8
125:273
§ 140-9. Exclusion of certain persons, organizations and activities.
This chapter shall not apply to employees of any public utility which is
subject to regulation by the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners;
provided, however, that such employees shall display the identification
badge or card issued by his employer.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be temporarily suspended on
verbal notice by the Township Clerk or any law enforcement officer and
permanently revoked by the Municipal Court Judge, after reasonable
notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application
for the license.
(2) Misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on activities regulated herein.
(3) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude.
(4) Conducting business in violation of any provision of this chapter.
(5) Violation of any Township ordinance, any state or federal law or for
other good and sufficient reasons.
(6) Violation of the terms of the license.
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be served upon the licensee or mailed to the
licensee at the address given by the licensee in making application
herein at least five days prior to the date set for hearing.
A. Organizations.
(1) Any bona fide members of any church, social, civic, fraternal,
educational, charitable, civic, veteran or philanthropic
organization, volunteer first aid organization or fire company,
located within the Township of Woolwich, desiring to solicit or who
have solicited in its name money, donations of money, property or
financial assistance of any kind, or desiring to sell or distribute any
items of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or
solicited at any place or places within the Township for any
purpose, shall be permitted to conduct business in the Township
without a license, upon the filing of a sworn application in writing
with the Township Clerk; or any member of any such organization
not located in the Township of Woolwich, which organization has
received the written approval and endorsement of the governing
body of the Township of Woolwich, and which shall give the
following information:
(a) Name and address of organization.
§ 140-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 140-9
125:274
(b) Nature and location of planned activity.
(c) Period during which solicitation or sale is to be carried on.
(d) Name, address and social security number of each person who
will conduct solicitations.
(e) A recent photograph of all persons who are not Township
residents who will conduct solicitations or sales.
(2) Such organization, association, society or corporation shall furnish
all its members, agents or representatives conducting solicitation
or sales with credentials in writing stating the name of the
organization, names of the agent and the duration and purpose of
solicitation. All persons or organizations qualifying for a license
exemption under this section shall comply with all other provisions
of this chapter.
B. Special exemption.
(1) The Township Committee, by resolution, may exempt from
compliance with any part or parts of this chapter any person or
organization. Any person or organization seeking an exemption
must make a written request to the Township Clerk at least 30 days
before the start of the activity for which the exemption is sought.
The Township Committee may place conditions or restrictions on
the granting of an exemption.
(2) Criteria for exemption. The following are criteria to be applied
when considering whether an exemption will be granted:
(a) The charitable nature of the organization.
(b) The number of participants who are Township residents,
eliminating or minimizing the need for identifying information.
(c) The reputation of the individual or organization in the
community.
(d) The financial or human resource burden of compliance with
any provision of this chapter when weighed against the benefit
to the Township and/or its residents.
(e) Whether the activity will result in or lead to a benefit to the
Township residents such as lower taxes, increased public
services, betterment of the community or other public benefit.
(f) The need to regulate the activity to address safety, health or
other concerns.
§ 140-9 LITTERING § 140-10
125:275
§ 140-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-18]
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter, whether
as principal, agent or employee of another, shall, upon conviction by the
Municipal Court Judge, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to
imprisonment in the County jail not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge. Upon conviction, the person or entity on whose
behalf the licensee was acting shall be prohibited from licensed activities
for one year from the date of the guilty plea or conviction.
§ 140-11. Safety, business practices and quiet enjoyment
requirements.
A. Except as otherwise provided by specific exception in this chapter,
persons subject to this chapter, including persons claiming an
exemption from the requirement of the municipal licensing. shall not:
(1) Station, place, set up or maintain wares adjacent to any sidewalk if
to do so would place him closer than 200 feet to another vendor
who is selling adjacent to the sidewalk.
(2) Solicit, conduct business with or sell to persons in motor vehicles.
(3) Station, place, set up or maintain his wares or equipment in such a
way as would restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the
pedestrians right-of-way; restrict, obstruct, interfere with the use
of enjoyment from the abutting property; create or become a
nuisance; increase traffic congestion, cause or increase traffic
delay or hazards; cause or create or constitute a danger to life,
health or property; sell food, drinks, ice cream or confections of any
kind for immediate consumption unless he has available for public
use his own litter receptacle which must be attached to his cart or
vehicle which shall be clearly marked and maintained for his
patronage use; nor shall any peddler lease any location without
first picking up, removing and disposing of any trash or refuse
remaining from sales made by him.
(4) Leave his wares unattended at any time or store, place or lease the
same overnight on any sidewalk or public way of the Township.
(5) Station, place, set up or maintain his wares closer than 50 feet from
the curbline or end of pavement of intersecting streets.
(6) Place his wares in such way as would reduce the unobstructed
pedestrian right-of-way on a sidewalk to less than six feet.
(7) Engage in business within 20 feet of any location where the curb
has been depressed to facilitate pedestrian or vehicle movement.
§ 140-10 WOOLWICH CODE § 140-11
125:276
(8) Engage in business on any sidewalk or along any street within 100
feet of any fire hydrant, crosswalk or bus stop or within 25 feet of
any driveway.
(9) Place his wares in front of the display windows or signs of fixedlocation
businesses, nor shall they be within 20 feet from the
entrance door to a fixed-location business.
(10) Operate in such a manner as to restrict the continued maintenance
of a clear passageway for vehicles or pedestrians.
(11) Engage in business within 200 feet of the grounds of any school
between 1/2 hour prior to the start of the school day and 1/2 hour
after dismissal at the end of the school day.
(12) Engage in business within 200 feet of the grounds of any church,
synagogue or other house of worship while same is in session.
(13) Use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, sound
amplifier, horn, bell, radio, record player, tape player, CD player,
musical instrument or any similar device used to attract attention,
entertain the public or entertain himself.
(14) Sell from any one site or area for a period of more than four hours,
including time for setup and breakdown of a vending unit. After
four hours, the vending unit or vendor must move to a new location
at least 300 feet away from where he was doing business or cease
doing business. No vendor may return to the same location in any
calendar day. No vendor shall place any object, sign or person nor
take any action designed to reserve a location for their use. Any
such object may be removed and kept as evidence of a violation by
any person, who shall promptly surrender it to the police.
(15) Place his wares other than on one vending unit, whether it be a
cart, single table no larger than 96 inches long by 48 inches wide
by 72 inches high or display unit similar to a table which shall
occupy a space no larger than 32 square feet. The Township Clerk
may grant an exception to size limits with the advice and consent of
the Chief of Police in the case of the sale of certain holiday items
sold for limited times during the year.
(16) Engage in business within 300 feet of any fixed place of business
selling substantially similar merchandise; a food vendor shall not
operate within 300 feet of a restaurant.
(17) Every person registering under this chapter shall produce proof of
such registration at the request of any resident from whom
solicitation is made.
(18) Licensees with licenses issued under the terms of this chapter,
including solicitation by those who are deemed to be exempt from
licensing requirements, shall not enter upon or within any private
§ 140-11 LITTERING § 140-11
125:277
§ 140-12. Conduct of licensees.
Every person to whom a license is issued under the terms of this chapter
shall be governed by the following rules and regulations:
community within the Township of Woolwich nor any other
community which shall be posted with “no solicitation” signage.
[Added 8-20-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-17]
B. A vending unit is a selling or display unit, with or without wheels,
intended to serve as a transportable structure for facilitating the
display, sale and transportation. All equipment installed in any part of
the vending unit or articles carried by the unit shall be secured in order
to prevent movement during transit and prevent detachment in the
event of a collision or overturn.
C. In the event that food should be sold by any vendor, a certificate of
health compliance issued by the Gloucester County Department of
Health shall be conspicuously displayed on the vending unit. Selling
food shall be prohibited in the Township of Woolwich without such a
certificate of health compliance. Furthermore, any vendor selling food
shall provide proof of an insurance policy issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey protecting
the vendor and the Township from all claims or damages to property
and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations
under or in connection with the vending. Such insurance shall name as
an additional insured the Township of Woolwich and shall provide that
the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date
without 30 days' written notice to the Township. The amounts of the
insurance to be maintained are: personal injury, $100,000 per person,
$300,000 per occurrence; property damage, $25,000.
A. All circulars. samples or other matter shall be handed to an occupant of
the property or left in a secure place located on the premises.
B. No person shall enter or attempt to enter the dwelling of any resident
without an express invitation from the occupant of the dwelling.
C. No person shall conduct himself in such a manner as to become
objectionable to or annoy any occupant of any house. Signs posted by
property owners stating "no soliciting" shall be obeyed.
D. No licensee or any person in his behalf shall shout, cry out, blow a horn,
ring a bell or use any sound-making or amplifying device upon any of
the streets, parks or other public places of the Township or upon private
premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced
therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares, merchandise or services which the
licensee proposes to sell.
§ 140-11 WOOLWICH CODE § 140-13
125:278
§ 140-13. (Reserved)44
§ 140-14. Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of license;
appeals.
Following the filing of the registration form pursuant to the aforesaid, the
Chief of Police shall make or cause to be made such investigation as he
deems necessary to verify the information set forth therein. The Chief of
Police shall thereupon signify his approval or rejection on the reverse side of
the application and, if approved, the Township Clerk may issue the license
to such applicant. In case of disapproval of an application, the applicant
may appeal to the Township Committee. The Committee shall set a time
and place for a hearing, which hearing shall be within 10 days after appeal
is taken by the applicant, at which hearing the applicant will be given an
opportunity to present his reasons why the license should be issued. The
decision of the Township Committee shall be final.
§ 140-15. Yard sales.
The provisions of this chapter applicable to transient merchants shall not
apply to residents of the Township of Woolwich conducting yard sales upon
their own property. There is no cost to the residents for the permitted
number of yard sales as indicated in this section.
§ 140-16. Do-Not-Knock Registry. [Added 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-18]
A. Sales of household goods by yard sale or similar event are prohibited
except insofar as the seller shall comply with this section.
B. A maximum of two single-day or two weekend (Saturday and Sunday)
yard sales or similar event may be held in any calendar year at any
household in the Township. For the purpose of this subsection, any
apartment with separate cooking and toilet facilities shall qualify as a
"household."
A. Establishment of a Do-Not-Knock Registry.
(1) The Township Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those
premises where the owner and/or occupant has notified the Clerk
that peddling, soliciting, canvassing, itinerant vending and door-todoor
sales enterprising as set forth in this chapter are not
permitted on the premises (hereinafter referred to as the "Do-Not-
Knock Registry"). Notification shall be by completion of a form
available from the Township Clerk's office. After its initial creation,
the list shall be updated on an annual basis on January 1 of each
year. Nothing shall preclude the Clerk from updating the list more
frequently.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 140-13, Registration for charitable or religious organizations, was
repealed 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-9.
§ 140-13 LITTERING § 140-16
125:279
Chapter 143
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 74.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 99.
Littering — See Ch. 125.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 159.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
B. Do-Not-Knock Registry display.
(1) Any owner and/or occupant who has requested enlistment on the
Do-Not-Knock Registry shall be able to purchase from the Clerk's
Office, for a nominal fee, a sticker for display at his/her/its premises
indicating enlistment on the Do-Not-Knock Registry. Display of a
sticker shall not be mandatory in order to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
C. Distribution of Do-Not-Knock Registry.
(1) The Township Clerk shall distribute the most recent Do-Not-Knock
Registry list to each licensee at the time of issuance and renewal of
a license. The licensee shall not conduct regulated activities at any
premises identified on the then current Do-Not-Knock Registry.
§ 140-16 WOOLWICH CODE § 140-16
125:280
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1545]
§ 143-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Woolwich Township Construction Code Official of the Township of Woolwich,
being marked and designated as the "International Property Maintenance
Code, 2003 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Township
of Woolwich in the State of New Jersey for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of
such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code on file in the office of the Township of Woolwich are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 143-2
of this chapter.
§ 143-2. Revisions.
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Title Insert: Township of Woolwich
Section 103.5 Fees Insert: (Schedule of Fees)
Section 304.14 Insect
Screens
Insert: January 1-December 31
Section 602.3 Heat Supply Insert: September 1-June 1
Section 602.4 Occupiable
Work Spaces
Insert: September 1-June 1
§ 143-3. Repealer.
Chapter 143 entitled "Property Maintenance" of the Code of the Township
of Woolwich and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 143, Property Maintenance,
adopted 4-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-04.
§ 143-1 LITTERING § 143-4
125:281
§ 143-4. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed as cited in § 143-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right
or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 143-4.1. Maintenance of residential and nonresidential property.
[Added 10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-20]
The duties and responsibilities of owners and operators are as follows:
A. The duties of the owner and operator as herein stated are coextensive
with provisions of the 2009 International Property Maintenance Code
and any other relating ordinance/code and its chapters of the Township
of Woolwich and State Housing Code.
B. Hazards and unsanitary conditions. The grounds related to buildings
shall be keep free of hazards and nuisances, including but not limited to
the following:
(1) Refuse, brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris, slippery conditions and
excretion of pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways,
parking lots, and parking areas.
(2) Noxious weeds. (See 302.4 Weeds of the 2009 International
Property Code.)
(3) Natural growth such as dead and dying trees and limbs or other
natural growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating
conditions or storm damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the
vicinity thereof.
(4) Ground surface hazards such as holes, excavations, breaks,
projections, obstructions, icy conditions, unclean snow on paths,
walks, and parking lots. Upon discovery, such hazards should be
properly marked and protected until the hazard is eliminated. All
icy conditions, unclean snow on paths, walks, sidewalks and
parking lots shall be removed of all snow and ice or, in the case of
ice which may be so frozen as to make removal impractical, shall
cause the same to be thoroughly covered with sand, salt or cinders
within 24 hours after the same shall fall or be formed thereon. (Also
see Township Code § 159-17.) All such holes and excavations shall
be filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced to original
specification and other conditions removed where necessary to
eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions within 30 days of their
discovery.
§ 143-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 143-4.1
125:282
(5) Landscaping. All premises shall be kept landscaped pursuant to
site plan requirements (nonresidential property), and lawns,
hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed to keep them from
becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view,
and from constituting a blighting factor depreciating adjoining
property and impairing the character of the neighborhood. Lawns
shall be considered overgrown and unsightly when grass exceeds
eight inches in height.
(6) Sidewalks damaged by roots of a Township-owned or- supplied tree
must be repaired within 30 days of notification by the Township
designated official.
(7) Vacant land. Vacant land zoned or used for residential, commercial
or industrial use is subject to the provisions of this chapter and any
other relating chapter for the Township of Woolwich, relating to the
removal of refuse, garbage and weeds. The Code Official is hereby
authorized and directed, in addition to other Township officials, to
initiate and receive complaints with respect to such conditions, as
they affect the value and character of building development in the
township.
§ 143-4.1 LITTERING § 143-4.1
125:283

ARTICLE II
Vacant, Abandoned and Foreclosed Properties
[Adopted 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-2546]
§ 143-5. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish a program for identifying and
registering vacant, abandoned and foreclosed properties; to establish
the responsibilities of owners of vacant, abandoned or foreclosed
properties, and to ensure that vacant, abandoned and foreclosed
properties are maintained in compliance with applicable Township,
county, state and federal codes. It is the municipality's further intent to
participate in the county-wide registration program established by
Gloucester County and administered by Community Champions
Corporation as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming
blighted due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of
vacant, abandoned and foreclosed properties.
B. The Township Committee finds, determines and declares that buildings
and property which remain vacant and unoccupied for any appreciable
period of time become a harborage for rodents, an invitation for illegal
occupancy and for illegal activities, as well as a fire hazard, and that
unkempt grounds surrounding the property invite dumping and rubbish
thereon, that such buildings become dilapidated, contribute to
commercial and residential blight, depress market values of
surrounding property, require additional government services,
endanger the public safety and health, and generally remain
detrimental to the public good. Unsupervised vacant/abandoned or
foreclosed properties have a negative impact on surrounding properties
and neighborhoods. Owners of such structures and property should be
held accountable for the physical condition of the property.
C. This article establishes responsibilities of owners of the vacant,
abandoned and or foreclosed properties and structures and provides for
administration and enforcement of standards related to such property
and structures. This article incorporates the International Property
Maintenance Code and all applicable federal, state and local building
and fire codes. This article shall apply to all vacant, abandoned or
foreclosed property and/or structure within Woolwich Township.
D. It is in the public interest for the Township to establish minimum
standards of accountability for the owners or other responsible parties
of vacant, abandoned and foreclosed properties in order to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
E. It is in the public interest for the Township to impose a reasonable
administrative fee in conjunction with registration of vacant,
46.Editor's Note: Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article II, Vacant,
Abandoned and Foreclosed Properties, adopted 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06.
§ 143-5 LITTERING § 143-5
125:285
§ 143-6. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article and unless otherwise expressly stated, the
following words and phrases are defined as follows:
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY — Any real property located in the
municipality, whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage
with a lis pendens filed against it by the lender holding a mortgage on
the property, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the lender, is
subject to an application for tax deed or pending tax assessors lien sale, or
has been transferred to the lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The
designation of a property as "abandoned" shall remain in place until such
time as the property is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure
action has been dismissed, and any default on the mortgage has been cured
with its corresponding lis pendens rescinded.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that
is unsecured in such a way as to allow easy access to the interior space by
unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES — Codes including, but not limited to, the
municipality's Zoning Code and General Code, International Property
Maintenance Code, and the New Jersey Building Code.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY —
BORROWER — An owner of property subject to a mortgage, who grants a
lien or equitable interest in property as security for the payment of a debt.
BUILDING — A structure with a roof supported by columns or walls to serve
as shelter or enclosure.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement officer, building official,
zoning officer, code enforcement officer, fire or building inspector, or other
person authorized by the municipality to enforce the applicable codes.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY — Any condition that on its own, or combined
with other conditions, would lead a reasonable person to believe the
property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to,
overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
abandoned and foreclosed properties in light of the disproportionate
costs imposed on the Township by the presence of these properties.
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors, wall,
and/or roofs which create hazardous conditions and/or encourage
trespassing; or
A.
B. Properties cited for a public nuisance; or
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or the improvements thereon are dilapidated,
deteriorated, violate minimum health and safety standards, or lack
maintenance per applicable codes.
C.
§ 143-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 143-6
125:286
flyers or mail, past-due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities,
accumulation of trash, junk or debris, broken or boarded-up windows,
abandoned vehicles, the absence of window coverings, such as curtains,
blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent
with habitation or occupation, and statements by neighbors, passersby,
delivery agents or government employees that the property is vacant.
FORECLOSURE — The process by which a mortgage is enforced against a
parcel of real property through sale or offering for sale to satisfy the debt of
the borrower.
LENDER — A person or entity holding a mortgage on a property.
MORTGAGE — A recorded lien or interest in real property to secure
payment of a loan.
OWNER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation, company,
titleholder, fiduciary, or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or
any interest in real property. This term shall also apply to any person, legal
entity or agent responsible for the construction, maintenance or operation
of the property involved.
POSSESSORY LENDER — A person or entity that has foreclosed upon a
mortgage on a property but may not have legal or equitable title.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of abandoned real property.
SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE INSPECTION — A visual inspection to check
the minimum requirements as set forth in the currently applicable
International Property Maintenance Code for sanitary maintenance, life
safety, other obvious hazards and code violations. Such inspections will be
done in accordance with a checklist maintained by the Township.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on or attachment to the ground, and includes buildings.
VACANT PROPERTY — An unimproved lot or parcel of real property that
is not currently used or occupied and an improved lot or parcel of real
property with at least one building or structure that is not currently used or
occupied.
§ 143-7. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather shall be an
additional remedy available to the municipality above and beyond any other
state, county or local provisions for same.
§ 143-8. Establishment of registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of this article, the municipality or designee
shall participate in the county-wide registration program established by
Gloucester County and administered by Community Champions Corporation
§ 143-6 LITTERING § 143-8
125:287
cataloging each abandoned property within the municipality, containing the
information required by this article.
§ 143-9. Registration of vacant, abandoned, and foreclosed real
property.
A. Any mortgagee that holds a mortgage on real property located with the
municipality of Woolwich Township shall perform an inspection of the
property to determine vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the
mortgagor and the recordation of a lis pendens. The mortgagee shall
within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the Code
Enforcement Department, or designee, on forms or website access
provided by the municipality, and indicate whether the property is
vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for each
property, whether it is found to be vacant or occupied.
B. If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected
by the mortgagee or his designee monthly until the mortgagor or other
party remedies the default or it is found to be vacant or shows evidence
of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee
shall, within 10 days of that inspection, update the registration to a
vacancy status on forms provided by the municipality.
C. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
mortgagee and the server, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee
and the server, a direct contact name and telephone number for both
parties, facsimile number and e-mail address for both parties, the folio
or tax number, and the name and twenty-four-hour contact telephone
number of the property management company responsible for the
security and maintenance of the property.
D. A nonrefundable annual registration fee in the amount of $500 per
property shall accompany the registration form or website registration.
E. This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of
a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a
deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
F. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement and the inspection, security and maintenance
requirements of this section as long as they remain vacant or in default.
G. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
H. Failure to properly register or to modify the registration form from time
to time to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this section
is a violation of this article and shall be subject to enforcement and
penalties.
§ 143-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 143-9
125:288
§ 143-10. Registration, inspection and other fees.
All fees applicable to this article may be revised by resolution of the
Township Committee. Registration and inspection fees shall be paid at
the time of submitting the registration affidavit. There shall also be a fee
for the filing of any additional or new owner's affidavit, with such fee
being set by resolution of the Township Committee. For properties that are
not registered within the required time frame, an additional fee for the
added cost of the Township's expenses in having to determine ownership,
which may include, but is not limited to title searches, shall be assessed
and is immediately payable. The payment of all fees under this article is
secured by a lien against the property, which may be placed on the tax
roll for collection in the same manner and subject to the same interest and
penalties applicable to delinquent special assessments.
§ 143-11. Safety and maintenance inspections.
I. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this article, the municipality may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and
bring it into compliance.
A. If the foreclosed-upon vacant or abandoned vacant property includes
vacant or unoccupied buildings, the owner of that property is
responsible for immediately obtaining and paying for the Township's
safety and maintenance inspection (as defined herein) of the building
and property, obtaining necessary permits, making required repairs
and obtaining inspections from the Township annually thereafter until
the building is lawfully occupied, to ensure the buildings are safe,
secure and well maintained. The owner shall demonstrate that all
water, sewer, electrical, gas, HVAC and plumbing systems, exterior
finishes and walls, concrete surfaces, accessory buildings and
structures, swimming pools and spas, roofing, structural systems,
foundation and drainage systems, gutters, doors, windows, driveways,
and sidewalks are sound, operational or properly disconnected.
B. If, at the time of the safety and maintenance inspection, the inspector
deems that the electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems pose health
or safety hazards and require additional inspection by the registered
code official in that discipline, the owner shall be responsible to obtain
and pay for that requested inspection.
C. If an owner fails or refuses to complete the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, the possessory lender shall be obligated to
complete the inspection upon foreclosure of the property. Additionally,
any lender who holds a mortgage on the property located within
Woolwich Township shall obtain and pay for the inspection pursuant to
Subsection A of this section, to the extent permitted by law, or under
the mortgage of the property that is the security for the mortgage, upon
§ 143-9 LITTERING § 143-11
125:289
§ 143-12. Maintenance and security requirements.
All owners, possessory lenders, and lenders (to the extent permitted by
law or the terms of a mortgage), are responsible for compliance with the
requirements of this section which apply to all vacant property from the
time of vacancy, including the time between vacancy and when registration
is required.
default by the borrower, within five days after either the filing of
a complaint for foreclosure (if foreclosure is by judicial action) or
publishing a notice of foreclosure (if foreclosure is by advertisement.)
A. The property shall be kept free from weeds, grass, dry brush,
overgrown brush and dead vegetation in accordance with International
Property Maintenance Code, as well as trash, junk, debris, building
materials, and accumulation of newspaper, circulars, fliers, notices,
except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded items,
including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material, signage, containers, equipment,
construction materials or any other items that give the appearance that
the property is abandoned.
B. The property shall be maintained free from graffiti, tagging or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that
matches the color of the exterior of the surface.
C. All front, side and rear yards shall be properly maintained. Landscaping
includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground cover, bushes, trees,
shrubs, hedges or similar plantings. Maintenance includes, but is not
limited to, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of
required grasses and landscaping and removal of trimmings.
D. Pools, spas and other water features shall be kept drained and kept dry
and free from debris. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas
must comply with the minimum security fencing and barrier
requirements of applicable construction, building and property
maintenance codes and ordinances.
E. Property shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be
accessible to unauthorized persons. "Secure manner" includes, but is
not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates, and any
other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior
of the property and/or structures. Broken windows must be repaired or
replaced within 30 days. Boarding up of open or broken windows is
prohibited, except as a temporary measure.
F. Owners shall inspect or cause the inspection of vacant property on a
regular basis to verify compliance with this section and other applicable
laws. If the property is owned by a person other than an individual and/
or the lender or possessory lender is located more than 30 miles away, a
local property management company shall be contracted to perform
§ 143-11 WOOLWICH CODE § 143-12
125:290
§ 143-13. Property damaged by fire.
If a building is fire damaged, the owner or possessory lender has 90 days
from the date of the fire to apply for a permit to start construction or
demolition. An additional ninety-day extension may be granted by the
Township, provided the owner or possessory lender can demonstrate
substantial progress toward completing repairs. Failure to do so will result
in the property being deemed vacant and/or abandoned and subject to the
requirements of this article.
§ 143-14. Right of entry.
If the owner, lender or possessory lender has failed to secure the property
and it has been secured by the Township, the Township or its contracted
agent may reenter the structure to conduct necessary inspections to assure
compliance with the requirements of this Code and to determine if there are
emergency or hazardous health and safety conditions in existence.
weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section and
any other applicable laws are being met. The property shall be posted
with the name and twenty-four-hour contact telephone number of a
property management company located within 30 miles of the subject
property. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches
and shall be of a seventy-two-point Arial font and shall contain, along
with the name and twenty-four-hour contact number, the words: "THIS
PROPERTY MANAGED BY AND TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR
CONCERNS CALL." The posting shall be placed on the interior of a
window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from
the street or secured to the exterior of the building structure facing the
street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street or,
if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting
in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property,
but not readily accessible to vandals. The local property management
company shall inspect the property on a regular basis to determine if
the property is in compliance with the requirements of this section.
G. Failure of the mortgagee or owner to properly maintain the property
may result in a violation of the applicable codes and issuance of a
citation or notice of violation in accordance with the International
Property Maintenance Code and the Municipal Code. Pursuant to a
finding and determination by the municipality's Code Enforcement
Officer and/or designee, the municipality may take the necessary action
to ensure compliance with this section.
H. In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with all applicable codes.
§ 143-12 LITTERING § 143-15
125:291
§ 143-15. Reoccupancy and/or sale of property. [Amended
5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
A vacant building or structure on abandoned or foreclosed property shall
not be occupied until all violations have been corrected in accordance with
the violation or correction notices issued and a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Township Construction Office. All mechanical, electrical,
plumbing and structural systems shall be certified by a licensed contractor
as being in good repair, the provisions of the International Property
Maintenance Code, or its successor, complied with and all blight removed.
In addition, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all
outstanding cost, assessments and/or liens owed to the Township have been
paid in full.
§ 143-16. Violations and penalties.
§ 143-17. Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.
Any person who opposes, obstructs, or resists any enforcement officer or
any person authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties
as provided in this article shall be punished as provided in the applicable
codes in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 143-18. Immunity of enforcement officer.
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the municipality to
enforce the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or
criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the
discharge of duties imposed herein.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article or the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $100 and not
more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under
this article shall be recoverable from the owner as defined herein and
shall be a lien on the property.
B. For purpose of this section, failure to file a registration affidavit within
30 calendar days after a building becomes vacant property or within 30
calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
Township, and failure to provide correct information on the registration
affidavit, or failure to comply with the provisions of this article or such
provisions contained herein shall be deemed to be violations of this
article.
§ 143-15 WOOLWICH CODE § 143-18
125:292
Chapter 144
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 144, Rental Property, comprised of Art. I, Registration
of Rental Units, adopted 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-14, as amended,
was repealed 10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-18.]
Chapter 145
RIPARIAN ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Grading plans — See Ch. 109.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Soil removal — See Ch. 153.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 158.
Street excavations — See Ch. 159.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Topsoil — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 145-1. Purpose and authority.
The purpose of this chapter is to designate riparian zones and to provide for
land use regulation therein in order to protect the streams, lakes, and other
surface water bodies of Woolwich Township and to comply with N.J.A.C.
7:15-5.25(g)3, which requires municipalities to adopt an ordinance that
prevents new disturbance for projects or activities in riparian zones as
described herein. Compliance with the riparian zone requirements of this
chapter does not constitute compliance with the riparian zone or buffer
requirements imposed under any other federal, state or local statute,
regulation or ordinance. Further, nothing contained in this chapter shall
supersede the protections afforded to landowners under the state's Right
to Farm Act (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.) and the Township's Right To Farm
Ordinance (§ 203-18 of the Woolwich Township Municipal Code).
§ 145-2. Definitions.
The definitions of the words and/or terms utilized in this chapter shall be
as defined or described in the Water Quality Management Planning Rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:15, the Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and/or the
Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, as they exist as of the
effective date of this chapter and as they may be amended over time. The
following definitions are exactly as the NJDEP defines them as of the date
of this chapter:
§ 143-18 LITTERING § 145-2
125:293
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from the surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid.
Acid-producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local Soil Conservation District offices.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal entity
applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Construction
Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions
of this chapter and that would be located in whole or in part within a
regulated riparian zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for the purpose of implementing the antidegradation policies set
forth in those standards, for protection from measurable changes in water
quality characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting and
other characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting or removing of
vegetation.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed and
banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and which is shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverage or, in the case of a special
water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
Quadrangle Map or in the County Soil Surveys.
LAKE, POND or RESERVOIR — Any surface water body, shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverage or, in the case of a special water
resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
Quadrangle Map or in the County Soil Surveys, that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and is shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's Geographic Information System
(GIS) hydrography coverage or, in the case of a special water resource
protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters shown on the USGS Quadrangle Map or in the
County Soil Surveys.
§ 145-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 145-2
125:294
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly adjacent
to all surface water bodies, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds,
reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including their
point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverage or,
in the case of a special water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS Quadrangle Map or in the County Soil Surveys. There
is no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean or along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — A threehundred-
foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated
as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond or reservoir, as defined herein and shown
on the USGS Quadrangle Map or in the County Soil Surveys, within the
associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater Management
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Any perennial stream, intermittent stream,
lake, pond or reservoir, as defined herein; in addition, any regulated water
under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or
state open waters identified in a letter of interpretation issued under the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§ 1531 et seq., or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 145-3. Establishment and protection of riparian zones.
A. Except as provided in §§ 145-4 and 145-5 below, riparian zones adjacent
to all surface water bodies shall be protected from avoidable
disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
(1) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water) and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC 14 watershed.
(2) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not designated as C1 waters:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
§ 145-2 LITTERING § 145-3
125:295
§ 145-4. Variances.
To the extent allowed by the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8)
and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), new
disturbances for projects or activities in the riparian zone established by
this chapter may be allowed through the Zoning Board Component of
Woolwich Township's Joint Land Use Board review and approval of a
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water;
(c) Any segment of water flowing through an area that contains a
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependant on the surface
water body for survival, and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile as measured along the
length of the regulated water; and
(d) Any segment of water flowing through an area that contains
acid-producing soils.
(3) For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide
shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
B. If a discernible bank is not present along a surface water body, the
portion of the riparian zone outside the surface water body is measured
landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the feature's center line.
(2) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit.
(3) Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the mean high-water line.
(4) Along an amorphously shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a discernible channel,
the riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line.
C. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for the
initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a site and for
identifying the area of the riparian zone on any plan submitted to
Woolwich Township in conjunction with an application for a
construction permit, subdivision, land development or other
improvement that requires plan submissions or permits. This initial
determination shall be subject to review and approval by the Municipal
Engineer, governing body or its appointed representative and, where
required by state regulation, the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 145-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 145-4
125:296
variance, provided the disturbance is proposed to be located on a
preexisting lot (existing as of the effective date of this chapter) when there
is insufficient room outside the riparian zone for the proposed use otherwise
permitted by the underlying zoning; there is no other reasonable or prudent
alternative to placement in the riparian zone, including obtaining variances
from setback or other requirements that would allow conformance with
the riparian zone requirements; and upon proof, by virtue of submission of
appropriate maps, drawings, reports and testimony, that the disturbance is:
§ 145-5. Exceptions.
To the extent allowed under the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and
subject to review and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to the extent required by those rules, the
following disturbances for projects or activities in the riparian zone
established by this chapter are allowed:
A. Necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare;
B. To provide an environmental benefit;
C. To prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or
D. To prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, by not allowing a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment.
A. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces.
B. Linear development with no feasible alternative route.
C. Disturbance that is in accordance with the stream corridor restoration
or stream bank stabilization plan or project approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Disturbance necessary to provide for public pedestrian access or waterdependent
recreation that meets the requirements of the Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7a, the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone Management
Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E.
E. Disturbance with no feasible alternative required for the remediation of
hazardous substances performed with New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or federal oversight pursuant to the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11a et seq., or the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.
F. Normal farming, horticulture, silviculture, and ranching activities,
including but not limited to: plowing, seeding, cultivating, and
§ 145-4 LITTERING § 145-5
125:297
§ 145-6. Appeals, conflicts and severability.
§ 145-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the Township Engineer and/or
Zoning Officer of any person or entity believed to be in violation hereof.
If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of this chapter is
discovered, a civil action in the Special Part of the Superior Court, or in
the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties
may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing and
serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to preclude the right of Woolwich Township, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25,
to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation
of any section or subsection of this chapter shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other section or
harvesting for the production of food and fiber, or soil and water
conservation practices, when part of an established and/or ongoing
farming, horticulture, silviculture, or ranching operation, on properties
which have received or are eligible for a farmland assessment under
the New Jersey Farmland Assessment Act, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.
A. Any party aggrieved by the location of the riparian zone boundary
determination under this chapter may appeal to the Township Engineer
and/or Zoning Officer under the provisions of this chapter. The party
contesting the location of the riparian zone boundary shall have the
burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
B. Any party aggrieved by a determination or decision of the Township
Engineer and/or Zoning Officer under this chapter may appeal to the
Township Committee of Woolwich. The party contesting the
determination or decision shall have the burden of proof in case of any
such appeal.
C. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are
herby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
D. Severability.
(1) Interpretation. This chapter shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(2) Notwithstanding that any provision of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
remaining provisions of the chapter shall continue to be of full force
and effect.
(3) The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 145-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 145-7
125:298
subsection or of any order issued pursuant to this chapter. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense, and the fine shall
be up to $1,000 maximum.
§ 145-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final adoption and publication in
accordance with the law on the date it is filed with the County Planning
Board after adoption.
Chapter 147
(RESERVED)
Chapter 148
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 58.
Housing standards — See Ch. 115.
Solid waste — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
§ 145-7 LITTERING § 145-8
125:299

ARTICLE I
Required Connection of Septic Systems to Sanitary Sewers in
Adopted Sewer Service Area
[Adopted 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
§ 148-1. Purpose.
In areas where public sanitary sewers are not physically available and
operational, but are intended to be the means of wastewater management
according to the adopted Water Quality Management Plan (WMP)
applicable to an area, interim use of individual subsurface sewage disposal
systems (ISSDSs) by existing and proposed development is allowed.
However, at such time as the sanitary sewers are made available and
operational, connection of buildings or structures served by an ISSDS to the
sewers is required in accordance with this article.
§ 148-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADOPTED SEWER SERVICE AREA — The area designated in the applicable
adopted Water Quality Management Plan (WMP), as updated by
modifications adopted in accordance with the Water Quality Management
Planning Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:15, within which wastewater that is generated
is to be conveyed to the wastewater treatment facility associated with the
sewer service area.
INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM or ISSDS — A
system for the disposal of less than or equal to 2,000 gallons per day of
sanitary sewage into the ground. Typically such systems are designed and
constructed to treat sanitary sewage in a manner that will retain most of
the settleable solids in a septic tank and discharge the liquid effluent to a
disposal field, but similar designs are also included (for example, those that
include seepage tanks or pits for effluent disposal and cesspools that may
have been constructed prior to current codes).
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any wastes, including wastes from humans,
households, commercial establishments and industries, that are discharged
to or otherwise enter a domestic treatment works.
§ 148-3. Connection required.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, an owner of a building or
structure equipped with an ISSDS located on a property abutting any street
or sewerage easement in which a gravity sanitary sewer line is operation
and available shall promptly connect thereto in a manner complying with
the applicable state regulations and Township ordinances, and cause all
sewage on such premises to be discharged into said sanitary sewer,
provided that the building or structure is located within the adopted sewer
§ 148-1 LITTERING § 148-3
125:301
service area of the wastewater treatment facility to which the sanitary
sewer line is connected and use of the ISSDS is discontinued.
§ 148-4. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to buildings or structures for which a sanitary
sewer line is considered not to be available in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:9A-1.6(e), as amended or supplemented, or is not operational in
accordance with a valid treatment works approval. Sanitary sewers which
are considered not available or not operational for the purposes of this
article include:
§ 148-5. Time limit for connection.
Such connection shall be accomplished on or before the expiration of 90
days following the date the sanitary sewer line becomes available and
operational or the effective date of this article, whichever should occur
later.
§ 148-6. Pumping and filling of septic tank upon connection to
sanitary sewer.
Upon connecting to the sanitary sewer, the ISSDS shall be pumped and
all its contents removed by a licensed septic cleaner. The lid of the septic
tank and/or cesspool shall then be broken or removed and the tank and/or
cesspool backfilled with clean fill.
§ 148-7. Violations and penalties.
In the event of noncompliance with the terms of this article, the Township
Health Official or Zoning Officer is authorized to order such connection by
written notice signed by the Zoning Officer or Health Official and served
A. Those connections to the sanitary sewer line that cannot be
accomplished without requiring the installation of a pumping station;
blasting of bedrock; the acquisition of an easement or right-of-way to
cross an adjoining property; or the crossing of a watercourse, railway,
major highway or other significant obstacle;
B. Where the sanitary sewer line is located 100 feet or more from the
building or structure to be served;
C. Where the sanitary sewer has received a Stage II "construction only"
treatment works approval in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:14A-22.9 and
has not yet received a Stage III treatment works approval, which is an
approval to operate the treatment works in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:14A-22.10, until such time as the Stage III treatment works approval
is approved; or
D. Where the sanitary sewer line or receiving sewage treatment plant is
subject to a sewer connection ban in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:14A-22.17, until such time as the sewer connection ban is lifted.
§ 148-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 148-7
125:302
either upon the owner(s) personally or by mail. If, following service of
such an order in the manner described above, the owner(s) should fail to
connect within 30 days of receipt of the aforesaid order, the owner(s) shall
be subject to a fine of up to $300 per day.
§ 148-7 LITTERING § 148-7
125:303

ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
§ 148-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to help protect public health and safety,
water quality and the general welfare by requiring the proper operation and
maintenance of individual subsurface sewage disposal systems (ISSDSs)
in Woolwich Township. Further, it is intended to comply with N.J.A.C.
7:15-5.25(e).
§ 148-9. Background.
ISSDSs that are not properly maintained can contaminate both
groundwater and surface water, creating health risks to humans and
impairing natural ecosystems. Regularly pumping out the accumulated
solids and liquids from an ISSDS before they interfere with proper function
is the single most-effective means to maintain an ISSDS in good working
order and to extend its effective life. Therefore, regular pumpouts are a key
means to protect the surrounding environment as well as public health and
welfare from the effects of a failed system.
§ 148-10. Applicability.
This article is applicable to all ISSDSs, both existing and newly installed,
within the Township of Woolwich.
§ 148-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTING AUTHORITY — The office, agency, or other entity responsible for
the implementation of this article, namely the Township Health Official or
Zoning Officer.
INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM or ISSDS — A
system for the disposal of less than or equal to 2,000 gallons per day of
sanitary sewage into the ground. Such systems are generally designed and
constructed to treat sanitary sewage in a manner that will retain most of
the settleable solids in a tank and discharge the liquid effluent to a disposal
field. Existing systems with other designs (some no longer permitted to be
used), such as cesspools or those that dispose of effluent through seepage
pits, are also included. This term refers to both systems that serve an
individual residence as well as on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems
serving a property other than a single-family home (such as commercial
buildings, food establishments, commercial/residential mixed uses, and
systems serving multiple units) with an engineering flow of less than or
equal to 2,000 gallons per day, including but not limited to those systems
identified in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.8(a)2.
§ 148-8 LITTERING § 148-11
125:305
LICENSED HEALTH OFFICER — An individual granted a license by the
Public Health Licensing and Examination Board of the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services.
LICENSED ISSDS INSTALLER — An industry professional that meets a set
of established criteria and is deemed qualified to construct, install or alter
individual subsurface sewage disposal systems by the acting authority or its
designee.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — An engineer licensed by the
New Jersey State Board of Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors to
practice the profession of engineering.
MAINTENANCE — Pumping out by a qualified service provider, as
determined by the acting authority, the accumulated solids and liquids
retained in an ISSDS, as well as servicing as necessary to restore an ISSDS
to good working order.
NJDEP-REGISTERED ISSDS SERVICE PROVIDER — An industry
professional that has completed the on-site wastewater treatment system
professionals voluntary registration form and filed it with the Department's
Bureau of Nonpoint Pollution Control.
OWNER — Any person or other entity that has legal title to property.
PROPERTY — Either of the following that is served by an ISSDS:
REGISTERED ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST — An individual
granted a license by the Public Health Licensing and Examination Board of
the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any wastes, including wastes from humans,
households, commercial establishments, and/or equivalent water-carried
wastes of human origin from industries, that are discharged to an ISSDS.
§ 148-12. Inventory records.
The Woolwich Township Board of Health, or its designee, shall maintain a
database identifying each ISSDS in active use within Woolwich Township.
The database shall include for each ISSDS the parcel block and lot and
address of the property where the ISSDS is located, the name and address
of the property owner, a description of system size, type and location on
the property, and the pumpout status according to the required pumpout
schedule set forth in § 148-13. Owners of properties served by ISSDSs are
required to cooperate in the initial development and continuing update
of the database, which may be developed in phases, as set forth below
and in § 148-13. Property owners with an ISSDS are required to submit
A. A single lot as defined by municipal lot and block; or
The combined area contained within the legal boundaries of two or
more contiguous lots where, for any part of each of those lots, there is
a shared pecuniary, possessory or other substantial common interest by
one or more persons (such as common ownership and/or operation or a
common plan of development or sale).
B.
§ 148-11 WOOLWICH CODE § 148-12
125:306
a registration form with the required information to the Township and to
obtain a permit, with an associated fee of $3, for the ISSDS. The purpose
is to complete the initial database prior to the deadline for submitting the
six-year WMP update required at N.J.A.C. 7:15-5.23(a). A phased system
may consist of initially populating the database with those systems already
known pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9a-3.5, which requires a permit to construct,
install, or alter an individual or nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal
system. For the remaining existing systems, there shall be a presumption
that a property is served by an ISSDS unless demonstration is made by the
property owner that a sewer hookup exists.
§ 148-13. Routine ISSDS maintenance.
A. The owner of a property served by an ISSDS must cause the ISSDS to
be pumped out by an ISSDS service provider in accordance with the
applicable schedule. Documentation of compliance shall be submitted
within 60 days to Health Official or designee in the form of a receipt
from the ISSDS service provider for the service indicating the property
location, service type(s) provided and date of service.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection A(2), each ISSDS shall be
pumped out every three years following the initial scheduled
pumpout, as set forth in Subsection C, unless an alternative
schedule is identified by the acting authority, as set forth in
Subsection B.
(2) In lieu of a pumpout, the property owner may submit a septic
system inspection report to the Health Official or designee, on a
form provided by the acting authority, indicating that the system is
not in need of pumping and is in good working order. In this case,
the pumpout schedule will be shifted forward by one year. Said
form shall be prepared, completed and certified by one of the
following:
(a) Licensed ISSDS installer;
(b) NJDEP - registered ISSDS service provider;
(c) Licensed professional engineer;
(d) Licensed health officer or registered environmental health
specialist; or
(e) Other person acceptable to the acting authority.
B. Modifications to term of scheduled maintenance. The acting authority
may, on its own motion, upon notice and opportunity to the property
owner for a hearing, or upon application for a modified schedule by a
property owner, alter the time period for scheduled maintenance. The
acting authority may consider the factors, including but not limited to
those listed below, in determining that a different pumping schedule
applies:
§ 148-12 LITTERING § 148-13
125:307
§ 148-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Adherence to the provisions of this article is necessary to help protect
public health and safety, water quality and the general welfare. Failure to
adhere to the provisions set forth in this article shall constitute a violation of
this article for which a fine shall be levied, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29,
in an amount between $25 and $750, based upon severity of violation.
(1) Size of the ISSDS relative to the wastewater generated by the
structure(s) served (i.e., small number of users relative to system
design may warrant a longer period, while a large number of users
relative to system design may warrant a shorter period).
(2) ISSDSs that are cesspools.
(3) Unusual type and/or intensity of sewage generation, such as dining
establishments, pet grooming, hair salons, etc.
C. Notification of requirement for scheduled maintenance.
(1) An initial notice of requirement for initial pumpout and the
pumpout schedule applicable thereafter shall be mailed by the
acting authority to owners of properties served by ISSDSs. Except
as provided in Subsection C(2), the initial scheduled pumpout is
required to be conducted within 90 days of the date set forth in the
initial notification.
(2) Property owners shall be exempt from the initial pumpout
requirement, provided documentation is submitted to the Health
Official or designee that confirms a pumpout was completed no
more than 18 months prior to receiving the initial notification. In
this case, the initial required maintenance will commence three
years from the date of the documented pumpout.
(3) Sixty days prior to the next scheduled maintenance, the acting
authority shall send a "notice for service due" letter to the affected
property owners.
§ 148-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 148-14
125:308
Chapter 149
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 23.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 148-14 LITTERING § 148-14
125:309

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 149-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require approval of proposed site plans
within the Township of Woolwich by the Planning Board or, in appropriate
cases, by the Board of Adjustment, for the purposes set forth in the
Municipal Land Use Law47 and to exercise the power of site plan review and
approval granted to municipalities of the State of New Jersey.
§ 149-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Woolwich Township
Site Plan Ordinance of 1978."
§ 149-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use,
zoning variance or permit to build in a mapped area or for a structure
not related to a street.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE — A line of unobstructed vision from a point
3.75 feet above the center line of a street to a point on the same center
line.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area at a street intersection
with another street, an alley or a driveway, where vision from an
automobile is unobstructed, formed by the intersecting street lines
and a line drawn between points on the street center lines located a
required distance in feet from the intersection of the center lines.
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street with access closed at one end by a
vehicular turnaround.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 149-1 LITTERING § 149-3
125:311
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for
the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood
damage.[Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
HIGH DENSITY — Those residential and zoning districts in which the
density is equal to or greater than five or more dwelling units per acre.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOW DENSITY — Those residential and zoning districts in which the
density is equal or less than three dwelling units per acre.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MEDIUM DENSITY — Those residential and zoning districts in which
the density is between three and five dwelling units per acre.
OBLIGOR — One that places himself under a legal obligation.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article 5 of
the Municipal Land Use Law.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having a proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, which may be accepted
by a municipality, including cash, provided that the municipality shall
not require more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNING BOARD — The Township Planning Board.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design
of a project illustrating, in a schematic form, its scope, scale and
relationship to its site and immediate environs.
REVIEWING BOARD — The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
whichever Board has jurisdiction over the particular application.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown:
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage,
floodplains, marshes and waterways.
(1)
§ 149-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-3
125:312
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way that is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action of the township or a street
or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County
Recording Officer prior to the appointment of the Planning Board and
the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the
land between the street lines whether improved or unimproved and
may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas
and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter,
streets shall be classified as follows:
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
(2)
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this chapter.
(3)
ALLEYS — Minor service streets used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or side of abutting properties.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREETS — The street intended to move traffic
between local streets to and from secondary arterials. A collector
street serves a neighborhood or large subdivision.
(2)
LOCAL STREET — A street intended to provide access to other
streets from individual properties and to provide right-of-way
beneath it for sewer, water and storm drainage pipes.
(3)
MAJOR ARTERIALS — A street intended to move through traffic
to and from such major attractors as Central Business Districts,
regional shopping centers, colleges and/or universities, military
installations, major industrial areas and similar traffic generators
within the governmental unit; and/or as a route for traffic between
communities or large areas. They should be designed so that no
residential properties face onto them.
(4)
MINOR ARTERIALS — A street intended to collect and distribute
traffic in a manner similar to primary arterials, except that these
streets service minor traffic generating from areas such as
community-commercial areas, primary and secondary educational
plants, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches and offices,
and/or designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the system
of primary arterials. They should be designed so that no residential
properties face onto them.
(5)
SERVICE ROADS — Low-volume roads parallel to and adjacent to
arterials and highways that provide access and frontage to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
(6)
§ 149-3 LITTERING § 149-3
125:313
§ 149-4. Applicability.
B. Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in Chapter
203, Zoning, or in P.L. 1975, c. 291,48 such term is intended to have the
meaning set forth in the definition of such term found in such ordinance
or statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed from the
context of this chapter.
A. Site plan review and approval shall be required before any change of
use or before any excavation, removal of soil, clearing of a site or
placing of any fill on lands contemplated for development, and, except
as hereinafter provided, no building permit shall be issued for any
building or use, or relocation or enlargement in size or other alteration
of any building or change in use, of any building, including accessory
structures, unless a site plan is first submitted and approved by the
reviewing board, and no certificate of occupancy shall be given unless
all construction and development conforms to the plans as approved by
the reviewing board.
B. Subdivision or individual lot applications for detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings or any uses accessory thereto, such as a private
garage or storage shed incidental to residential uses, shall be exempt
from site plan review and approval, but this shall not limit the
requirements for submission and approval of subdivision plats as
otherwise required by municipal ordinances.
C. Site plan review and approval shall not be required for the construction,
relocation, enlargement or other alteration of any nonresidential
building to be used for agriculture purposes of a nonretail nature,
provided that it will not normally be open to the public and provided
that the site of said building is contiguous to farmland under the same
ownership which is qualified for farmland assessment, but this shall not
limit the requirement for submission and approval of subdivision plats
as otherwise required by municipal ordinances.
D. The reviewing board may by resolution waive site plan approval
requirements in any case where the board finds that the construction or
alteration or change of occupancy or use does not affect existing
circulation, drainage, relationship of buildings to each other,
landscaping, buffering, lighting and other considerations of site plan
review.
E. Site plan approval shall not be required for soil excavation governed by
the township ordinance regulating soil excavation and sale.
F. Site plan review and approval shall not be required if exempted by law.
G. In the event any single property owner or consortium of property
owners owns property located within the Woolwich Regional Center
48.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 149-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-4
125:314
§ 149-5. Performance standards.
In reviewing any site plan, the Board shall consider:
and Auburn Road Village, as defined in Part 2 of the Zoning
Ordinance,49 entitled "Woolwich Regional Center and Auburn Road
Village Regulations and Design Standards," consisting of 15 acres or
more, he/she or it may apply to the Joint Land Use Board for General
Development Plan (GDP) approval for its portions of either Center and
shall be subject to the provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 et seq. regarding
GDP review and approvals. Both property owners or consortiums of
property owners who obtain GDP approval and those who do not obtain
a GDP approval for their property shall be required to obtain site plan
and/or subdivision approval as may be required by law in addition to
complying with the conditions of Part 2 of the Zoning Ordinance.50
[Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-17]
A. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent to the
site with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking
areas, off-street loading and unloading, movement of people, goods and
vehicles from access roads, within the site, between buildings and
between buildings and vehicles. The Planning Board shall ensure that
all parking spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged.
Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed so as to
interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads and to
permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress to the site.
B. The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be reviewed
so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient
arrangement. Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire
protection, impact on surrounding development and contiguous and
adjacent buildings and lands.
C. Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of
persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards
shall be a type approved by the Planning Board. Directional lights shall
be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent
properties.
D. Buffering shall be located around the perimeter of the site to minimize
headlights of vehicles, noise, light from structures, the movement of
people and vehicles and to shield activities from adjacent properties
when necessary. Buffering may consist of fencing, evergreens, shrubs,
bushes, deciduous trees or combinations thereof to achieve the stated
objectives.
E. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan design
and integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking and
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning, Part 2.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning, Part 2.
§ 149-4 LITTERING § 149-5
125:315
buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees, bushes,
shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture, art and the
use of building and paving materials in an imaginative manner.
F. Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing, harmonious
with other signs on the site and located so as to achieve their purpose
without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
G. Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply and garbage
disposal shall be reviewed and considered. Particular emphasis shall be
given to the adequacy of existing systems and the need for
improvements, both on site and off site, to adequately carry runoff and
sewage and to maintain an adequate supply of water at sufficient
pressure.
H. Garbage disposal shall be adequate to ensure freedom from vermin and
rodent infestation. All disposal systems shall meet municipal
specifications as to installation and construction.51
I. Chapter 203, Zoning, shall be complied with in all respects unless a
variance is obtained.
J. Environmental considerations. Environmental elements relating to soil
erosion, preservation of trees, protection of watercourses, topography,
soil and wildlife shall be reviewed and the design of the plan shall
minimize any adverse impact on these elements. Whenever possible,
the natural features of a site are to be preserved, floodplains respected
and excessive cut or fill avoided. In reviewing a site plan, the reviewing
authority shall take into consideration the effect of the development
upon all aspects of the environment as outlined in the environmental
impact statement requirements, as well as the sufficiency of the
applicant's proposal in his environmental impact statement for dealing
with any immediate or projected adverse environmental effects. The
reviewing authority may require, as a condition of approval of the
application, that steps be taken to minimize the adverse environmental
impact during and after construction, and no final approval shall be
issued until all such requirements shall have been complied with or
compliance is guaranteed by a performance guaranty meeting the
standards, requirements and procedures set forth in § 149-13 of this
chapter. [Added 5-1-1989 by Ord. No. 89-8; amended 8-21-1989
by Ord. No. 89-16]
51.Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, pertaining to environmental elements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6.
§ 149-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-5
125:316
ARTICLE II
Application Submittal and Distribution Requirements
§ 149-6. Submission of complete application.
A. The applicant shall submit seven copies of his complete application to
the Secretary of the Board or the administrative officer of the reviewing
board. The time for the Board's review shall not begin to run until the
submission of a complete application with the required fee. Unless the
applicant is informed in writing by the Secretary of the reviewing board
within 45 days of the actual submission of the application that it is
incomplete, said application shall be deemed complete as of the date it
was submitted.
B. A complete application for preliminary approval shall also consist of the
following:
(1) A properly completed preliminary site plan information form
available from the Secretary of the Planning Board.
(2) The required fee.
(3) A preliminary site plan which shall be legibly drawn or reproduced
at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet. Deviations from
this requirement may be permitted for certain items of the plans
upon request prior to submission and upon the recommendation of
the Planning Board. The preliminary site plan shall be prepared
under the supervision of a New Jersey licensed land surveyor and a
New Jersey licensed engineer and shall show or include the
following information:
(a) A key map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet, if greater
than five acres, clearly showing the location of the proposed
development within the township and in relation to major
streets, water bodies and political boundaries within the area.
(b) The tract or development name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot
numbers, North arrow, graphic scale, reference meridian, date
and the zoning district in which the lot or lots are located and
the following names and addresses: the name and address of
the owner or owners; the name and address of record of owner
or owners of tracts abutting onto and within 200 feet of the
tract to be developed; the name and address of the developer;
and the name and address of the person who prepared the
map.
(c) The acreage of the tract to be developed to the nearest tenth of
an acre.
(d) The location of existing and proposed property lines, building
setback lines from streets, existing buildings and structures
with an indication of whether they will be retained or removed.
§ 149-6 LITTERING § 149-6
125:317
(e) All existing elements, including but not limited to sidewalks,
streets, paved areas, buildings, utilities, plant materials and
drainage lines that are to be removed and/or demolished.
(f) Typical profiles and cross sections of proposed streets within
the development and existing streets and highways abutting
the development. Detailed plans and specifications for all
proposed culverts and bridges in the development. Traffic
patterns and access aisles shall also be shown. The typical
cross sections of streets shall clearly indicate the type and
width of the pavement and the location of curbs, the location of
sidewalks and shade tree planting strips, any existing or
proposed sight triangles and radii of curblines at intersections.
(g) All existing and proposed setback dimensions, landscaped
areas, freestanding trees over four-inch caliper, the boundaries
of all wooded areas and rows of trees, the location and extent
of rock formations and fencing within 100 feet of a street rightof-
way line or proposed street right-of-way.
(h) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals
referenced to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
datum and extending 200 feet beyond the lot lines where
possible and necessary.
(i) All existing watercourses within the development accompanied
by the following information or data:
[1] When a brook or stream is proposed for alteration,
improvement or relocation or when a drainage structure is
proposed on a running stream with a drainage area of 50
acres or greater, evidence of submission of the
improvement to the New Jersey Division of Water Policy
and Supply as a condition of preliminary approval.
[2] When a ditch, stream, brook or watercourse is to be
altered, improved or relocated, the method of stabilizing
slopes and measures to control erosion and siltation, as
well as typical ditch sections and profiles.
(j) The location and extent of the one-hundred-year floodplain
within and adjacent to the development.
(k) The total acreage in the drainage basin of any watercourse
running through or adjacent to the development in the area
upstream of the development.
(l) The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest
downstream drainage structure and the acreage in the
development that drains to the structure.
§ 149-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-6
125:318
(m) The location and extent of drainage and conservation
easements and stream encroachment lines within the
development.
(n) The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds within or adjacent to the
development.
(o) Plans and computations showing existing and proposed storm
drainage systems serving the development, including the
following:
[1] All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or
adjacent to the development showing size and profile of
the lines, direction of flow and the location of each
manhole and inlet; and
[2] The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, retention basins or other
water conservation devices.
(p) Plans showing existing and proposed sanitary sewerage
facilities serving the development, including the following:
[1] Location, size and profiles of all sanitary sewer lines,
pumping stations and connections to existing facilities.
[2] Location of any proposed sanitary sewage treatment
plants within or adjacent to the development.
(q) Plans showing the size and location of all water mains within
the development.
(r) Identification of lands within the development to be dedicated
or reserved for public use.
(s) The location of any other underground utilities and easements
to accommodate them, clearly indicated on the plan.
(4) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying or
to apply to the land being developed.
(5) For any development in which buildings at the time of construction
will not be connected to a public sewerage disposal system, three
copies of a sewage disposal report as required in Subsection B(7)
below.
(6) Erosion-sedimentation control plan as required by law for review
by the Gloucester County Soil Conservation District.
(7) Soil percolation test requirements.
§ 149-6 LITTERING § 149-6
125:319
(a) Soil percolation tests shall be performed for all developments
containing buildings that at the time of construction will not be
connected to a public sewage disposal system.
(b) Soil percolation tests shall be made in accordance with the
applicable state and local regulations.
(c) The applicant's engineer shall enter the results of the tests on
three copies of a sewage disposal report and shall submit these
with the preliminary site plan; provided, however, that, where
the approval of the proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities
by the appropriate county or state health agency is otherwise
required, two copies of its report of investigation and approval
may be submitted in lieu of the sewage disposal report as
required in this Subsection B(7).
(d) Soil percolation tests shall be performed at the site(s) of the
proposed on-site sanitary sewage disposal facility throughout
the tract being developed.
(e) The results of the soil percolation tests shall be analyzed by the
Planning Board and the County Planning Board in conjunction
with the appropriate characteristics of the tract being
developed and the general area surrounding the tract being
developed, and the final site plan layout shall be based on this
analysis.
(8) Environmental impact statement. [Added 5-1-1989 by Ord. No.
89-8; amended 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-16]
(a) The applicant for any site plan approval that requires
certification by the Soil Conservation District of a plan for soil
erosion and sediment control shall also submit an
environmental impact statement, in triplicate, signed and
sealed by a New Jersey licensed engineer or a New Jersey
licensed professional planner, preferably with experience in
environmental studies. As used in this chapter, an
"environmental impact statement" means a written description
and analysis of all possible direct and indirect effects the
development will have upon the development's site as well as
upon the surrounding region affected thereby, with particular
reference to the effect of the development upon the public
health, welfare and safety, the protection of public and private
property and the preservation and enhancement of the natural
environment. Every environmental impact statement shall
contain the following:
[1] A key map showing the location of the development and
how it relates to the surrounding region affected thereby.
[2] A description of the development specifying, in the form of
maps, drawings, graphs or similar visual aids, and also by
§ 149-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-6
125:320
narrative, what is to be done and how it is to be done
during and after construction of the development,
including information and technical data adequate to
permit a careful assessment of the environmental impact
of the development.
[3] An inventory of the existing environmental conditions at
the development site and in the surrounding region
affected thereby which shall describe the following:
[a] Physical characteristics:
[i] Air quality.
[ii] Hydrology, including maps and descriptions of
streams, water bodies and floodplains and a
discussion of water quality.
[iii] Geology.
[iv] Soils and their properties, including capabilities
and limitations.
[v] Topography and slope.
[vi] Drainage.
[vii] Vegetation.
[viii] Air quality and water quality described with
reference to the standards promulgated by the
Department of Environmental Protection of the
State of New Jersey and soils shall be described
with reference to criteria contained in the
Gloucester County, New Jersey Soil Survey
Standards and Specifications, issued by the
United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service.
[b] Wildlife:
[i] Fish and aquatic organisms.
[ii] Wild animals.
[c] Manmade conditions and structures:
[i] Sanitary and storm sewer systems, including
planned construction.
[ii] Noise characteristics and levels.
[iii] Traffic volume.
§ 149-6 LITTERING § 149-6
125:321
[iv] Land use, including maps and descriptions of
zoning and Master Plan delineation of the
development area.
[v] Aesthetics.
[d] Community character:
[i] History, including maps and descriptions of sites
of historic and archaeological significance.
[ii] Demography.
[iii] Culture.
[iv] Maps and descriptions of sites reserved or
planned for recreational purposes or as wildlife
refuges.
[e] A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals
required by municipal, county or state law, the status
of each, and proof that the applicant has contacted
officials of any federal, state, county or municipal
agency affected by the proposed development.
[4] An assessment of the probable impact of the development
upon all of the topics listed in Subsection B(8)(a)[3] above.
[5] A listing and evaluation of adverse environmental impacts
which cannot be avoided, with particular emphasis upon
air or water pollution, increase in noise during and after
construction, damage to plant, tree and wildlife systems,
damage to natural resources, displacement of people and
businesses, increase in sedimentation and siltation,
flooding, potential stormwater runoff damage both on and
off site, increase in municipal services, and health, safety
and well-being of the public. Off-site and off-tract impact
shall also be set forth and evaluated.
[6] A thorough description of the steps to be taken to minimize
adverse environmental impact before, during and after
construction of the development, both at the development
site and in the surrounding region affected thereby, such
description to be accompanied by necessary maps,
schedules and other explanatory data as may be needed to
clarify and explain the actions to be taken.
[7] Identification and description of any irreversible and
irretrievable commitment of resources which would be
involved in the proposed action.
[8] A statement of alternatives to the proposed development
which might avoid some or all of the adverse
§ 149-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-6
125:322
§ 149-7. Submission to County Planning Board.
All applications for site plan approval shall be submitted to the County
Planning Board for its review and recommendations, and where applicable,
approval. The applicant shall furnish proof of such submission at the time
of the submission of his application to the municipal reviewing board by
presenting a copy of his site plan with an indication from the county that
it has been filed with it. Any application for site plan approval shall not be
deemed complete in the absence of proof that it has been filed with the
County Planning Board. If the County Planning Board has failed to grant
or deny approval of the site plan at the time of preliminary approval of
applicant's application, such preliminary approval shall be conditioned on
approval of said site plan by the County Planning Board.
§ 149-8. Submission of soil erosion and sediment control plan.
No application for site plan approval shall be deemed complete in the
absence of proof that a plan for soil erosion and sedimentation control
has been submitted to the relevant reviewing authority, pursuant to the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. or proof that such a plan is not
required by said statute for the particular application. If the reviewing
authority has failed to grant or deny certification of the erosion plan at the
time of preliminary approval of applicant's site plan, preliminary approval
may be denied, or, at the direction of the reviewing authority, it may be
conditioned on certification of applicant's erosion plan.
§ 149-9. County culverts and bridges.
After preliminary site plan approval and prior to consideration of the final
site plan, detailed plans and specifications for all proposed culverts and
bridges within county jurisdiction or improvements to existing county
culverts or bridges shall be submitted to the County Planning Board for
review and approval of the County Engineer. The plans shall also be
environmental effects, including a no-action alternative,
with an objective evaluation of each alternative, including
the no-action alternative.
[9] A reference list of available pertinent, published
information relating to the development, the development
site and the surrounding region affected thereby.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the reviewing board may waive
the requirement for an environmental impact statement if
sufficient evidence is submitted by the applicant to support a
conclusion that the proposed development will have a slight or
negligible environmental impact. Portions of such requirement
may likewise be waived upon a finding by the reviewing board
that a complete statement need not be prepared in order to
evaluate adequately the environmental impact of the
development.
§ 149-6 LITTERING § 149-9
125:323
accompanied by the permit of the New Jersey Division of Water Policy and
Supply indicating its approval of the proposed facility.
§ 149-10. Distribution of site plan.
The Secretary of the reviewing board shall distribute the site plan
application for review and report, and approval where required, as follows:
A. One copy to the Municipal Clerk.
B. One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
C. One copy to the Municipal Zoning Officer.
D. One copy to the Chairman of the County Planning Board.
E. One copy to the Municipal Tax Assessor.
F. One copy to the County Board of Health.
G. One copy to the local Fire Department or Fire Marshal.
§ 149-9 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-10
125:324
ARTICLE III
Preliminary Approval
§ 149-11. Time limit for decision on site plans for 10 acres of land
or less.
Upon the submission to the Secretary of the Planning Board of a complete
application for a site plan for 10 acres of land or less, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer, except that if the application for site plan approval also involves
an application for a relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date
of the submission of a complete application to the Secretary of the Planning
Board, or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 149-12. Time limit for decision on site plans for more than 10
acres of land.
Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan of more
than 10 acres, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 95 days of the date of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 149-13. Time limit for decision on complete applications
submitted to Board of Adjustment.
Upon the submission to the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment of a
complete application for site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76b,
the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny preliminary approval of the
application within 120 days of the date of such submission or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 149-14. Failure to approve within time periods deemed approval
of plan.
Failure of the reviewing board to reach a decision within the specified time
periods or extensions thereof shall result in the approval of the site plan as
submitted.
§ 149-15. Processing of amended applications.
If the reviewing board requires any substantial amendment in the layout of
improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject of a
hearing, an amended application for development shall be submitted and
proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application for development.
The reviewing board shall, if the proposed development complies with this
chapter, grant preliminary site plan approval.
§ 149-11 LITTERING § 149-16
125:325
§ 149-16. Effect of submission of sketch plans.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of a developer to
submit a sketch plan to the reviewing board for informal review, and neither
the reviewing board nor the developer shall be bound by any discussions
or statements made during such review, provided that the right of the
developer at any time to submit a complete application for site plan
approval shall not be limited by his submittal of a sketch plan, and the
time for the reviewing board's decision shall not begin to run until the
submission of a complete application.
§ 149-17. Applications requiring public meeting with notice.
A public meeting with the same notices as required for a hearing on an
application for development under the Municipal Land Use Law52 shall be
held to discuss all applications for site plan approval involving uses which,
on the submitted complete application, show five or more off-street parking
spaces. A public meeting with such notices is not required for all other site
plan applications.
§ 149-18. Power to grant exceptions to site plan requirements.
The reviewing board, when acting upon applications for preliminary site
plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of this chapter, if the literal enforcement of
one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
§ 149-19. Rights under preliminary approval.
A. Preliminary approval of a site plan, except as provided in Subsection B
of this section, shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a
three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; natural resources to be preserved on the site;
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading;
screening, landscaping and location of structures; exterior lighting
both for safety reasons and streetlighting, except that nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent the municipality from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to the public health and safety.
52.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 149-16 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-19
125:326
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the reviewing board may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that, if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
B. In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the reviewing
board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection A(1), (2) and (3)
above for such period of time, longer than three years, as shall be
determined by the reviewing board to be reasonable taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, economic conditions and
the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
for thereafter and the reviewing board may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the reviewing board to be reasonable taking into
consideration:
(1) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval.
(2) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval.
(3) Economic conditions.
(4) The comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the
design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised
standards may govern.
§ 149-19 LITTERING § 149-19
125:327

ARTICLE IV
Final Approval
§ 149-20. Granting of final approval; planned developments.
The reviewing board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval conform to
the standards established by ordinance for final approval and the conditions
of preliminary approval, provided that in the case of a planned development,
the reviewing body may permit minimal deviations from the conditions
of preliminary approval necessitated by change of conditions beyond the
control of the developer since the date of preliminary approval without the
developer being required to submit another application for development for
preliminary approval.
§ 149-21. Time limit; failure of reviewing board to act.
Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after submission
of a complete application to the Secretary of the reviewing board, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
reviewing board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute final
approval of the application for final approval as submitted, and a certificate
of the Secretary of the reviewing board as to failure of the reviewing board
to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other required evidence of approval.
§ 149-22. Contents of complete application for final approval.
A complete application for final approval shall consist of the following:
§ 149-23. Effect of final approval.
The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
§ 149-19 of this chapter, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval. If the
developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, the
reviewing board may extend such period of protection for extensions of
one year but not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other
A. A properly completed final site plan approval form.
B. The required fee.
C. A site plan in final form, including all the information shown on the
preliminary plan, conditions of preliminary approval, plus the following:
(1) All site improvements completed to date clearly indicated as
completed.
(2) All site improvements remaining to be completed clearly indicated
as incomplete.
§ 149-20 LITTERING § 149-23
125:329
provisions of this chapter, the granting of final approval terminates the time
period of preliminary approval pursuant to §§ 149-11 through 149-16 of this
chapter for the section granted final approval.
§ 149-24. Planned developments.
In the case of a site plan for a planned development of 50 acres or more
or conventional site plan for 150 acres or more, the reviewing board may
grant the rights referred to in § 149-23 of this article for such period of
time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the reviewing board
to be reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development. The developer
may apply for thereafter, and the reviewing board may thereafter grant,
an extension of final approval for such additional period of time as shall
be determined by the reviewing board to be reasonable taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval, the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, economic conditions
and the comprehensiveness of the development.
§ 149-25. Required guaranties.
A. As a condition of final site plan approval, the reviewing board may
require and shall accept in accordance with the standards adopted by
this chapter for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of on-tract improvements:
(1) Performance guaranty; review of improvements by Municipal
Engineer.
(a) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the
municipality in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation for improvements it may deem necessary or
appropriate, including streets, grading, pavement, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade trees, surveyor's
monuments, as shown on the final map and required by the
Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.),
water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other
means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control
and sedimentation control devices, public improvements of
open space and other on-site improvements and landscaping,
provided that no more than 10% of the total performance
guaranty shall be required to be in cash, and the balance may
be in the form of a bond from a bonding company or other
security approved by the Township Committee.
(b) The Municipal Engineer shall review the improvements
required by the reviewing board which are to be bonded and
itemize their cost. Said itemization shall be the basis for
determining the amount of the performance guaranty and
§ 149-23 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-25
125:330
maintenance guaranty required by the reviewing board. The
Municipal Engineer shall forward his estimate of the cost of
improvements to the applicant within 30 days of the date of
receipt of a request sent by certified mail for said estimate.
(2) The furnishing of a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the
governing body for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of
the cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental
agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be
installed or the improvements are covered by performance or
maintenance guaranty to another governmental agency, no
performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case may be, shall be
required for such utilities or improvements.
B. The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
Township Committee, by resolution, when portions of the improvements
have been certified by the Municipal Engineer to have been completed.
The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
Township Committee by resolution.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the municipality for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected, and the municipality
may, either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof,
complete such improvement.
D. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the Township Committee in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Municipal Clerk, of the completion of said
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer.
Thereupon the Municipal Engineer shall inspect all of the
improvements and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the
Township Committee, indicating either approval, partial approval or
rejection of the improvements with a statement of reasons for any
rejection. If partial approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements
rejected shall be set forth.
E. The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements, on the basis of the report of the Municipal Engineer and
shall notify the obligor in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of
said report and the action of said reviewing board with relation thereto,
not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the
completion of the improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the
obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance
guaranty, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure
provision of the improvements not yet approved. Failure of the
Township Committee to send or provide such notification to the obligor
within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the
§ 149-25 LITTERING § 149-25
125:331
§ 149-25.1. Nonapplicability to commercial development. [Added
5-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-07]
The requirement for performance guarantees as set forth in § 149-25 shall
not apply to commercial development.
§ 149-25.2. Notice to local school districts. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from
all liability, pursuant to such performance guaranty.
F. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the reviewing
board may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
G. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceeding any determination of the
governing body or the Municipal Engineer.
H. The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of improvements.
A. Final approval for site plan approval involving residential housing shall
be conditioned upon the applicant furnishing final development plans to
both the Swedesboro-Woolwich School District and the Kingsway
Regional School District. Said plans shall include the following:
(1) Plot plan showing all lots and number of lots contained therein.
(2) Street map of development, including street names.
B. Proof of service. The Township of Woolwich will not sign approved plans
until the applicant has provided a certification of proof of service to the
school districts on a form to be provided to the applicant along with
proof of return receipt of certified mailing.
§ 149-25 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-25.2
125:332
ARTICLE V
Improvement Specifications
§ 149-26. General requirements.
§ 149-27. Cartway width.
All streets intended to be dedicated to public use shall be in accordance
with township or county requirements as applicable to full cartway width
and shown on the site plan.
§ 149-28. Curbs.
Curbs shall be installed along both sides of all streets.
§ 149-29. Sidewalks.
All collector and arterial streets shall be provided with paved all-weather
sidewalks as required in § 149-49.
§ 149-30. Erosion and sediment control.
Erosion and sediment control facilities shall be installed in accordance with
the design principles and requirements contained in § 149-54.
A. All lots shown on a site plan shall be adaptable for the intended
purposes without danger to health or peril from flood, fire, erosion or
other menace.
B. Physical improvements to the property being developed shall be
provided, constructed and installed as shown on the final plat, in
accordance with the requirements of the township as set forth in this
chapter.
C. All required improvements, such as curbs, gutters, sidewalks and
roads, shall be constructed in accordance with current New Jersey
State Highway Department construction methods utilizing approved
materials.
D. Supervision of the installation of the required improvements shall in all
cases be the responsibility of the developer.
E. All of the required improvements shall be subject to inspection and
acceptance or rejection by the Municipal Engineer, who shall be
notified by the developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of
construction.
F. No underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
accepted.
§ 149-26 LITTERING § 149-31
125:333
§ 149-31. Storm sewers and related facilities.
Storm sewers and related facilities shall be installed in accordance with the
design principles and requirements contained in § 149-53.
§ 149-32. Sanitary sewage disposal.
Sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be installed in accordance with the
design principles and requirements contained in § 149-55.
§ 149-33. Water supply.
Water supply shall be installed in accordance with the design principles and
requirements contained in § 149-56.
§ 149-34. Access roads.
Whenever access to the development is required across land located in
another municipality, the Planning Board may request assurance from the
Township Attorney that access is legally established, and from the
Municipal Engineer that the access road is adequately improved, or that a
performance guaranty has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to
assure the construction of the access road.
§ 149-35. Monuments.
The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in accordance
with the requirements of the Map Filing Law of the State of New Jersey,
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11.
§ 149-36. Street signs.
Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections. The design
and placement of such signs shall conform to § 149-47E and be subject to
approval by the township and the county, as required.
§ 149-37. Street lighting. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
A. Street lighting shall be installed at no cost to the municipality by a
developer in locations approved by the Township Engineer. For
residential subdivisions, street lighting shall be installed, prior to the
issuance of any certificate of occupancy, along all roadways necessary
to ensure at least one route of illuminated access for any occupied
structure.
B. Operating expenses for residential subdivision shall be assumed by the
Township when 50% of the section is occupied.
C. Luminaries shall be installed on fourteen-foot laminated poles, with
said poles being installed to a depth of five feet below grade. Luminaire
mounting height shall be 14 feet above grade.
§ 149-31 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-37
125:334
§ 149-38. Recommended improvements.
The following improvements are recommended: All portions of a
development not covered with buildings or other impermeable surfaces and
not retained in their natural state shall be suitably landscaped.
D. Lighting fixtures.
(1) Type of fixture shall generally be of a `traditionaire' style in
accordance with specifications as promulgated by the Township
Engineer. Other decorative fixtures may be utilized in accordance
with the Township Engineer.
(2) Poles for freestanding fixtures shall generally be fluted and tapered
from base to top and in accordance with specifications as
promulgated by the Township Engineer.
E. Pole-mounted street luminaries shall be installed on alternating sides of
the street at five-hundred-foot intervals unless the presence of vertical
and/or horizontal curves or factors relating to specific types of
development necessitate a closer interval. In residential subdivisions,
the poles shall be placed, to the greatest extent possible, in line with
shared property boundaries. Deviations from the spacing interval shall
be approved by the Township Planning Board.
F. On residential streets, 70 watt high-pressure sodium (HPS) luminaries
shall be provided with at least one 100 watt high-pressure sodium
(HPS) luminaire being provided at each street intersection. On minor
collector and major collector streets, 100 watt high-pressure sodium
(HPS) luminaries shall be provided along the street with 150 watt highpressure
sodium (HPS) luminaries being provided at intersections.
These luminaries are permitted at these intersections.
§ 149-37 LITTERING § 149-38
125:335

ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 149-39. General.
A. The developer shall observe the following requirements and principles
of land development in the design of each development or portion
thereof, as well as the requirements of the Gloucester County Site Plan
Review Manual.
B. The development shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the township. If either or both an
Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the development
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The
streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map
shall be considered in approval of site plans.
C. The development shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to preserve the natural environment and scenic beauty of
Woolwich Township.
D. Existing features which would add value to residential development or
to the township as a whole, such as trees and other vegetation,
watercourses and falls, beaches, historic spots and similar
irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the
development.
E. No trees shall be removed from any development nor any change of
grade of the land effected until approval of the site plan has been
granted.
F. The site plan shall show the number and location of existing trees, as
required by these regulations, and shall further indicate all those
marked for retention, and the location of all proposed shade trees
required along the side of each street as required by these regulations.
G. The protection of specimen trees for four-inch caliper or over shall be a
factor in determining the location of open space, buildings,
underground services, walks, paved areas, playgrounds, parking areas
and finished grade levels.
H. All trees on the plan required to be retained shall be preserved, and all
trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of
grade.
I. Every effort should be made to avoid removal of trees having a caliper
of five inches or greater from the property in the process of developing,
grading or installing improvements. Where, in the judgment of the
Planning Board, such removal is unavoidable, a plan and a statement of
material to be removed, replaced and/or demolished shall be submitted
for approval.
§ 149-39 LITTERING § 149-39
125:337
§ 149-40. Street location.
§ 149-41. Partial or half streets.
J. The development shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to provide optimum open space and to create a man-made
environment for human use or occupancy compatible and harmonious
with the natural environment.
K. The development shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to require the minimum feasible amounts of land coverage
and the minimum feasible disturbance of soil and site by grading,
excavation and other land alterations.
L. The development shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to avoid substantial probabilities of:
(1) Accelerated erosion.
(2) Pollution, contamination or siltation of water bodies, including
ponds, lakes, rivers and streams.
(3) Damage to vegetation to remain in the development.
(4) Injury to wildlife and fish habitats.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
B. Local streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
C. If, in the opinion of the Planning Board, it is desirable to provide for
street access to adjoining property, streets shall be extended to the
boundary of such property.
D. Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication and included
within the lot area of residential, commercial and industrial
development for purposes of internal circulation, service and access to
parking and loading areas) shall be permitted. The minimum width of
the cartway for an internal private street shall be 10 feet for each
direction of movement. A private street shall not be a through street
and shall be intended only for the internal use of the development.
A. New half or partial streets and temporary culs-de-sac will not be
permitted, except where essential to the reasonable development of a
tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards of this
chapter and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of
the remaining part of the street can be obtained.
B. Where an existing half street is adjacent to a new subdivision or
development, the other half of the street shall be improved and
dedicated by the developer. The Planning Board may authorize a new
§ 149-39 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-41
125:338
§ 149-42. Street design criteria.
In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width and improvement
to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police,
fire-fighting, snow removal, sanitation and street maintenance equipment,
and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and avoid
undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for
streets are hereby required. (Street classification may be indicated on the
Master Plan or Official Map, if any; otherwise, it shall be determined by the
Planning Board.)
perimeter street where the developer improves and dedicates the
entire required street right-of-way width within his own development
boundaries.
C. The developer shall provide the entire required right-of-way as
specified by Subsection D or as much thereof as is possible within his
property, along all existing streets that traverse or abut his property.
D. Where a development borders an existing narrow road or when the
Master Plan or Official Map (if any) or zoning setback regulations
indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require
use of some of the land in the development, the applicant shall be
required to improve and dedicate such areas for widening or
realignment of such roads. Such frontage roads and streets shall be
improved and dedicated by the applicant to the full width as required by
these regulations for acquisition. Provision for cost allocation of such
improvements shall be in accordance with Article VII.
E. Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying
yard or area requirements of Chapter 203, Zoning, whether the land is
to be dedicated to the township in fee simple or an easement is granted
to the township.
A. All street pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures,
curbs, turnarounds and sidewalks shall conform to all construction
standards and specifications as set forth in this chapter or as required
by the Planning Board in the subdivision process. Such improvements
shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be
submitted by the developer for plan approval.
B. After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer, the
applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to
be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in this chapter.
C. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains and bridges.
D. Developments that adjoin or contain existing township or county streets
that do not conform to widths as shown on the adopted Township or
County Master Plan or Official Map (if any) or the standards set forth in
this § 149-42 shall have dedicated additional width along either one or
§ 149-41 LITTERING § 149-42
125:339
both sides of said street. If the development is along one side only, 1/2
of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
E. Minimum street right-of-way and cartway width shall be as shown on
the Township Master Plan or Official Map (if any) or, if not shown
thereon, shall be as set forth below. The right-of-way width shall be
measured from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than the
following, provided that no street of a width greater than 50 feet within
the right-of-way lines shall be required unless said street constitutes an
extension of an existing street of the greater width or already has been
shown on the Master Plan at the greater width or already has been
shown in greater width on the Official Map.
Improvement
Residential
(feet)
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
(feet)
Minimum width of right-of-way:
Local street 50 52
Collector streets 60 70
Minor arterial 70 74
Major arterial 80 80
Minimum width cartway (with concrete curbs):
Local street 30 32
Collector street 32 40
Minor arterial 40 44
Major arterial 48 48
F. Service roads or frontage streets shall have a minimum right-of-way
width of 40 feet with a minimum paved cartway width of 10 feet per
lane.
G. Alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 25 feet with a paved
cartway width of one ten-foot lane per direction.
H. All arterial streets shall have a median at channelized intersections not
less than 16 feet in width. The design at channelized intersections shall
conform to established federal and New Jersey Department of
Transportation safety standards.
I. Slope rights shall be provided in addition to the right-of-way whenever,
due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate
earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one.
J. Other street design criteria are as follows:
§ 149-42 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-42
125:340
Maximum Grade
Type of Street
Residential
(percent)
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
(percent)
Local street 6 4
Collector street 5 4
Secondary arterial 4 3
Primary arterial 4 3
Minimum grade 0.5 0.5
Service roads and alleys shall have a maximum grade of 6%. The
cross slopes on all streets shall be 2% or less.
Minimum Radius of Curve
Type of Street
Residential
(feet)
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
(feet)
Local street 250 350
Collector street 375* 375*
Secondary arterial 475* 475*
Primary arterial 700* 700*
*Maximum superelevation = 0.06
Minimum Length of Vertical Curves
Local street 100 feet, but not less than 25 feet, for each
1% algebraic difference in grade
Collector street 150 feet, but not less than 35 feet, for each
1% algebraic difference in grade
Secondary arterial 200 feet, but not less than 50 feet, for each
1% algebraic difference in grade
Primary arterial 300 feet, but not less than 100 feet, for each
1% algebraic difference in grade
Requirement Residential
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
Minimum length of tangents
between reverse curves
(feet):
Local street 100 200
§ 149-42 LITTERING § 149-42
125:341
Requirement Residential
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
Collector street 240 240
Secondary arterial 260 260
Primary arterial 300 300
Minimum sight distance
(feet):
Local street 200 250
Collector street 240 250
Secondary arterial 275 300
Primary arterial 350 400
Minimum turnaround (feet):
Local street
Right-of-way diameter 120 160
Pavement 100 140
Center island diameter (if
required)
40 60
Design speed (miles per
hour)
Local streets 30 30
Collector streets 35 35
Secondary arterial 40 40
Primary arterial 50 50
Minimum radius (feet):
At right-of-way 25 30
At pavement 25 30
K. The pavement thickness design shall, as a minimum, conform to the
following Schedule of Pavement Thickness Design:
Type of Street FABC Stab. Base
Soil Aggregate
Type II, C1.B
Industrial 2" FABC-1 5" 6"
Primary arterial 2" FABC-1 5" 6"
Secondary street 2" FABC-1 4" 6"
Collector street 3" FABC-2 -- 8"
Local street 2" FABC-1 -- 8"
L. Shade trees shall be installed on both sides of all local streets subject to
approval of the Planning Board, at a minimum spacing along each side
§ 149-42 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-42
125:342
§ 149-43. Street intersections.
of the street of 30 feet on center and maximum of 100 feet on center.
Varieties shall be approved by the Planning Board. The method of
installation and location shall be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
Shade trees shall be installed at a minimum size of two-inch caliper.
Suggested varieties of trees to be planted within 10 feet of streets
or sidewalks are as follows: American white ash, Sentry ginkgo (male
grafted only), sweetgum, Amur cork tree, Oriental plane tree, Northern
red oak, scarlet oak, pin oak, silver linden, European linden, sugar
maple and Norway maple. No trees shall be planted within 30 feet of
the cartway on arterial streets.
M. To provide visual continuity, only one variety of shade tree shall be
installed on the street. A mixture of varieties of street trees on a street
may be installed upon approval of the Planning Board.
N. Bridges of primary benefit to the developer, as determined by the
Planning Board, shall be constructed at the full expense of the
developer without reimbursement from the township. The sharing
expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the
developer as determined by the Planning Board will be fixed by special
agreement between the Township Committee and the developer. Said
cost shall be charged to the developer pro rata as the percentage of his
land developed and so served. In the absence of such an agreement the
provisions of Article VII of this chapter shall apply.
O. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as
to affect the subdivision or development of adjoining lands shall be
treated as follows:
(1) In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth, in
addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district, shall
be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access
highway. This strip shall be part of the development and shall be
designated on the plan: "This strip is reserved for screening. The
placement of a structure hereon is prohibited."
(2) In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses, the
nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the
railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance
therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial
sites.
(3) Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which
crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such
distance shall be determined with due consideration of the
minimum distance required for future separation of grades by
means of appropriate approach gradients and may be required to
be at a distance in excess of 150 feet.
§ 149-42 LITTERING § 149-43
125:343
A. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than 75º shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved
approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right
angles for at least 100 feet therefrom.
B. No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
C. Intersections along an arterial street shall not be closer than 800 feet
(measured from center line to center line) along the center line of the
arterial street.
D. Local and collector streets intersecting another local or collector street
shall either intersect directly opposite each other or shall be separated
by at least 150 feet between center lines, measured along the center
line of the street being intersected.
E. Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight leveling
area, the grade of which shall not exceed 2% within 60 feet of the
intersection of the center lines.
F. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of:
(1) Twenty feet for intersections involving local streets.
(2) Thirty feet for all intersections involving a collector street.
(3) Forty feet for all intersections involving an arterial street.
G. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall
have the corners cut off in accordance with good engineering practice
to permit safe vehicular movement.
H. Street right-of-way lines at intersections shall be parallel to (concentric
with) curb arcs.
I. Deceleration lanes of not less than 12 feet in width shall be provided on
through/arterial streets at intersections between arterial streets or
between arterial and collector streets. The length and geometry of
deceleration lanes shall be subject to approval by the Municipal
Engineer.
J. Arterial streets shall be directly intersected only by other arterial
streets or by collector streets.
K. Where any arterial or collector street intersects an arterial or collector
street, the right-of-way requirements shall be adequate to
accommodate deceleration lanes as approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
§ 149-43 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-44
125:344
§ 149-44. Sight distance at intersections.
In addition to the right-of-way widths required in accordance with this
chapter, clear-sight triangle easements shall be dedicated as follows:
§ 149-45. Access.
A. The area bounded by the right-of-way lines and a straight line
connecting sight points on street center lines shall be as follows:
(1) From a point on the minor (stop control) road center line at least 20
feet from the edge of the major (through) road pavement.
(2) From the intersection of the center lines, along the major road
center line, 300 feet for a local road, 350 feet for a collector road,
400 feet for a minor arterial road and 500 feet for a major arterial
road.
B. Curb ramps shall be designed in accordance with state and federal
requirements for maneuverability by the physically handicapped.
C. The township and county shall have the right of entry to remove any
obstruction to vision within the clear-sight triangle not conforming to
the standards controlling the area upon proper and sufficient notice to
the property owner.
D. No earth bank, hedge, fence, shrub or wall higher than 2.5 feet above
(proposed or existing) curb level, nor any obstruction to vision, other
than a post or tree not exceeding one square foot in cross-sectional
area, shall be permitted to remain within the clear-sight triangle.
A. When developments result in lots abutting a primary or secondary
arterial street, a service road shall be provided, or the frontage shall be
reversed so that the lots contiguous to such arterial street will front on
an internal street with no direct access to the arterial.
B. Screening through the use of appropriate plant materials, fences or
walls subject to site plan review shall be provided in a strip of land
along the rear property line of lots with reverse frontage to buffer lots
from the arterial street.
C. Drainage facilities made necessary by the construction of the
development shall be provided by the developer.
D. Where developments abut an arterial street and service roads or
reverse frontage is provided, the improvements to the arterial shall be
limited to the following: The additional right-of-way or easement for the
arterial street shall be uniformly graded to a minimum slope of 1/4 inch
to the foot toward the pavement of the arterial. Topsoil at a minimum
depth of four inches shall be uniformly distributed over the graded area
and the area seeded with a perennial grass seed or other suitable
vegetation approved by the Planning Board.
§ 149-44 LITTERING § 149-45
125:345
§ 149-46. Cul-de-sac streets.
E. Curbs shall be provided for a distance of 200 feet from the curb return
on each side of any new street which connects with an arterial street.
F. Where a development results in lots with frontage on a primary or
secondary arterial street that, due to its size, shape or other peculiar or
unusual circumstances, makes the provision of a service road or
reverse frontage impractical or unnecessary, the lot or lots in said
development shall have driveways so laid out that it is possible to turn
passenger vehicles on the lot, and it is not necessary to back any
passenger vehicle into the street.
G. No development containing reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be approved, except where the control and disposal of land
comprising such strips has been placed in the township under
conditions approved by the Planning Board.
H. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a
proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent
property to such street.
I. Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least 40 feet from
the point of intersection of the nearest street right-of-way lines.
J. In order to provide a safe and convenient means of access from the
street, grades on private driveways located within a street right-of-way
should not exceed 10%.
K. In order to provide safe and convenient ingress and egress, private
driveway entrances shall be rounded at a minimum radius of five feet or
shall have a flare constructed that is equivalent to this radius at a point
of intersection with the cartway edge.
L. No driveway shall be constructed or maintained that does not meet the
following regulations:
(1) Entrance to the street shall be at a horizontal angle of 75º to 105º
with the intersecting street.
(2) The driveway between the right-of-way of the street and the
cartway shall be paved.
(3) All curb cuts shall be properly constructed to the satisfaction of the
Municipal Engineer when curbing is provided. If curbing is not
provided, then an adequate drainpipe shall be installed.
(4) Driveways in commercial and industrial districts shall have a
minimum width of 12 feet for each direction of movement.
(5) Driveways in residential districts shall have a minimum width of 10
feet and a maximum width of 20 feet excluding any parking bay or
turnaround.
§ 149-45 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-46
125:346
§ 149-47. Street names.
§ 149-48. Alleys (service streets).
A. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 600 feet to the turning
circle, except that this distance shall be increased to 800 feet if an
emergency vehicular access and pedestrian walkway at least 10 feet
wide is provided from the head of a cul-de-sac giving direct access to an
adjacent street, and provided that the cul-de-sac serves no more than
25 dwelling units or an equivalent traffic-generating use.
B. Culs-de-sac shall have a turnaround at a radius of 40 feet to the outside
edge of the paved cartway, exclusive of any parking area, and 50 feet to
the outside edge of the right-of-way. The length of the cul-de-sac shall
be measured along its center line from the center section with the
intersecting street center line to the center of the radius of the cul-desac.
C. Culs-de-sac shall be readily identifiable as such by traffic moving on the
collector street to which it is connected, such as by Court or Circle
names. Culs-de-sac shall not be located so as to appear to terminate
collector streets.
D. P-loops (loop streets from a single access point) shall have an entrance
leg not exceeding 900 feet. The loop of a P-loop shall have a street
length not exceeding 3,000 feet.
A. A proposed street that is in alignment with an existing and named street
shall bear the name of the existing street.
B. In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the township, irrespective of the type of suffix.
C. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Planning Board. All street names must conform to a comprehensive
street naming program (if any).
D. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other
street names in the township so as not to cause confusion.
E. Street signs shall be placed at each street's intersection. They shall be
four-way signs of such material, size, height and location, in accordance
with state and local standards, and in conformity with the existing signs
already established in the township (if any).
A. Service streets are prohibited in developments for single-family
detached residences, except where required to avoid direct driveway
access to arterial or collector streets.
B. Dead-end service streets shall be avoided, but if necessary, service
streets shall be terminated with a paved turnaround with a minimum
radius to the outer pavement edge of 40 feet if parking is prohibited on
§ 149-46 LITTERING § 149-48
125:347
§ 149-49. Sidewalks.
§ 149-50. Blocks.
the turnaround or with a minimum radius to the outer pavement edge
of 50 feet if parking is permitted on the turnaround.
C. Service street intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but if necessary, then corners shall be rounded or cut back
sufficiently to permit safe vehicular circulation.
A. Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement right-ofway
of all streets as shown in the following table:
Nature of Road Residential
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
Local road Both sides 4 feet wide Both sides 5 feet wide
Collector road Both sides 4 feet wide Both sides 5 feet wide
Secondary arterial Both sides 4 feet wide Both sides 5 feet wide
Primary arterial Both sides 4 feet wide Both sides 5 feet wide
B. Sidewalk requirements may be revised or waived by the Planning Board
during site plan review if demonstrated as creating reasonable
alternative sidewalk configurations. Imaginative and innovative
configurations are to be encouraged by the Planning Board.
C. Concrete curbs are required for all roads. They shall be of a design
acceptable to the Planning Board upon recommendation of the
Municipal Engineer.
D. Sidewalks constructed of four-inch thick concrete or equivalent shall be
improved as required in § 149-29 of this chapter. A median strip of
grassed or landscaped areas shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent
curbs.
E. The Planning Board may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access
from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby roads,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 10 feet in width. Easements
shall be indicated on the site plan.
A. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be
permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways.
B. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated.
C. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials shall be not less
than 1,000 feet in length.
§ 149-48 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-50
125:348
§ 149-51. Lots.
D. In long blocks, the Planning Board may require the reservation of an
easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage
facilities or pedestrian traffic.
E. Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide, may be
required by the Planning Board through the center of blocks more than
800 feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access
to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other
community facilities.
F. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as
may be determined suitable by the Planning Board for the prospective
use.
A. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall conform with Chapter 203,
Zoning, and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Where lots are more than double the minimum required areas for the
zoning district, the Planning Board may require that such lots be
arranged so as to allow further development and the opening of future
streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all
in compliance with Chapter 203, Zoning, and these regulations.
C. If feasible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines
or radial to curved street lines.
D. If feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather than cross
them in order to avoid interjurisdictional problems.
E. Generally, the depth of a residential lot for a single-family detached
home shall not be less than one nor more than 2 1/2 times its width.
F. Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall be
adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide satisfactory
space for on-site parking, loading and unloading, setbacks and
landscaping.
G. Such lot must front upon a public or private street approved in
accordance with the requirements and standards of this chapter.
Private streets shall have direct access to public streets.
H. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except
where necessary to provide separation of residential development from
traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
and orientation.
I. Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from an arterial
street. Where driveway access from an arterial street may be necessary
for several adjoining lots, the Planning Board may require that such lots
§ 149-50 LITTERING § 149-51
125:349
§ 149-52. Buffer areas.
In the instance where the Planning Board determines that buffer planting
or fencing is necessary to protect the general welfare of the public, planted
buffer areas shall be installed to provide a year-round visual screen of such
width, height and location as approved by the Planning Board. The size,
variety and planting design of the buffer area shall be as approved by the
Township Planning Board. Fencing shall be installed to provide a physical
barrier, as approved by the Planning Board.
§ 149-53. Storm drainage.
be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic
hazard on such street.
J. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
A. Storm sewers, culverts, natural and man-made drainage channels and
retention basins and related installations shall be provided as necessary
to permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses, to ensure adequate
drainage of all low points along streets, to intercept stormwater runoff
along streets at intervals related to the extent and grade of the area
drained and to provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage
disposal facilities where such facilities are permitted.
B. Where existing storm sewers are reasonably accessible, proposed
developments shall be required, if necessary, to connect therewith.
C. In developments containing lots less than 15,000 square feet in area
and in business and industrial districts, underground storm sewer
systems shall be constructed throughout the development and be
conducted to an approved outfall.
D. Permanent natural and/or man-made drainage channels and detention
basins shall be provided to control the increased storm runoff that may
result from increasing the impervious area within the development. In
all instances the detention shall be such as to reduce the rate of runoff
from the ten-percent (so-called ten-year) storm in the developed
condition to that which would have occurred in the undeveloped
condition. In instances where there is no provision for conducting the
water to natural streams, the detention shall be adequate for all of the
runoff from a two-percent (so-called fifty-year) storm. Spillways or
emergency spillways of any detention facility shall be capable of
passing the runoff from at least the one-percent (so-called one-hundredyear)
storm. In the design of storm drainage facilities, special
consideration shall be given to avoidance of problems that may arise
from the concentration of stormwater runoff onto adjacent developed or
undeveloped properties.
§ 149-51 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-53
125:350
E. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area,
whether inside or outside the development. The Municipal Engineer
shall review the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of
construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of
maximum potential watershed development permitted by Chapter 203,
Zoning.
F. The developer shall study the effect of each development on existing
downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the development.
These studies, together with such other studies as shall be appropriate,
shall serve as a guide to needed improvements.
G. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the
development will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the
Planning Board may withhold approval of the development until
provision has been made for the improvement of said potential
conditions by the contribution from the developer in such sum as the
Planning Board shall determine adequate.
H. No development shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be
provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.
I. Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream at least 15 feet wide or of such width as
will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage, or
for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, maintaining,
improving or protecting such drainage facilities.
J. Any changes in an existing drainageway shall be subject to the approval
of the Township Planning Board and the Gloucester County Planning
Board, as applicable, as well as meeting the requirements for any state
permits.
K. The applicant shall be required by the Planning Board to carry away by
pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either
previous to or as a result of the development. Such drainage facilities
shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible or in perpetual
unobstructed easements of appropriate width and shall be constructed
in accordance with appropriate construction standards and
specifications and shall be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
L. Trash bars shall be installed on all pipes equal to or greater than 30
inches in diameter.
M. Pipeline design.
(1) Storm sewer pipelines shall be designed by either of the following
two methods. Both shall be based on the Manning equation and
shall utilize the following friction factors:
§ 149-53 LITTERING § 149-53
125:351
n = 0.015 concrete pipe
n = 0.021 corrugated metal pipe
(2) The n value for other materials may be approved by the Planning
Board after recommendation by the Municipal Engineer.
(3) The minimum allowable pipe size is 15 inches.
(4) The minimum allowable velocity is 2.5 feet per second when
flowing 1/4 full.
(5) The maximum velocity is 10 feet per second with the pipe flowing
full.
N. Pipeline submerged.
(1) This method is based on the assumption that when the storm sewer
system is under maximum load the hydraulic gradient will be at or
above the crown of the pipe and that flow in the lines will be
controlled by head differentials between structures or other
locations where the system is open to the ground surface, such as
inlets or outlets, manholes and stream inlets or outlets. The head of
water above the crown of any pipe can range from zero feet to a
point which will not cause surface flooding.
(2) The slope of the hydraulic gradient in any section of storm sewer
between opening to the surface shall be calculated on the
assumption that the pipe is flowing full at a constant velocity and at
the required capacity.
(3) The elevation of the hydraulic gradient at any point in the pipe shall
be no lower than the crown of the pipe and no higher than the
surface of the ground.
(4) At all structures such as manholes, inlets, etc., where the pipe size
does not change, the elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be
dropped 0.2 feet to allow for losses therein. Where the inlet and
outlet pipe sizes are not the same, the elevation of the hydraulic
gradient shall be dropped an amount based on the following
formula:
H = 0.21 feet + 0.8 (D2-D1) feet
D1 = Diameter of inlet pipe
D2 = Diameter of outlet pipe
If D1 is larger than D2, head loss = 0.2 feet
O. Pipeline flowing full.
(1) This method is based on the assumption that the hydraulic gradient
will match the inside top of the pipe when the system is under
maximum hydraulic load.
§ 149-53 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-53
125:352
(2) For this method, head losses through manholes, inlets, etc., shall be
ignored.
(3) When the pipe sizes change, the inside tops of the pipes shall be
matched.
(4) Continuous profiles for each reach of pipe shall be plotted along
with the location of the hydraulic gradient and the hydraulic
information pertinent to each reach within the system. This
information shall include the pipe size and type, the "n" factor, the
slope of the hydraulic gradient, slope of the pipe, the design
capacity and the velocity at the design capacity.
P. Inlet design.
(1) Stormwater inlets shall be equal to New Jersey State Highway
Department inlet Type B. The maximum collecting capacities of the
inlets shall be considered to be:
(a) When installed on streets where the grade is 1.00%: five cubic
foot per second.
(b) When installed on streets where the grade is 2.00%: 4.8 cubic
foot per second.
(c) When installed on streets where the grade is 3.00%: 4.6 cubic
foot per second.
(d) When installed on streets where the grade is 4.00%: 4.4 cubic
foot per second.
(e) When installed on streets where the grade is 5.00%: 4.2 cubic
foot per second.
(f) When installed on streets where the grade is 6.00%: 4 cubic
foot per second.
(2) Sufficient inlets shall be located and constructed so that the length
of surface runoff will not contribute a runoff to the inlet exceeding
the preceding designated collecting capacities.
(3) The gutter grate of all inlets shall be set not less than two inches
nor more than four inches below the gutter grade. The surface of
the paving adjacent to the inlets shall be constructed to blend into
the lowered gutter grade at the inlet in such a manner that a
sudden drop-off or dip at the inlet will not be created. At such
locations where drainage is entirely dependent on inlets, the
collecting capacities of the inlets shall be designed for 1/2 of the
preceding considered capacities.
(4) Where surface water is collected from two directions at one street
corner, inlets shall be placed at or near the tangent points of both
§ 149-53 LITTERING § 149-53
125:353
ends of the radius. The use of one inlet in the radius will not be
allowed.
(5) Access manholes shall be spaced at five-hundred-foot intervals
(maximum) through rights-of-way and at sewer junctions where
there are no catch basins.
Q. Open channel design. Open channel design should be based on the
following hydraulic considerations:
(1) Manning's equation:
(a) Friction factor.
n = .015 - best concrete-lined ditch
n = .025 - best unlined ditch
n = .03 to .15 - fair to poor natural streams and watercourses
(b) Velocity range.
Excavation Material
Velocity
(feet per second)
Fine sand and firm loam 2.50 to 3.5
Stiff clay and hardpan 3.75 to 6.0
Concrete lined ditch 15
(2) Ample freeboard should be provided on all channels.
(3) The channel should be designed to conform, wherever possible, to
the adjacent ground conditions. This means that it should not be
projecting excessively above the surrounding ground or placed
excessively below the surrounding ground.
(4) Continuous profiles for each reach of open channel shall be plotted,
along with the adjacent average ground and the hydraulic
information pertinent to each reach within the system. This
information shall include the type of channel lining, the "n" factor,
the width of the channel bottom, the side slopes and methods of
their stabilization, the water depth, the design capacity and the
velocity at the design capacity.
(5) Open channels shall have a maximum side slope of 3 to 1 and shall
have adequate slope protection.
(6) Culverts. All culverts shall be limited to a single opening; multiple
pipes will not be permitted. The design of culverts shall be such as
to minimize the probability of debris accumulation.
(7) Detention basin design. Detention basins shall be required on all
major developments unless deemed unnecessary by the Municipal
Engineer. The provisions of § 149-53D shall be met as a minimum.
§ 149-53 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-53
125:354
§ 149-54. Erosion and sediment controls.
However, where there is potential for major flood damage
downstream, provisions of the following Subsection Q(8) through
(14) will apply and will be required.
(8) Determination of project area runoff:
(a) Use natural runoff coefficient.
(b) Use ultimate developed runoff coefficient.
(9) Storage is required for a five-and-five-tenths-inch maximum rainfall
(twenty-four-hour rainfall occurring in 1960) to reduce the runoff in
the developed condition to that which occurred in the undeveloped
condition, or as required by New Jersey Water Policy and Supply
Council.
(10) Indicate flooded area if an additional two-inch rainfall occurred
during the 24 hours following the design storm.
(11) Allowance for percolation and evaporation out of basins during and
after the storm will not be considered in the calculations.
(12) Basin storage capacities shall be calculated as follows: [Amended
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
Storage volume (in cubic feet) =
Project area (in square feet) x difference in coefficients x total
rainfall (in inches)
12 - outflow (in cubic feet)
(13) The outlet structure shall be capable of discharging water at a rate
equal to or less than the contribution calculated for the drainage
basin area in its natural state before development for a ten-year
storm period.
(14) If required, profiles and sections indicating downstream capacities
and proposals and/or easements for reconstruction or cleaning of
all streams shall be submitted prior to consideration of the first
final section.
A. No topsoil shall be used as spoil, and topsoil shall be removed from the
site only if necessary and after approval of the Planning Board. On all
sites, topsoil shall be stripped to a depth of nine inches or to the depth
of the topsoil from all areas which are to be disturbed. Topsoil shall be
stockpiled and stabilized with straw mulch until respread at a minimum
depth of at least six inches. The topsoil to be respread shall contain no
particles over two inches in diameter.
§ 149-53 LITTERING § 149-54
125:355
B. Following earthmoving during development, all areas which include
steep slopes, highly erodible soils or are poorly drained and which are
not to be covered by roads or buildings shall be sodded as soon as
possible or stabilized in such a manner as is acceptable to the Municipal
Engineer.
C. All other areas which will not be covered by a permanent hard or
impervious surface within one month of commencement of earthmoving
must be stabilized immediately upon completion of the disturbance.
Stabilization, either temporary or permanent, is to be done by
mulching, seeding, sodding, macadam, crushed stone or gravel,
bituminous or any other appropriate stabilizing method. A minimum top
dressing of three inches shall be required when mulching; crushed
stone or gravel is to be used as a stabilizing medium.
D. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish or
other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land or left or
deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, and removal of same shall be required prior to issuance of
any certificate of occupancy within a development, nor shall any be left
or deposited in any area of the development at the time of expiration of
the performance guaranty or dedication of public improvements,
whichever is sooner.
E. Where lawn is to be provided by the developer, lawn-grass seed shall be
sown at not less than four pounds to each 1,000 square feet of land
area. In the spring, the seed shall be sown between March 1 and May
15, and in the fall, the seed shall be sown between August 15 and
October 15. The seed shall consist of a maximum of 10% rye grass by
weight and a minimum of 90% of permanent bluegrass and/or fescue
grass by weight. All seed shall have been tested for germination within
one year of the date of seeding, and the date of testing shall be on the
label containing the seed analysis. Sod of an appropriate grass may be
used to comply with any requirements of seeding set forth herein.
F. All temporary streets, turning areas or building sites used during
construction should be given a dressing of at least three inches of
crushed stone or gravel. Permanent streets and parking areas should be
graded to required elevations, then applied with a permanent subbase
and/or base course which should be brought to final grade and the
permanent surface applied.
G. At a point where runoff leaves each site, a sediment basin or basins
shall be constructed. The sediment basin(s) shall be designed in a
manner approved by the Municipal Engineer and the Gloucester County
Soil Conservation District. Following permanent stabilization of the
site, the basin may be removed or retained. If retained, silt must be
removed within one year after completion of development.
H. Sediment basins designed for watershed areas less than 70 acres that
include provisions for periodic cleanout shall be designed to contain 0.6
§ 149-54 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-54
125:356
§ 149-55. Sewerage facilities.
inches of runoff or 0.05 acre-feet per acre of area contributing runoff
water and sediment.
I. Sediment basin cleanout shall be required when the storage capacity is
reduced by sediment accumulation to 0.02 acre-feet per acre of
drainage area or within one year after completion of development.
J. Sediment basins serving watershed areas larger than 70 acres, and
those for which periodic cleanout is not anticipated, shall be designed
to contain sediment capacities appropriate for the size of the
watershed.
K. In general the average sediment basin length should be at least twice
the average width.
L. The performance guaranty shall include an amount to guarantee
completion of all requirements contained in §§ 149-26 through 149-38
of this chapter and will also include, but not be limited to, soil
preservation, final grading, lot drainage, lawn-grass seeding where
appropriate, removal of debris and waste, fencing and all other lot
improvements required by the Planning Board.
M. Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, at the
expiration of the performance guaranty, the Township Committee may
enforce the provisions of the guaranty where the provisions of this
section or any other applicable law, guaranty, ordinance or regulation
have not been met.
A. Regulations for sewerage facilities.
(1) All sanitary sewer systems, sewage and industrial waste treatment
works shall comply with the rules and regulations established by
the Department of Environmental Protection of the State of New
Jersey, the township and any sewerage utility franchised by the
township.
(2) Sanitary sewerage facilities (including the installation of laterals in
the right-of-way) shall be subject to the specifications, rules,
regulations and guidelines of the Health Officer, Municipal
Engineer and appropriate state agency.
(3) Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create
a sanitary sewer district for the purpose of providing sewerage
facilities to the development where no district exists for the land to
be developed.
(4) Sanitary sewers shall not be used to carry stormwater.
(5) For lots on which on-site disposal is permitted in Chapter 203,
Zoning, sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows:
§ 149-54 LITTERING § 149-55
125:357
(a) Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably
accessible, the applicant shall connect with same and provide
sewers accessible to each portion of the development.
(b) Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably
accessible but will become available within a reasonable time
(not to exceed 10 years), the applicant may choose one of the
following alternatives:
[1] Central sewerage system, the maintenance cost to be
assessed against each property benefited. Where plans for
future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the
applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals and mains to
be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready
for connection to such public sewer mains; or
[2] Individual disposal systems, provided that the applicant
shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals and mains from
the street curb to a point in the development boundary
where a future connection with the public sewer main
shall be made.
(6) Sewer lines shall be laid from the building to the street line, and a
connection shall be available in the home to connect from the
individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public
sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until
ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the
public sewer system, where such exist, and shall be ready for
connection to such public sewer main.
(7) Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and
will not become available for a period in excess of 10 years, the
applicant may install a sewerage systems as follows:
(a) Medium- and high-density residential uses shall be serviced by
a central sewerage system only. No individual disposal system
will be permitted.
(b) For low-density residential uses, individual disposal systems or
central sewerage systems may be used.
(c) For all other uses, sanitary sewerage systems shall be
constructed as follows: Sanitary sewerage facilities shall
connect with public sanitary sewerage systems unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board.
(8) Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes
required by the standards referenced in Subsection A(1) of this
section.
(9) No on-site disposal system or treatment plant for the use of more
than one residence or its equivalent shall be permitted.
§ 149-55 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-55
125:358
(10) When on-site facilities are required and permitted, a carefully
engineered facility shall be installed. Before covering and
backfilling, all on-site facilities must be inspected by the Health
Officer and must be so installed that they can be approved as
complying with the approved engineering drawings that are part of
the plans with applicable regulations and ordinances. Such
approval shall be in writing.
(11) Two copies of an accurate sketch of on-site facilities shall be
provided with the site plan showing the location of all important
features, including pipe size, the run of the various pipes, the
location of the tile field, location of vents and cleanouts for septic
tanks and septic tank capacity.
(12) If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is
placed in a street or alley abutting upon private property, the owner
thereof shall be required to connect to said sewer for the purpose
of disposing of waste, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or
occupant to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage
disposal system.
(13) If public sewerage facilities are not available and individual
disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to
the requirements of Chapter 203, Zoning, and percolation tests and
boring logs shall be made as directed by the local government
Health Officer and the results submitted to the Health Department.
The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic
tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment
device, shall also be approved by the Health Officer.
(14) These design criteria for sanitary sewers are not intended to cover
extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be
required in those instances where considered justified by the
Municipal Engineer and the Health Officer.
(15) Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the ultimate
tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current
zoning regulations and approved planning and zoning reports
where applicable.
(16) Sewer capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated
maximum hourly quantity of sewage and industrial waste, together
with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous
flow.
(17) Unit design flows.
(a) The unit design flows presented hereinafter should be
adequate in each case for the particular type of development
indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area.
§ 149-55 LITTERING § 149-55
125:359
Type of Development
Design Factor
(cubic feet per second per
acre)
One- and two-family dwellings .02
Multiple dwellings:
One- and two-story .02
Three- through six-story .03
Commercial:
Small stores, offices and
miscellaneous business
.02
Shopping centers .02
High rise To be submitted for approval
of Municipal Engineer
Industrial To be submitted for approval
of Municipal Engineer
(b) These design factors apply to watersheds of 300 acres or less.
Design factors for watersheds larger than 300 acres and
smaller than 1,000 acres may be computed on the basis of a
linear decrease from the applicable design factor for an area of
300 acres to a design factor of .01 cubic feet per second per
acre for an area of 1,000 acres unless otherwise approved by
the Municipal Engineer. Design factors for watersheds larger
than 1,000 acres may be .01 cubic feet per second per acre
unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(18) The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the diameter of
the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless
otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(19) No public sewer shall be less than eight inches in diameter.
(20) All sewers shall be designed to give mean velocities when flowing
full of not less than 2.0 feet per second. All velocity and flow
calculations shall be based on the Manning formula using an N
value of no less than 0.013 unless otherwise approved. The slopes
shall be at least the minimum for the size indicated.
(21) Exceptions to these minimum slopes shall be made at the upper
end of lateral sewers serving under 30 houses. Said sewers shall
have a minimum slope of 0.75%.
(22) Where lateral sewers serve less than 10 houses, the minimum slope
shall be not less than 1%.
(23) The minimum slopes for sewer pipe are indicated in the regulations
of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 149-55 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-55
125:360
§ 149-56. Water facilities.
(24) All sewers shall be laid with a straight alignment between
manholes, unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(25) Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line; at all changes in
grade, size or alignment; at all intersections; and at distances not
greater than 400 feet for sewers 15 inches and smaller and 500 feet
for sewers 18 inches in diameter and larger.
(26) The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer and the
manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches, except where required
to match crowns.
(27) The use of drop manholes will require approval by the Municipal
Engineer. The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall
conform to those approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(28) When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the crown of the smaller
sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one. The minimum
drop through manholes shall be 0.2 feet.
(29) Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley rights-of-way
unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in easements
on private property, access shall be maintained to all manholes.
(30) A manhole shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End
lines shall be extended to provide access from street or alley rightof-
way where possible. Imposed loading shall be considered in all
locations.
(31) Not less than six feet of cover shall be provided over the tops of
pipes in streets and alley rights-of-way or three feet in all other
areas.
(32) Cleanouts and lampholes will not be permitted.
(33) There shall be no physical connection between a public or private
potable water supply system and a sewer which will permit the
passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply.
(34) Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other
water supply sources and structures.
(35) A minimum horizontal distance of 10 feet shall be maintained
between parallel water and sewer lines.
(36) At points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be
constructed of cast-iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance
of 10 feet in each direction from the crossing, measured
perpendicular to the waterline. This will not be required when the
water main is at least two feet above the sewer.
§ 149-55 LITTERING § 149-56
125:361
A. All water supplies and water treatment works shall comply with the
rules and regulations established by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the State of New Jersey and Woolwich Township, as
amended and revised.
B. Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a
water supply district for the purpose of providing a water supply system
capable of providing domestic water and fire protection.
C. Where a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install
adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the
specifications of the state or township and the National Board of Fire
Underwriters. All water mains shall be at least six inches in diameter.
Fire hydrants must be compatible with local fire company equipment
and be approved by the Township Fire Marshal.
D. Water main extensions shall be approved by the officially designated
agency of the state and township.
E. To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply
improvements and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating
all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the site
plan, and the cost of installing same shall be included in the
performance guaranty to be furnished by the developer.
F. In low-density zoning districts, at the discretion of the Planning Board,
if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be used or
a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate
supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the
development. Water samples shall be submitted to the Health
Department for its approval, and individual wells and central water
systems shall be approved by the appropriate health authorities. Orders
of approval shall be submitted to the Planning Board.
G. If the Planning Board requires that a connection to a public water main
be eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well
or central water system, the developer shall make arrangements for
future water service at the time the plan receives final approval.
Performance guaranties or cash bonds may be required to insure
compliance.
H. Fire hydrants shall be required for all developments serviced by a
public water system.
I. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and within
500 feet of any structure and shall be approved by the applicable
protection unit.
J. In general, criteria affecting valve and hydrant locations shall be that
not more than one hydrant is affected by shutting off any one section;
not more than three valves are necessary to shut off any one section,
and the number of residences affected by shutting off any one section
§ 149-56 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-56
125:362
§ 149-57. Public open space and community facilities.
shall be limited to approximately 25. The Fire Department must be
notified of shut downs during improvements or connections to the
system.
K. A copy of the approval of such fire hydrant installations by the
appropriate public agency and utility company shall be submitted with
the site plan, along with a suitable agreement (in a form determined by
the Township Attorney) establishing that the ownership of the fire
hydrants shall be conveyed to the township at no cost to the township at
the time the fire hydrants are first available for their intended use.
L. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire
hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other
supply improvements, shall be installed before any final paving of a
street shown on the site plan.
A. In reviewing developments, the Planning Board shall consider whether
community facilities in the area, especially schools, are adequate to
serve the needs of the additional dwellings proposed by the developer
and shall make such report thereon as it deems necessary in the public
interest. The applicant should provide a brief impact statement for
review by the Board.
B. Developers shall reserve land for both public and quasi-public
community facilities and will reserve areas for facilities normally
required in residential neighborhoods, including churches, libraries,
schools and other public buildings and parks, playgrounds and
playfields.
C. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
suitably prepared to provide for such use. Prior to the preparation of
plans, developers of large tracts should review with the Planning Board
the minimum standards for various community facilities applicable to
the tract being developed.
D. In developments that are intended to contain more than 50 dwelling
units, the Planning Board shall consider the need for suitable open
areas for recreation and shall make a recommendation thereon.
Standards to be used by the Planning Board in determining space for
recreation shall be as follows: [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
Dwelling Units
Minimum Playground and
Neighborhood Park Acreage to
be Recommended
50 to 100 2.5 to 3.5
101 to 200 3.5 to 5.0
201 to 400 5.0 to 7.0
§ 149-56 LITTERING § 149-57
125:363
Dwelling Units
Minimum Playground and
Neighborhood Park Acreage to
be Recommended
For each additional 100 units 1.0 to 2.0
E. An individual area of less than two acres shall not be reserved for
recreation purposes if it will be impractical or impossible to secure
additional lands in order to increase its area unless such smaller area is
approved by the Planning Board, as for example, to provide a tot-lot.
F. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and
location suitable for use as a playground, playfield or for other
recreation purposes and shall be relatively level and dry and shall be
improved by the developer to the standards required by the Planning
Board, which improvements shall be included in the performance
guaranty.
G. Reservation of public areas.
(1) If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation
of designated streets, public drainageways, flood-control basins or
public areas within the proposed development, before approving a
subdivision or site plan, the Planning Board may further require
that such streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in
locations and sizes suitable to their intended uses. The Planning
Board may reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways,
basins or areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the
approval of the final plat or within such further time as may be
agreed to by the developer. Unless during such period or extension
thereof the municipality shall have entered into a contract to
purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according to law
for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets,
ways, basins or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land
for private use in accordance with applicable development
regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to streets
and roads, flood-control basins or public drainageways
necessitated by the subdivision or land development and required
for final approval.
(2) The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation
of use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the
fair market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the
period of reservation, provided that determination of such fair
market value shall include but not be limited to consideration of the
real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved and prorated
for the period of reservation. The developer shall be compensated
for the reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering or other
§ 149-57 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-57
125:364
professional services incurred in connection with obtaining
subdivision approval or site plan approval, as the case may be,
caused by the reservation. The procedure for the payment of all
compensation payable under this section shall be as follows:
(a) After the termination of a period of one year after the approval
of the site plan or after such further time as may be agreed to
between the developer and the Planning Board, and no later
than 90 days thereafter, the developer shall file in triplicate
with the Township Clerk a verified petition requesting
compensation payable under this section and setting forth a
detailed, itemized list with separate dollar amounts for each
item for which he seeks compensation.
(b) The governing body, after receipt of such petition, shall fix a
time, place and date for a public hearing on the petition, which
date shall be no later than 60 days from the date of receipt of
the petition by the Municipal Clerk.
(c) Notice of such hearing shall be delivered or mailed by certified
mail to the developer at least 20 days in advance of the hearing
date.
(d) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions for hearing by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
(e) At the hearing the developer shall have the burden of
establishing by good and sufficient evidence his entitlement to
compensation and the amounts of such compensation.
(f) Such hearings may be continued by the governing body from
time to time but must be completed within 90 days from the
first hearing date.
(g) Within 90 days after the date of conclusion of hearing, the
Township Committee shall, by resolution, set forth its findings
and determination as to what amount, if any, shall be paid to
the developer. A certified copy of said resolution shall be
delivered or mailed by certified mail to the developer within 10
days of its adoption.
(h) Any payments to be made pursuant to such resolution shall be
made to the developer within 120 days from the date of
adoption of such resolution.
H. Recreational facilities for future residential population. [Added
9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
(1) All lands set aside for open space shall be developed with active
and passive recreational facilities to service the needs of the future
residential population. The Planning Board shall have complete and
final determination as to the adequacy, usefulness and
§ 149-57 LITTERING § 149-57
125:365
functionalism of the lands set aside for open spaces. Active and
passive recreational facilities shall include but not be limited to
the following: ball fields, multipurpose fields, tennis courts,
multipurpose court areas, children's playground equipment,
passive picnic or sitting areas, swimming pools, bicycle baths and
jogging trails.
(2) The following shall be used as the basis for determining the
recreation need. Population shall be calculated using 3.6 persons
per single-family detached unit, 2.6 persons per single-family
attached or two-family unit and 2.5 persons per multifamily unit.
Recreational Facilities Number/Unit of Population
Basketball 1 per 1,000
Tennis 1 per 2,000
Baseball/softball
Youth 1 per 5,000
Adult 1 per 5,000
Football/soccer 1 per 5,000
Multicourt 1 per 2,000
Tot-lot 1 per 200 (15% of total
population)
Advanced play 1 per 400 (30% of total
population)
Picnic areas 1 per 5,000
(3) The Board may require a developer to make certain site
preparation improvements to the open spaces. These may include
the following:
(a) Removal of dead trees or diseased trees.
(b) Thinning of trees or other growth to encourage more desirable
growth.
(c) Grading and seeding.
(d) Improvements of protection of the natural drainage system by
the use of protective structures, stabilization measures and
similar improvements.
(4) Development of open space and recreational facilities shall proceed
at the same rate as development of the dwelling units. To assure
compliance with this subsection, the Planing Board shall require
the approval of an open space and recreational amenity phasing
map which shall become part of an overall phasing plan and
approval for any subdivision, planned and/or clustered
development.
§ 149-57 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-57
125:366
§ 149-58. Certain easements.
(5) The requirements of this subsection relating to the construction of
active and passive recreation facilities and the total percentage of
open space required within a development may be modified and/or
waived by the Planning Board, if requested by the developer, upon
the Planning Board's determination that both the area local to the
development and Woolwich Township's park and recreation needs
would be better served by an agreed cash request to the designated
parks and recreation budget, which sums shall be added to the
current year municipal budget when received as a dedication by
rider in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-39.
(6) The amount of the contribution required pursuant hereto shall be
determined by the estimated cost of the passive and active
recreation facilities and equipment that would otherwise be
required by the proposed development, which shall also take into
consideration the value of the additional lots that the developer will
have for sale, and shall be prorated over the total number of
building lots, as shown on the preliminary plans submitted by the
applicant and approved by the Planning Board, in order to
determine a per lot amount.
(7) Payment of the contribution required pursuant hereto shall be
made prior to the signing of the final plans by the Planning Board
Chairman, Planning Board Secretary and Township Clerk and shall
be equal to the per-lot amount times the number of building lots
shown on the final plans to be signed and filed and shall be made
payable to the designated Parks and Recreation Fund. For good
cause shown, the Planning Board may enter into an agreement to
provide that the payment or payments shall be made at some later
time, subject to the posting of adequate performance guaranties in
an amount of 120% of the agreed contribution subject, however,
that the delayed period of time shall in no event be later than the
issuance of the first certificate of occupancy.
(8) The cash bequest shall be used exclusively for park and recreation
purposes and shall be placed in the current budget line item
designated "parks and playgrounds, other expenses." Woolwich
Township reserves the right to use said funds for proper purposes
anywhere within the Township of Woolwich.
A. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the development
shall be shown on the site plan.
B. Underground service connections to the street property line of each
planned structure shall be installed at the developer's expense.
C. At the discretion of the Planning Board, the requirement for service
connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be
§ 149-57 LITTERING § 149-58
125:367
retained in single ownership and intended to be developed for the same
primary use.
D. All utility facilities, constructed or installed after the effective date of
this chapter, including but not limited to wires, cables, pipes, conduits
and appurtenant equipment, carrying or used in connection with the
furnishing of electric, telephone, telegraph, cable television or similar
service, shall be placed below the surface of the ground, provided that
the following utility facilities shall be permitted above ground:
(1) Electric transmission lines and facilities in excess of 50 kilovolts.
(2) Equipment, such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear,
meter pedestals, telephone pedestals, outdoor lighting poles or
standards, radio and television antennae and associated
equipment, which is, under accepted utility practices, normally
installed above ground.
(3) Meters, service connections and similar equipment normally
attached to the outside wall of the customer's premises.
E. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
F. No dwelling units or any portion thereof shall be located within 25 feet
of any petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas transmission line
that traverses the subdivision.
§ 149-58 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-58
125:368
ARTICLE VII
On-Tract and Off-tract Improvements
§ 149-59. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a site
plan application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a site plan
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
§ 149-60. Responsibility of developer for certain off-site
improvements.
Preliminary approval shall contain a condition that the developer pay his
pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary street
improvements and water, sewerage, and drainage facilities, and easements
therefor, located outside the property limits of the site plan but necessitated
or required by construction or improvements within such site plan or
development. Before consideration of a final site plan plat, such off-tract
improvements shall be built and completed by the developer or their
construction shall have been guaranteed in accordance with the following
provisions which shall apply to such off-tract improvements.
§ 149-61. Cost estimates.
A. At the time application for preliminary approval for a site plan is made
and again upon application for final approval, the applicant shall
provide the Township Committee with an estimate of the types and
costs of such off-tract improvements and the amount by which
properties including the site plan benefit thereby.
B. Such estimate at the time of application for final approval shall include
detailed supporting data which shall include but not necessarily be
limited to:
(1) The total cost of the improvement.
(2) The estimated value of the benefit to the applicant.
(3) The estimated value of the benefits conferred upon others in terms
of reasonable likelihood of the use.
(4) The time when such benefits are likely to be conferred.
(5) The reasonable, useful life of the off-tract improvements.
(6) The inflation, deflation or all significant changes in the cost of
construction.
§ 149-59 LITTERING § 149-61
125:369
§ 149-62. Construction of improvements by municipality or
developer; partial reimbursement to developer.
The Township Committee shall decide whether the off-tract improvements
or any combinations of them are to be constructed by the municipality as
a general improvement, as a local improvement, or whether construction
is to be done by the developer with a formula providing for partial
reimbursement to the developer by other property owners, where the
improvements specially benefit properties other than property subject to
the site plan.
§ 149-63. Cash deposit or performance guaranty required; specially
benefited properties.
C. Such estimate at the time of application for preliminary approval shall
be the applicant's best estimates for each of the six above factors,
together with his basis therefor.
A. As a condition for final approval of any site plan, the applicant shall
provide the township with a cash deposit or a performance guaranty as
provided in § 149-2 of this chapter to insure payment to the township in
the following amounts:
(1) An amount equal to the difference between the estimated cost of
the improvement and the estimated total amount by which all
property to be served thereby, including the site plan property, will
be specially benefited by the improvement, if the improvement is to
be constructed by the municipality as a general improvement.
(2) The estimated amount by which the site plan specially benefits
from the improvement, in addition to the amount required for a
general improvement, if the improvement is to be constructed by
the municipality as a local improvement.
(3) An amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvement, if the
improvement is to be constructed by the applicant.
B. If such off-tract improvements or any combination of them are to be
constructed by the applicant, the applicant shall bear the cost of all
such improvements and shall be reimbursed by such specially benefited
property owners, if and when any such off-tract improvements are used
in the development of off-tract parcels. The Township Committee may
assess or lien the pro rata cost of such off-tract improvement upon other
specially benefited property owners at such time as such other specially
benefited owner or owners use the off-tract improvements in the
development of off-tract parcels.
C. Actual cost figures, rather than estimated costs, shall be used for
making such allocations once the improvements are constructed. The
cost figures shall be supplied by the applicant and certified by a New
Jersey certified public accountant, after audit. Approval of planned unit
§ 149-61 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-63
125:370
developments, major subdivision, or site development plans, involving
the use of such off-tract improvements by other specially benefited
property owners outside this site plan shall be conditioned upon
payment of the pro rata share of the value as so determined, to the
applicant, in the same manner as above.
§ 149-63 LITTERING § 149-63
125:371

ARTICLE VIII
Fees; Penalties
§ 149-64. Application fees and escrow deposits. [Amended 7-6-1987
by Ord. No. 87-2; 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 89-5; 4-5-1993 by Ord. No.
93-2]
A. Application fees and escrow deposits for site plan applications shall be
paid as required in Chapter 95, Fees, Article I, Application Fees and
Escrow Accounts.
B. Procedure. [Added 9-6-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11]
(1) The application fees and escrow fees recited hereinabove as
minimums which must accompany the application. An application
shall not be deemed complete until the application fee and escrow
fee required have been paid. The Planning Board shall exercise its
discretion in establishing the figure required for the escrow fund in
the event the project will require more time for review than has
been provided for by the figures recited hereinabove or the project
is of a nature that is not expressly included in one of the
aforementioned categories.
(2) Application fees and escrow fees must be submitted in separate
checks payable to "Woolwich Township." The escrow fee shall be
forwarded to the Chief Financial Officer of Woolwich Township for
deposit into a developer's escrow account. The application fee shall
be deposited into the Planning Board account until the end of the
month, at which time the moneys in said account shall be submitted
to the Treasurer of Woolwich Township for deposit into the general
account of Woolwich Township.
(3) The escrow fee shall be retained in order to cover the cost of any
professional services rendered to Woolwich Township, the
Woolwich Township Planning Board or the Woolwich Township
Board of Adjustment for review of applications for development,
review and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements
or other purposes permitted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. All professional charges for review of an
application for development, review and preparation of documents
or inspection of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary,
given the status and progress of the application of construction.
Review fees shall be charged only in connection with an application
for development presently pending before the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment or upon review of compliance with conditions
of approval or review of requests for modification or amendment
made by the applicant. A professional shall not review items which
are subject to approval by any state governmental agency and not
under municipal jurisdiction except to the extent consultation with
a state agency is necessary due to the effect of state approvals in
the subdivision or site plan. If Woolwich Township, the Woolwich
§ 149-64 LITTERING § 149-64
125:373
Township Planning Board or the Woolwich Township Board of
Adjustment retains a different professional or consultant in the
place of the professional originally responsible for development,
application review or inspection of improvements, the township or
the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall be responsible
for all time and expenses of the new professional to become
familiar with the application or the project, and the township,
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall not bill the applicant
or charge the deposit or the escrow account for any such services.
(4) The township shall be reimbursed for all payments to independent
consultants in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. If the salary,
staff support and overhead for a municipal professional are
provided by the township, the charge shall be the maximum
permitted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. For
other professionals, the charge shall be at the same rate as all
other work of the same nature by the professional for the township
when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants
or developers.
(5) All escrow funds shall be utilized by the appropriate Board to pay
the cost of any professional fees incurred by the Board for review
and/or testimony. The term "professional," as used herein, shall
include the services of a duly licensed engineer, surveyor, planner,
attorney, appraiser or other expert who would provide professional
services to ensure that an application complies with the standards
set forth in township ordinances and experts whose testimony may
be solicited to give further information to the approving Board in
any area addressed by any of applicant's experts.
(6) The following closeout procedure shall apply to all deposits and
escrow accounts established under the provisions of P.L. 1975, c.
291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), and shall commence after the
appropriate Board has granted final approval and signed the
subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of application review
escrows and deposits, or after the improvements have been
approved as provided in Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53), in the case of improvement inspection escrows and
deposits. The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to
the Chief Financial Officer of the township, to the approving Board
and to the relevant township professional that the application or
the improvements, as the case may be, are completed. After receipt
of such notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the Chief
Financial Officer within 30 days and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial Officer shall
render a written final accounting to the applicant on the uses to
which the deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of the final bill.
Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including
interest in accordance with Section 1 of P.L. 1985, c. 315 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1), shall be refunded to the developer along with the
§ 149-64 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-64
125:374
final accounting. To facilitate the release of escrow, an applicant
shall submit a signed escrow release voucher with the development
application.
(7) The Chief Financial Officer shall make all of the payments to
professionals for services rendered to the municipality or
approving Board for review of applications for development, review
and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other
purposes under the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.). Each payment charged to the deposit for review
of applications, review and preparation of documents and
inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from the
professional, which voucher shall identify the personnel
performing the service and, for each date the services performed,
the hours spent to one-fourth-hour increments, the hourly rate and
the expenses incurred. All professionals shall submit vouchers to
the Chief Financial Officer on a monthly basis in accordance with
schedules and procedures established by the Chief Financial
Officer. If the services are provided by a township employee, the
township employee shall prepare and submit to the Chief Financial
Officer a statement containing the same information as required on
a voucher on a monthly basis. The professional shall send an
informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the
Chief Financial Officer simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief
Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant a
statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative
balance of the escrow account. This information shall be provided
on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a
monthly basis, if monthly charges exceed $1,000. If an escrow
account or deposit contains insufficient funds to enable the
township or approving authority to perform required application
reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief Financial Officer
shall provide the applicant with a notice of the insufficient escrow
or deposit balance. In order for work to continue on the
development or the application, the applicant shall, within a
reasonable time period, post a deposit to the account in an amount
to be agreed upon by the township or approving authority and the
applicant. In the interim, any required health and safety
inspections shall be made and charged back against the
replenishment of funds.
(8) An applicant shall notify, in writing, the governing body, with copies
to the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the
professional, whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by
a professional for service rendered to the township in reviewing
applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, inspection of improvements or other charges made
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.). The governing body or its designee shall, within a reasonable
§ 149-64 LITTERING § 149-64
125:375
§ 149-65. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
For each and every violation of any provision of this chapter, the owner,
contractor or other persons interested as general agent, architect, building
contractor, owner, tenant or any other persons who commit, take part in
or assist in any violation of this chapter, or who maintain any building or
premises in which any violation of this chapter shall exist, and who shall
have refused to abate said violation within five days after written notice
shall have been served upon him either by mail or by personal service, shall
for each and every violation be fined as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
§ 149-66. Additional remedies.
In addition to the remedy or remedies hereinbefore provided, any person,
persons, company or corporation violating this chapter or any provision or
section thereof may be proceeded against by the Township of Woolwich by
appropriate action or by proceeding in equity or otherwise to enjoin any
violation of this chapter or to prevent and enjoin any threatened violation of
this chapter.
time period, attempt to remediate any disputed charges. If the
matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the
applicant may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals
established under Section 9 of P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-127), any charge to an escrow account or a deposit by any
township professional or consultant or the cost of the installation
of improvements estimated by the Municipal Engineer pursuant to
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). An applicant
or his authorized agent shall submit the appeal in writing to the
County Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant or his
authorized agent shall simultaneously send a copy of the appeal to
the township, the approving authority and any professional whose
charge is the subject of the appeal. An applicant shall file an
appeal within 45 days from receipt of the informational copy of
the professional's voucher required by Subsection c of Section
13 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2), except that, if the
professional has not supplied the applicant with an informational
copy of the professional's voucher, the applicant shall file his appeal
within 60 days from receipt of the township statement of activity
against the deposit or escrow account required by Subsection c. of
Section 13 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2). An applicant
may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges by a
professional during a period not exceeding six months to
demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or
inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this provision need
not appeal each charge individually.
§ 149-64 WOOLWICH CODE § 149-66
125:376
Chapter 153
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 23.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Environmental site assessment — See Ch. 92.
Fees — See Ch. 95.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Grading plans — See Ch. 109.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Street excavations and openings — See Ch.
159, Art. II.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Topsoil — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 153-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control the placement and removal of
soil in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience and general
welfare of the community. The adoption and enforcement of this chapter
is by no means a substitute for the approval of the Gloucester County Soil
Conservation District but is meant to supplement District requirements with
regards to soil placement and removal.
§ 153-2. Definitions.
The words or terms not interpreted or defined by this chapter shall be
used with common or standard utilization. The following words, terms and
phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
APPLICANT — An individual person, developer, partnership, corporation,
or other entity or public or quasi-public agency requesting permission to
engage in land-disturbance activity.
AQUIFER — Any aquifer designated as such pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9-6. The
aquifers represent groundwaters with the designated use of potable water
and conversion to potable water.
CONTAINMENT — Any hazardous substance, hazardous constituent,
hazardous waste or pollutant.
CONTAMINATED SITE — Any property, including but not limited to
structures, sediment, soil and water, that contains a contaminant which is
present at such levels of concentration as to require action pursuant to any
federal or state statutes or regulations.
CONTRACTOR — Any person engaged in the moving, delivery or placement
of fill from, in or upon any land in the Township.
§ 149-66 SOIL REMOVAL § 153-2
153:377
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing, highly erodible soil or severely
eroded area.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner of a lot or any parcel of
land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option
or contract to purchase, or any other applicant or person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading, transporting,
storing or filling of land.
DREDGED MATERIAL — Any material removed from the bottom of a body
of water.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Township Zoning Officer or person(s)
designated by the Township Committee in the absence of the Zoning Officer.
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
FARM — Any area which is used for the sole purpose of farming, which
provides for the use of land, within its capabilities and treatment, within
practical limits to grow and harvest produce or other crops, the raising of
animals for slaughter or the production of mild. The raising of an animal as
a hobby or as a pet is exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
FILL and FILL MATERIAL — Any sand, gravel, earth, soil, dredged material,
or other material of any composition whatsoever, the placement of which
upon a site results in a change of topography of the site.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and additional portions of the
floodplain that are subject to flood flow at lesser depths and lower velocities
than the floodway and that are inundated by the flood hazard area designed
flood.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any hazardous substance as defined pursuant
to Section 3 of P.L. 1976, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b), hazardous waste
as defined pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1976, c. 99 (N.J.S.A. 13:E-38), or
pollutant as defined pursuant to Section 3 of P.S. 1977, C. 74 (N.J.S.A.
58:10A-3).
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water within the
Township.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, storing or filling of land.
LOT — Any parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions as by
a lawful subdivision or deed of record, by a survey map or by a metes and
bounds description.
MOVE — To dig, excavate, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade, level or
otherwise alter or change the location or contour of any site; or to transport
and to supply fill material or soil from one parcel or premises to another.
§ 153-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 153-2
153:378
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in
establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — A certificate or other document issued to perform work or other
activity under this chapter.
PERMITTABLE EFFLUENT CONTAMINANT LEVELS — The dissolved
priority pollutant plus-40 containment levels within the effluent which are
below the groundwater quality criteria for Class IIA groundwater as set
forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9-6.
PERMITTABLE SOIL/SEDIMENT CONTAINMENT LEVELS — Priority
pollutant plus-40 contaminant levels, which are below the most stringent
soil cleanup criteria, as set forth by the State Department of Environmental
Protection.
PLAN — A scheme or design, which indicates land treatment measures,
including a schedule of the timing for their installation to minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation.
PRIORITY POLLUTANT PLUS 40 and PP +40 — The priority pollutant list of
126 compounds and elements developed by the Environmental Protection
Agency pursuant to Section 307(a)(1) of the Clean Water Act and 40
nontargeted organic compounds detected by gas chromatography/mass
spectroscopy (GC/MS) analysis. For the purpose of this chapter, a PP +40
scan means the analysis of a sample for all priority pollutants except those
as analyzed using GC/MS analytical methods. Nontargeted compound
criteria shall be used pursuant to the version of the Environmental
Protection Agency's "Contract Laboratory Program Statement of Work for
Organic Analysis, Multi-Media, Multi-Concentration" in effect as of the date
which the laboratory is performing the analysis.
REMEDIAL ACTION — Those actions taken at a site when hazardous
materials have been found, including the removal, treatment, containment,
transportation, the securing of or other engineering treatment measures,
including related operations and maintenance activities, whether of a
permanent nature or otherwise, designed to ensure that any discharge
or placement at the site is remediated in compliance with the applicable
remediation standards, including the sealing of or closure of wells and
groundwater supplies contaminated by the placement of hazardous
materials.
REMEDIATION — All necessary actions to investigate and clean up any
known, suspected, or threatened discharge or placement of hazardous
substances, including, as necessary, identifying areas of concern and
determining the presence of hazardous substances and the collection and
evaluation of data adequate to determine whether or not discharged or
placed hazardous materials exist. In addition, remediation includes the
determination of the nature and extent of any discharged or placed
hazardous substance, identifying and evaluating any problems presented by
the discharge or placement and the performance of a remedial action.
SITE — Any plot or parcel or parcels of land.
§ 153-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 153-2
153:379
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT AND THE STATE SOIL CONSERVATION
COMMITTEE — The Gloucester County Soil Conservation District and the
State Agency Committee established or organized in the State Department
of Agriculture, under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
STREAM — Any natural or artificial watercourse, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash, in
which water flows in a definite direction of course, either continuously or
intermittently, and which has a definite channel and shall include an area
adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
STRIPPING — Any activity which significantly disturbs vegetated or
otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and grubbing
operations.
§ 153-3. Permission to place soil, fill land or remove soil in
Township.
A. No owner, applicant, developer, corporation, contractor, subdivider, or
other person shall move, deliver, fill, place, or remove soil or otherwise
disturb, cause, allow, or permit material to be moved or placed on or
removed from any property in the Township without first obtaining
approval from the Township Zoning Officer and/or any other applicable
county, state or federal approval(s) or permit(s).
B. The owner or applicant who claims that he cannot develop his property
without the removal, regrade or placement of fill in excess of what is
available on site shall make application to the Township Zoning Officer
for a fill placement or removal permit, together with an application for
site plan or subdivision approval if the project is a nonresidential use or
minor or major subdivision.
C. The applicant shall submit a map or plat with the application as
provided for in the land use and subdivision and site plan ordinances
and shall delineate the place on which the fill is to be placed, moved or
removed. The application shall also specify the number of cubic yards of
fill to be delivered; the origin of the fill material; the number of cubic
yards to be removed; the destination of this removed material; the
length of time necessary to do so; and a statement indicating why it is
removed; the destination of this removed material; the length of time
necessary to do so; and a statement indicating why it is essential to the
development of the premises to place, fill or remove the specified
amount of material. If the application requires review by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment (referred to as "the Board"), the
Board shall schedule and conduct a public hearing on the full
application for development in accordance with applicable provisions of
the Municipal Land Use Law, as amended. Following the public hearing,
the Board shall make the findings and conclusions, based on the
evidence submitted to it as to whether the placement or movement of
the fill or the removal of the material is essential to the development of
§ 153-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 153-3
153:380
§ 153-4. Permits.
§ 153-5. Contents of permit application and plan.
The applicant shall file the required three sets of plans with the application
for the permit required under this chapter and all other material or data
in the time frame required by the land use and land subdivision and site
plan ordinances. The plan and application shall show, include or contain the
following:
the premises for the permitted use, taking in to account the grades of
abutting streets and lands, adjacent land values and uses, drainage,
and all other factors as may be borne upon or relate to the coordinated
and harmonious physical development of the Township.
D. The conclusions and findings of the Board shall be incorporated in its
resolution of approval or denial.
A. No land area shall be disturbed by any person, developer, partnership,
corporation, other entity, municipal corporation or other public agency
within the Township unless the applicant has received the following:
(1) A permit following the submission of a plan to the Township Zoning
Officer for his review.
(2) The required and approved plan from the soil conservation district.
(3) By way of amplification and not by way of limitation, approval of a
soil removal or soil placement plan is required for the following
application categories: subdivision, site plan, conditional use,
zoning variance, planned unit development and construction
permit.
(4) The applicant must submit a separate soil removal or soil
placement plan for each site or lot. The applicant may consult the
soil conservation district for the selection of appropriate erosion
and sediment control measures during the development of the plan.
(5) Approval of the State Department of Environmental Protection.
B. If certification is required and has been issued by the soil conservation
district and a permit has been obtained from the Township Zoning
Officer or any other applicable county, state or federal approval(s) or
permit(s), then only notification of the commencement of the permitted
work is required to be given to the Township Engineer. The soil removal
and soil placement plan shall be prepared in accordance with standard
engineering practices, showing the requirements stated in this chapter,
and shall be approved before any disturbance shall commence unless
exempted as allowed in this chapter. Work undertaken by Township
personnel shall be exempt from the notification requirements. An
applicant must provide three signed and sealed sets of plans drawn by a
state-licensed design professional.
§ 153-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 153-5
153:381
A. The block, lot and street address of the property.
B. Proof of soil conservation district approval.
C. The title block with original signature and embossed seal of the design
professional who prepared the plan.
D. The identity and addresses of the owner and applicant.
E. The name of the individual who represents the applicant and who is
responsible for conformance with this chapter, including the proper
mailing address and telephone number where the individual may be
reached.
F. The name, address and telephone number of the contractor who will be
doing the actual work on the property.
G. During the course of the construction, any modification or alteration of
the approved plans requires approval by the authority having
jurisdiction, before the work is started.
H. A description of the proposed use of the site following completion of
work.
I. If the application is for a major subdivision or the proposed work
requires site plan approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, provide a survey map prepared by a state-licensed land
surveyor showing the location of all property corners, with permanent
markers set at each corner point and a metes and bounds description of
the property, including the total land area.
J. An estimate, in cubic yards, of the quantity of fill to be brought to the
site with a description of the origin of the soil or an estimate of the
quantity, in cubic yards, of the material to be removed from the site,
with the destination of the soil included.
K. The proposed dates of commencement, completion and maintenance of
work.
L. An estimate of the type and number of earthmoving machines to be
used in the operation, the daily starting and finishing times during
which machines will be operated, and the means of protection to
prevent unauthorized access.
M. With the application there shall be filed the required number of
topographic maps of the site showing where the proposed fill,
placement or soil removal operation is to be conducted. Include an
engineering plan showing surrounding lands within 200 feet of the
perimeter of the site, prepared and certified by a licensed professional
civil engineer or land surveyor of the state, on a scale of not less than
one inch equals 100 feet, and as referred to in the United States Coastal
and Geodetic Survey data.
§ 153-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 153-5
153:382
§ 153-6. Review and approval; decisions and notification.
N. Proof that no contaminants exist in the soil, including but not limited to
results of tests for permissible effluent contaminant levels, permissible
soil/sediment contaminant levels and priority pollutant plus-40 scans.
O. The present and proposed grades on a fifty-foot grid layout with contour
lines at two-foot intervals for the property up to and including five
acres; or for more than five acres, one-hundred-foot grids with contour
lines at five-foot intervals. If topographic maps are obtained by aerial
topography, the required grid layout may be superimposed on it. Where
access to adjoining lands is not permitted, the contour lines of the
perimeter lands shall be taken from available state maps or data or
from United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey Map of the particular
area.
P. The grades of all abutting streets and lands within 200 feet of the
property.
Q. The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets, streams,
bodies of water and watercourses, natural and artificial, as well as all
proposed elevations of the areas to be modified.
R. All existing structures, land features, showing all existing surface and
subsurface water drainage conditions and provisions, both on site and
off site. Include all existing and proposed elevations of these drainage
systems including the profiles of any new construction. If the work is on
a watercourse, provide cross sections at fifty-foot intervals in addition
to the proposed profile.
S. Show all wooded areas in the property under construction, locating all
trees with a diameter of six inches or larger. All trees and shrubs to be
retained shall be protected at the drop line with the erection of
protective snow fencing. Include protection erection details.
T. Show the proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the area
upon completion of the proposed work. Define how the area filled or the
material removed will not impact the adjacent areas, create hazard, or
adversely affect the slope, swale or drainage of all abutting property.
U. Show where all materials, good and bad, shall be stockpiled on site.
V. Show the location and provide a description of one benchmark
elevation for each 20 acres of land.
A. Review and approval or denial pursuant to this chapter shall be made
within 30 days for all applications not requiring approval of the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. The Zoning Officer shall make all decisions and notification
requirements under this chapter in writing.
§ 153-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 153-7
153:383
§ 153-7. General design and performance principles.
A. Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed land
disturbance and shall be in operation during all stages of the
disturbance activity.
B. Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be done
in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
C. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
D. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall
be kept within practical limits.
E. Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization
measures shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
construction or other land disturbance.
F. Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff, resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions, during and after
development or disturbance. Such provisions shall be in addition to all
existing requirements.
G. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on the site, whenever
possible, to facilitate groundwater recharge.
H. Sediment shall be retained on the site to the maximum extent feasible.
I. Diversions, sedimentation basins and similar required structures shall
be installed before any on-site grading or disturbance.
J. Construction activities which create obnoxious and unnecessary dust,
fumes, odors, smoke, vibrations, or glare noticeable in adjacent
occupied buildings or on public streets will not be tolerated. The
applicant must define, perform and maintain proper procedures to
eliminate this occurrence or nuisance.
K. Any damage to public or private property shall be repaired in place or
removed and replaced at the applicant's expense and inspected by the
Township Engineer before any performance or cash bonds are
returned.
L. Unsightly construction debris, including scrap materials, cartons, boxes
and wrapping, must be removed daily. The burial of any debris on site is
strictly forbidden.
M. Whenever construction activities take place within or adjacent to a
traveled way or interfere with existing traffic patterns in any manner,
the applicant, developer or permit holder shall conform to Township
requirements.
N. All trench excavations shall conform to all applicable federal, state and
local regulations. No trench shall be left uncovered during
nonconstruction hours. Any trenches in a right-of-way or easement shall
§ 153-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 153-7
153:384
§ 153-8. Grading and filling.
All lots where fill material is deposited shall have clean fill and/or topsoil
deposited which shall be graded to allow complete surface draining of the
lot into local storm sewer systems or existing natural drainage courses.
No regrading of a lot shall be permitted which would create or aggravate
stagnation or a drainage problem on site or on adjacent properties or which
will violate this chapter. Grading shall be limited to areas shown on a plan
approved pursuant to this chapter or an approved site plan, or subdivision
or approved grading plan. Any topsoil disturbed during approved excavation
and grading operations shall be redistributed throughout the site. The
requirements of this section shall be enforced by the Township Zoning
Officer, in consultation with the Township Engineer and shall be in addition
to any other applicable county, state or federal approval(s) or permit(s).
be covered with a steel plate and secured to avoid bouncing and
movement.
O. All areas of excavation in areas other than public streets or rights-ofway
shall be protected by the installation of a temporary fence
enclosure prior to the commencement of any work, which shall be
maintained throughout the excavation process to prohibit unauthorized
access.
P. The routes for trucks coming to and leaving the site shall be subject to
the approval of the Township Engineer or his authorized representative.
Q. No trucks shall arrive at or leave the site with material prior to 8:00
a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. from Monday to Saturday.
R. No trucks shall operate on legal holidays or Sundays.
S. The applicant shall truck the material to sites within the Township
whose owners will accept the material, and only if the sites and the fill
therein are approved by the Township Zoning Officer and Township
Engineer.
T. Videotaping of the condition of the Township-owned paved cartways
along the route may be filed with the Township prior to the hauling of
fill material on Township roads.
U. Any dirt dropped on all roads within the Township shall be cleaned up
immediately upon notice from the Engineering Department. Failure to
follow this condition will result in the requirement of prewashing all
excess soils from the tires and/or truck undercarriage prior to the
entrance onto and use of Township roads.
V. Certain major subdivisions may be limited regarding import/export of
soil by Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment resolution and/or
Township Council resolution and/or developer's agreement.
§ 153-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 153-9
153:385
§ 153-9. Maintenance of control measures and duration.
All necessary soil removal and soil placement control measures installed
under this chapter shall be adequately maintained during construction and
for a minimum of one year after completion of the subject project or until
such measures are permanently stabilized, as determined by the Township
Zoning Officer in consultation with the Township Engineer; however, such
period shall not exceed two years. The Township Zoning Officer, acting
as Township agent, shall give the applicant a certificate upon request
indicating the date on which the measures called for in the approved plans
were completed. All trees and shrubs to be retained shall be protected
at the drop line with the erection of protective snow fencing. Nothing in
this section shall affect the right of the Township to enforce maintenance
requirements of structures that are to be perpetually maintained by the
developer or owner of the property or structure.
§ 153-10. Performance bond required.
§ 153-11. Fees.
A. No permits will be issued pursuant to this chapter until the applicant
has posted with the Township a performance guarantee or cash bond in
a form approved by the Township Attorney. The bond shall be in an
amount equal to 120% of the cost of temporary and/or permanent site
restoration and shall be deposited with the Township Clerk to
guarantee complete site restoration and cover.
B. Permission to postpone work shall not exceed six months. Upon failure
to complete the work, the Township may use the money deposited with
the Township to finish the unfinished portion of the work in accordance
with the land disturbance permit. Any unused portion of the moneys
deposited shall be returned to the applicant, less an amount of money to
be retained by the Township for expenses incurred in the
administration of such funds.
C. In addition to the performance bond requirement in Subsection A of this
section, the applicant shall be obliged to reimburse the Township for
the cost of all documented extraordinary costs or expenses necessitated
as a result of unforeseen difficulties or exigencies or necessitated by or
resulting from any violation of any provision of this chapter. This shall
include specifically all engineering fees, attorney's fees and costs
incurred by the Township in prosecuting any complaint in the municipal
or other court for a violation of this chapter. Also included are all costs
or fees incurred by the Township in conducting a hearing for revocation
or suspension of any permit or obtaining injunctive or other relief in any
court.
A. Under this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the Township the fee set
forth in the fee schedule in Subsection B of this section to cover the
costs of reviews and inspections required by this chapter in
§ 153-9 WOOLWICH CODE § 153-11
153:386
§ 153-12. Violations and penalties.
§ 153-13. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
Under this chapter, no temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate
of occupancy for a building on a lot shall be issued unless there has
been compliance with the provisions of the approved permit. The Township
Engineer must file a formal report of such compliance with the Construction
Official so that a temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of
occupancy may be issued.
conformance with § 153-6. All fees shall be submitted at the time of
application.
B. Along with the application for the permit under this chapter, there shall
be payment of the fee based on the following schedule:
(1) Up to 100 cubic yards: $500.
(2) Up to 500 cubic yards: $1,500.
(3) More than 500 cubic yards: $5,000.
A. If any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any
standard promulgated pursuant to the provisions of any statute or
regulation or fails to comply with the provisions of the permit, the
Township may institute a civil action in superior court for injunctive
relief to prohibit and prevent such violations, and such court may
proceed in a summary manner.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any
standard promulgated pursuant to this chapter or who fails to comply
with the provisions of the permit plan shall also be subject to a penalty
of not less than $25 nor more than $3,000, to be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1
et seq.53 The superior court and municipal court shall have jurisdiction
to enforce the Penalty Enforcement Law.
C. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
continues shall constitute an additional separate and distinct offense.
D. The Construction Official shall, upon receiving notice from the
Township Zoning Officer that the developer or contractor is in violation
of this section, suspend the further issuance of construction permits or
certificates of occupancy as a violation of his prior approval.
53.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 153-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 153-14
153:387
§ 153-14. Stop-work order.
The Township Zoning Officer, acting on behalf of the Township, may issue a
stop-work order if a project subject to this chapter is not being executed in
accordance with the permit or if there is any violation of this chapter.
§ 153-15. Exempted activities.
The following activities are specifically exempt from this chapter:
§ 153-16. Inspection and enforcement.
A. The use of land for gardening primarily for home consumption.
B. The agricultural use of lands when operated with a farm conservation
plan approved by the local soil conservation district.
C. The construction of a swimming pool, patio or deck at a single-family
dwelling.
D. Landscaping of an existing single-family dwelling.
E. Any movement of 15 cubic yards or less of material.
F. Activity that is part of a State Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) remediation project, as certified to by the Township Health
Officer.
G. Any activity that is part of a septic system repair, replacement and/or
removal project, as certified to by the Township Health Officer.
A. The Township Zoning Officer or designee, in cooperation with the
Township Engineer, shall inspect or require adequate inspection of the
work performed pursuant to this chapter and shall enforce the
requirements of this chapter.
B. If the Township Zoning Officer finds existing conditions are not as
stated in the applicant's permit, he may refuse to approve further work
and may require necessary remedies to be promptly installed and may
seek other penalties as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
C. The applicant shall have the permit on the site during all phases of
construction.
D. Should the applicant fail in his obligation to maintain the site in a safe
and orderly condition, the Township may, on five days' written notice or
immediately in the case of a hazard to life, health or property,
undertake whatever work may be necessary to return the site to a safe
and orderly condition and deduct the cost thereof from the performance
guarantee. Upon notice of such deduction, the developer shall, within
10 business days, reimburse the Township in the amount of the
deduction, or its performance guaranty will be held to be void, and the
Township may take action against the applicant.
§ 153-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 153-17
153:388
§ 153-17. Undeveloped property restoration and maintenance.
Chapter 155
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling Program
Manager — See Ch. 29, Art. VI.
Hazardous waste — See Ch. 113.
Littering — See Ch. 125.
A. When it is determined that site work or soil disturbance has
commenced without the posting of a performance guarantee as
required by this chapter, the Township Engineer shall require the owner
to restore the site. This restoration shall be based on §§ 153-7 and
153-10.
B. A project is deemed to be abandoned and in default for purposes of this
chapter when there is no major construction activity, such as
excavation, installation or filling, for a period of not less than six
months, with the exception of the period normally considered winter as
governed by the construction industry operating within the Township. If
an apparent default occurs, the Township Administrator, upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer, shall serve the applicant, by
certified mail, return receipt required, with a notice of default, with a
copy thereof to the Township Clerk and Township Committee. The
applicant shall have 10 business days to:
(1) Resume major construction activity on the site;
(2) Initiate site restoration in a manner satisfactory to the Township
Engineer; or
(3) Provide a site restoration guarantee.
§ 153-17 SOIL REMOVAL § 153-17
153:389

ARTICLE I
Nonresidential Reporting and Documentation of Recycling
[Adopted 9-6-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
§ 155-1. Documentation of source-separated materials; Recycling
Tonnage Report; form of documentation; leaves.
§ 155-2. Date for submission.
All nonresidential entities specified above shall comply with the mandates
of the Township of Woolwich as specified above on or before February 1
of each calendar year by submission of the required documentation to the
Township Recycling Coordinator.
§ 155-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
A. By February 1 of each year, all commercial, retail, wholesale,
institutional establishments, taverns, charitable organizations,
manufacturers, warehouses, offices, construction and demolition
companies and farmers (heretofore referred to as "sponsor/generator")
utilizing a private hauler to collect and/or market source-separated
recyclable materials must document and report to the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator the total weight of volume of all sourceseparated
materials recycled during the previous year.54
B. N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16 mandates that the governing body of each
municipality shall submit to the State of New Jersey and the County
Seat an annual Recycling Tonnage Report summarizing the amount of
material recycled during the previous calendar year.
C. Furthermore, acceptable documentation is an official letter or
computer report from the sponsor/generator, signed by an authorized
representative. This documentation must state the type of recycled
material, the quantity, expressed in tons or cubic yards, the date and
the market receiving the material(s). Those persons specifying this
information in cubic yards shall also indicate the conversion ratio of the
materials from cubic yards to tons.
D. In the case of leaves that are not composted at a New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection registered compost facility, a
written statement from the collector/farmer receiving the leaves must
be submitted, which details the amount of leaves collected, how they
were recycled (e.g., mulched, composted, etc.) and the name and
address of the collector/farmer.
54.Editor's Note: See also § 155-16 of this chapter.
§ 155-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-3
153:391

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste and Recycling
[Adopted 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
§ 155-4. Programs established; applicability.
§ 155-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this and succeeding sections, the following words shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUILDING — A structure that contains one or more units.
CART — A container designed to be mechanically emptied by an automated
or semi-automated collection vehicle.
COMMERCIAL SECTOR — All designated commercial retail, wholesale,
institutional, markets and manufacturing facilities including, but not limited
to: taverns, restaurants, churches, offices, professional offices, daycare
and private schools and facilities, strip stores, farms, private schools and
construction and demolition projects buildings or complexes.[Added
8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-10]
A. There is hereby established a program for the mandatory source
separation of recyclable materials within the Township of Woolwich,
and the requirements of this article shall apply to all property owners
and tenants of such property situated within the Township of Woolwich.
Such separation, collection and disposal of specified recyclable
materials shall be made under the supervision and guidance of the
Coordinator of Recycling.
B. There is hereby established a program to prohibit scavenging of
recyclable materials within the Township of Woolwich, and the
requirements of this article shall apply to all.
C. There is hereby established a program to prohibit littering and dumping
within the Township of Woolwich, and the requirements of this article
shall apply to all.55
D. The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
article. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including
collection of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or
regulations established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations
and penalty notices will be directed to the owner or management, in
those instances where the violator is not easily identifiable. The
management shall issue notification and collection rules to new tenants
when they arrive and every six months during their occupancy. [Added
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
55.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding the program to require use of Woolwich
Township Trash Tags, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-3-2000
by Ord. No. 00-5.
§ 155-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-5
153:393
COMPLEX — A property that contains more than one building.
CONTAINER or RECEPTACLE — A roll-off, dumpster, cart, can or bag
designed to receive and accept solid waste or recyclable materials and
prevent spillage of its contents.
CURB — The area adjoining the curbline of the streets.
DOCUMENTATION — Original or clear copies of receipts or letters in the
form of certified weight receipts or a signed business form letter that shall
include the name of the recycling market, the hauler and the generator and
shall show the dates and quantity/weight of each recycled material. It is
recommended that a separate summary sheet be provided for each recycled
material. These receipts or letters shall be acceptable from a recycling
market(s) or solid waste facility or hauler(s) or a letter from construction or
demolition permit applicants stating that no receipts were provided to them
from the identified market(s) and/or hauler(s) or a letter from construction
or demolition permit applicant stating that no material was generated.
DUMPING — Placement of any form of solid waste or recyclables equal to or
more than 0.148 cubic yard of solids or 30 U.S. gallons of liquid not placed
in a public receptacle or in authorized private receptacles for collection,
upon any street, sidewalk or public or private property.
DUMPSTER — A container designed to be mechanically emptied. These
dumpsters must have lids.
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware, including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners, fax machines,
vcr's and dvd players, radios, rechargeable batteries, TVs, electronic
components and the like.[Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
ESTABLISHMENT — A place where people live or conduct business.
HAZARDOUS — Including but not limited to paints, paint thinners/cleaners,
insecticides, pesticides and any other items so designated by the federal or
state environmental protection agencies as to require special handling.
ITEM, BULK — A product too large to fit into a container and/or household
furniture.[Amended 12-30-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-26]
LANDFILL — A facility designed exclusively to accept solid waste, designed
and permitted to meet all federal and New Jersey Environmental Protection
Agency rules and standards.
LITTERING — Placement of any form of solid waste or recyclables of less
than 0.148 cubic yard of solids or 30 U.S. gallons of liquid not placed in a
AMOUNT — A product disposed/sold by weight, count, gallonage or
yardage.
A.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Documentation for recycled hazardous
waste(s) (for example, oil, solvents, etc.) must include a copy of the
hazardous waste hauler's receipt, clearly showing the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Hazardous Waste Hauler
Permit Number.
B.
§ 155-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-5
153:394
public receptacle or in authorized private receptacles for collection upon
any street, sidewalk or public or private property.
MEDICAL/BIOHAZARDOUS — Including but not limited to any solid waste
which is generated in the diagnosis, treatment (for example, provision of
medical service) or immunization of human beings or animals in research
pertaining thereto or in the production of testing of biologicals. The term
does not include any hazardous waste identified or listed under 40 CFR Part
261 or any household waste generated from home self care as defined in
this section.
METAL OR PLASTIC CONTAINER — These containers shall be made of
metal or plastic.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) and shall include motels, hotels or other guest
houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).[Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-18]
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be authorized to,
among other things, enforce the provisions of this article, and any rules and
regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.[Added 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-18]
MUNICIPAL SECTOR — All designated municipal government buildings,
parks, public events, public school facilities, fire and ambulance facilities.
OCCUPANT — A person(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or any other
entity due to his or its status as an owner or lessee of a property in Woolwich
Township.
PERSON — Includes any and all person(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or
any other entity.
PLASTIC BAG — A bag designed to hold solid waste or recyclable materials.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
product.[Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
FERROUS AND NONFERROUS METAL AND APPLIANCES — Washers,
dryers, dishwashers, ovens, hot-water tanks, hot and cold water tanks,
gas/oil/electric heaters, gas tanks, bicycles, metal shelves, storage
cabinets, auto parts, metal lawn equipment or other large appliances
commonly referred to as "white goods."
A.
OZONE DEPLETING COMPOUNDS (FREON) — Items containing
chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) and other ozone depleting compounds
B.
§ 155-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-5
153:395
RESIDENTIAL SECTOR — All designated single-family buildings and
multifamily buildings of two or more separate living units.[Amended
8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-10]
ROLL-OFF CONTAINER — A container that is designed to be removable
from a vehicle or chassis.
SOLID WASTE — Consisting of solid waste Types 10, 13, 23, 25 and 27,
as defined by New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, N.J.A.C.
7:26-2.13.
(ODCs), examples of which are air conditioners, refrigerators and
freezers.
CANS — Aluminum, steel, tin and bimetal containers and foil. Labels
may be left on.
C.
GLASS — All bottles, jars and jugs made from silica or sand, soda ash
and limestone and used for packaging or bottling or the holding of
various matter. Clear, green, brown and other colors are included. This
shall not include ceramics, window glass, light bulbs, cooking ware or
mirrors.
D.
PLASTIC — All bottles, jugs and jars commonly marked or known as
"PET(1)" and "HDPE(2)." Rings, caps and labels may be left on. This
shall not include tubs or other items not considered a bottle, jug or jar.
E.
PAPER — All uncontaminated corrugated boxes and panels, newspaper,
magazines, books, junk mail, chipboard, computer paper, office paper,
copy paper, school paper, etc. This shall not include paper that is
treated, waxed or contaminated so as to be a health concern or
problem.
F.
BATTERIES — Wet cell automotive, motorcycle and boat batteries.
Commonly found in six-, twelve- and twenty-four-volt charges.
G.
H. OIL — Motor and transmission oil.
OIL FILTERS — Motor and transmission filters made in a metal
container.
I.
J. TIRES — Passenger and truck tires and tubes.
VEGETATIVE — Leaves, trees, branches, shrubs, stumps, bushes,
hedge trimmings, weeds and grass.
K.
MASONRY — All products generally used in the construction of
buildings, including but not limited to bricks, cinder block, asphalt,
concrete, rock and stone.
L.
Additionally, each business is encouraged to examine its operation for
any additional item(s), including but not limited to food waste and other
plastic, that can be recycled over and above those items mandated by
these regulations.
M.
§ 155-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-5
153:396
SOLID WASTE INCINERATOR (also known as "resource recovery facility"
and "waste to energy facility") — A facility designed exclusively to accept
solid waste for incineration and designed and permitted to meet all federal
and New Jersey Environmental Protection Agency rules and standards.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLING MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.[Added 12-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-18]
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purpose of recycling.[Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-18]
STREETS — All public highways, avenues, streets, lanes, boulevards,
circles, terraces, drives and public roads, whether dedicated or not, within
the limits of the Township of Woolwich.
TIED BUNDLE — A bundle should be used for the collection and removal of
solid waste or recyclable materials.
UNIT — A single commercial, municipal or residential establishment. 56
§ 155-6. Contract procedure; places served; exceptions. [Added
4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-557]
A. The Woolwich Township Committee shall have the power, if in it's
opinion it is more advantageous to have the garbage and other animal
and vegetable refuse collected, removed and disposed of by persons
other than authorities of the municipality, to make a contract or
contracts for such work or any portion thereof with any individual or
individuals, corporation or corporations. Before making such contract
or contracts, the Woolwich Township Committee shall first adopt
specifications for the doing of the work in a sanitary and inoffensive
manner. Said contract shall be entered into and made only after bids
therefor have been advertised according to law, and then only to the
lowest responsible bidder or bidders. The bidder or bidders to whom
the contract is awarded shall give satisfactory bond or other security
for the faithful performance of the work. The contract shall include and
in all respects conform to the specifications adopted for the doing of the
work.
B. Combined trash and recycling collection, removal and disposal will be
available from all municipal and residential sectors. [Amended
7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 02-0658; 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-10;
12-30-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-26]
56.Editor's Note: The former definition of "Woolwich trash tag," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-5.
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 155-6, Trash tag.
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C, regarding situations
when trash and garbage removal would not be furnished, was repealed 7-1-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-06.
§ 155-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-6
153:397
§ 155-7. Designated recyclable materials. [Amended 7-1-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-06; 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
The following materials shall be designated recyclables from the
commercial, municipal and residential sectors: ozone-depleting compound
appliances, ferrous and nonferrous metals, glass, cans, plastic, paper,
C. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial establishments and locations, as well as government,
schools and other institutional locations within the municipality of
Woolwich Township, to separate designated recyclable materials from
all solid waste. Designated recyclable materials shall be deposited
separate and apart from other solid waste generated by the owners,
tenants, or occupants of such premises and shall be placed separately
at the curb in a manner and on such days and times as may be
hereinafter established by regulations promulgated by the Township of
Woolwich. [Amended 12-30-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-26]
D. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of
a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the source
separation requirements of the article which requires a person
generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to
source separate from the municipal solid waste stream the specified
recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this chapter, a commercial or institutional
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator on forms to be provided for this
purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following
information:
(1) The name of the commercial or institutional entity;
(2) The street address location and block and lot designation;
(3) The name, official title and phone number of the person making
application on the behalf of the commercial or institutional entity;
(4) The name, address and official contact person and telephone
number of the facility which provides the service of recycling those
designated recyclable materials; and
(5) A certification that the designated recyclable materials will be
recycled and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service
provider or commercial/institutional generator shall provide
written documentation to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator of
the total number of tons collected and recycled for each designated
materials.
§ 155-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-7
153:398
vegetative, tires, newspaper, glass bottles and jars, aluminum cans, bimetal
cans, plastic containers (PET No. 1 and HDPE No. 2 plastics), paper,
corrugated cardboard, cereal boxes, junk mail, magazines and catalogs,
office paper, vegetative yard waste, clean wood waste, used motor oil and
electronic waste.
§ 155-8. Collection. [Amended 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-5]
§ 155-9. Container limits.
A. Municipal collection. The collection, removal and disposal of all
designated materials shall be conducted by a contractor as designated
by the Woolwich Township Committee at a schedule determined by the
contracting unit upon consultation with the Township Committee.
Woolwich Township public parks and sidewalk receptacles shall be
cleaned and maintained by the Woolwich Township Public Works
Department or such other party as may be designated.
B. Owners, occupants or lessee's residing within Woolwich Township shall
place containers curbside after 6:00 p.m. prior to the collection day, and
all containers shall be removed from the curbside as soon as practical
after collection or by 9:00 p.m. of the collection day. All solid waste shall
be removed from special events within 24 hours of their completion.
C. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in a clean and safe
manner. [Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
A. Automated trash collection. Three ninety-five-gallon containers (also
referred to herein as "containers") will be assigned by serial number
recorded by the Woolwich Township Public Works Department to each
residential taxable property and will remain the property of the
Township of Woolwich. One container shall be designated for recyclable
material, one container shall be designated for nonrecyclable refuse,
and one container shall be designated for yard waste. [Amended
8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-10; 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02;
12-30-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-26]
(1) If a resident vacates the premises, the container(s) assigned to that
residence must be left behind for the new resident. It is a
precondition of obtaining a certificate of occupancy to account for
all leased containers registered to that residence.
(2) At the sole discretion of the Director of Municipal Services, and if
all real property taxes are current, residents, after following all
recycling rules and regulations, may lease a second container (not
to exceed a total of 190 gallons per household each for trash and
recycling) at the following prices which may be amended by the
Township of Woolwich:
(a) Ninety-five-gallon containers: $95 annually.
(b) Vegetative containers: $40 annually.
§ 155-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-9
153:399
§ 155-10. Container storage and placement; hazardous waste.
(3) Containers requiring repair. Residents shall notify the Township of
Woolwich if containers need repair. At the sole discretion of the
Director of Municipal Services, or his or her designee, containers
deemed to be damaged beyond repair may be replaced provided
that the resident pays for the replacement container as outlined in
§ 155-9A(2)(a).
(4) All containers belong to the Township of Woolwich and not the
lessee.
(5) Residents may mark their addresses on the lids of the containers at
a maximum font of three inches in height.
B. Nonmunicipal collection.
(1) Commercial.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant or lessee to
arrange for separate collection, transportation and proper
disposal of collected solid waste and recyclables.
(b) Tenants or lessees of commercial buildings may be exempt
from collection, transportation and disposal requirements as
set forth above if their leases designate the owner of the
building responsible for this service.
(c) Owners or operators of commercially zoned buildings shall
provide separately labeled trash and recycling containers for
the public at a minimum of one set of containers every single
linear 1/4 mile (i.e., approximately 1,300 feet).
(2) Residential. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant or
lessee to arrange for separate collection, transportation and proper
disposal of collected solid waste and recyclables.
A. All waste disposal containers must be stored in a protected area or
enclosure so as not to allow debris to blow onto the streets or adjacent
properties. No enclosure shall be erected in a public right-of-way or
easement.
B. All solid waste shall be placed in waste disposal containers (trash cans,
bags, dumpsters) and secured so as to prevent easy access of vermin,
pests and household pets.
C. No waste disposal containers shall be filled to the point of overflowing.
D. Debris or litter on or around trash containers or around construction or
demolition projects shall not be accumulated or stored in such a
manner that it is likely to be removed by natural forces onto adjacent
property.
§ 155-9 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-10
153:400
§ 155-11. (Reserved)60
§ 155-12. Recyclable materials; separation and placement for
removal.
E. Hazardous waste shall be disposed of separately according to federal
(40 CFR 261) or New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(N.J.A.C. 7:26-7) disposal regulations.59
F. Medical/bio-hazard waste shall be disposed of separately according to
federal (40 CFR 261) or New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (N.J.A.C. 7:26-7) disposal regulations.
A. Municipally collected recyclable materials.
(1) Municipally collected. [Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-1061]
(a) Commercial sector. All solid waste and recyclables placed for
collection shall be placed at the curb.
(b) Municipal sector. All solid waste and recyclables placed for
collection shall be placed at the curb or in the loading/storage
area.
(c) Commercial sector. All solid waste and recyclables placed for
collection shall be placed at the curb.
(2) Collected recyclable materials. [Amended 4-3-2000 by Ord. No.
00-5; 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 02-06; 11-19-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-41]
(a) Ozone-depleting compounds, appliances, ferrous and
nonferrous metals. Gas tanks must be empty and appliances
may contain Freon or other ozone depleting compounds.
(b) The following items may be placed in a single container: Glass,
metal and bimetal cans, recyclable plastic and plastic
containers with rings and caps removed, newspaper, mixed
paper, office paper, junk mail, magazines and catalogs, cereal
boxes, glass bottles and jars with rings and caps removed,
aluminum cans, and corrugated cardboard. [Amended
12-30-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-26]
(c) 62 "Vegetative materials" shall be defined as Christmas trees,
leaves, tree parts, branches, shrubs, stumps, bushes, hedge
59.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 113, Hazardous Waste.
60.Editor's Note: Former § 155-11, Collection sites, was repealed 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-5.
61.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1), requiring the recyclable materials be brought to
the designated municipal dropoff site, was repealed 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-5.
62.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2)(c), regarding paper and cardboard, was repealed
12-30-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-26. This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection
A(2)(d) and (e) as Subsection A(2)(c) and (d), respectively.
§ 155-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-12
153:401
§ 155-13. Additional methods of disposal.
§ 155-14. Solid waste; placement for removal. [Amended 4-3-2000
by Ord. No. 00-5; 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-10; 12-30-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-26]
Trash containers shall be placed out with metal lift bar facing the center
of the street and with at least four feet of clearance on either side so that
the mechanical arm can easily lift the container without interference. All
containers must be placed in such a fashion as to allow for unencumbered
access by the refuse and recyclable collection equipment. The Township
is under no obligation to empty any containers which, under the sole
discretion of the Director of Municipal Services and/or his or her
designee(s), is deemed to be inappropriately placed or encumbered.
§ 155-15. Solid waste disposal.
§ 155-16. Commercial establishments; recyclable materials
reporting and documentation.
trimmings, weeds and grasses. Christmas trees shall be
collected as is. Tree part/branches and bushes shall be tied and
bundled in four-foot lengths weighing no more than 50 pounds.
[Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
(d) Electronic waste. [Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
B. Nonmunicipally collected recyclable materials. It shall be the
responsibility of the commercial, municipal and residential sectors to
make arrangements for the collection and removal of the designated
recyclable materials.
C. Nonmunicipally collected recyclable materials. Nonmunicipally
collected recyclable materials shall consist of leaves, batteries, motor
oil, oil filters, tires and masonry building products. [Amended
7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 02-06; 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-10]
A. Any resident or commercial establishment may donate or sell any
recyclable materials to any person, partnership, corporation or charity,
whether operating for profit or not-for-profit. However, this source must
be listed on the Recycling Report.
B. Said person, partnership, corporation or charity may not, however,
under any circumstances collect any recyclable materials placed for
collection by the Township of Woolwich.
A. All solid waste must be properly contained and disposed. No
commercial or residential solid waste shall be disposed of in public or
unauthorized private containers.
B. All contractors, construction and demolition projects must provide their
own solid waste removal and disposal service.
§ 155-12 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-16
153:402
§ 155-16.1. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
[Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
A. All documentation shall be included with the Recycling Report. All
commercial establishments, cleaning firms or such private hauler
responsible for removal of recyclable materials must file completed
Recycling Reports with the Coordinator of Recycling.63 Recycling
Reports shall be submitted to the Township's Coordinator of Recycling
as per the following schedule: [Amended 7-1-2002 by Ord. No.
02-06]
Report Period Due Date
January 1 to December 31 February 1, for previous year
B. All construction and demolition projects shall be required to complete a
orm and submit it along with a request for a permit. The person who
signs the form regarding the project shall be responsible for filing solid
waste and recycling documentation when the project is completed or at
the end of the calendar year, whichever is first. [Amended 11-19-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-41]
C. All documentation of recycled materials and solid waste from special
events shall be submitted to the Township's Coordinator of Recycling no
later than 24 hours of their completion.
A. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this article.
B. The arrangements for the collection of designated recyclables
hereunder shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or
industrial property owner or its designee, unless the municipality
provides for the collection of designated recyclable materials. All
commercial, institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoor
litter receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also
provide receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those
materials commonly deposited in the location of the litter receptacle,
and shall provide for separate recycling service for those contents.
C. Every business, institution or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at its premises, including the amount
of recycled materials, by material type, collected and recycled and the
vendor or vendors providing recycling service. Recycling reports shall
be submitted to the Recycling Coordinator as per the following
schedule:
Report Period Due date
January 1 to December 31 February 1, for previous year
63.Editor's Note: See Art. I, Nonresidential Reporting and Documentation of Recycling, of
this chapter.
§ 155-16 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-16.1
153:403
§ 155-17. Recycling collection by unauthorized persons.
§ 155-18. Littering and dumping prohibited.64
§ 155-19. Unlawful acts.
D. All construction and demolition projects shall be required to complete
an ORM form and submit it along with a request for a permit. The
person who signs the form regarding the project shall be responsible
for filing solid waste and recycling documentation when the project is
completed or at the end of the calendar year, whichever is first.
E. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and to maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for the inspection by any code enforcement officer.
A. From the time of placement at the designated municipal loading/
storage area described herein for the collection by the Township of
Woolwich, in accordance with the terms hereof, items shall be and
become the property of the Township of Woolwich or its authorized
agent.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm, charity,
corporation, partnership or employee to collect, pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up any recyclable items placed for collection by the
Township or its authorized agent.
C. Any and each collection in violation hereof from one or more properties
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or dump solid waste or other materials
upon any street, sidewalk or other property.
B. No person, while an operator or a passenger in any vehicle, shall throw,
deposit or dump solid waste or other materials upon any street,
sidewalk or other property.
A. It shall be unlawful to combine designated, unsoiled recyclables with
other solid waste. Failure to source separate designated materials for
recycling is a violation of this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
contains visible signs of designated recyclable materials. It is also
unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for disposal those bags or
containers of solid waste and/or recyclables which visibly display a
warning notice, indicating that the load of solid waste contains
designated recyclable materials and therefore should not be removed
for disposal.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Littering.
§ 155-16.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-19
153:404
§ 155-20. Unauthorized use of receptacle.
§ 155-21. Unauthorized landfill.
The following shall constitute an unauthorized landfill:
§ 155-22. Scavenging of source-separated recyclable materials.
No person, firm, charity, corporation, partnership or employee shall collect,
pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable item placed for
collection by the Township or its authorized agent.
§ 155-22.1. New development of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional, or industrial properties (pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 13:1E-99.16c). [Added 12-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-18]
C. Once placed in the location identified by this article, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials. [Added
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
D. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of, grass clippings, leaves or
other material from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
E. No person shall burn trash or designated recyclables without a permit
issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or
its authorized agent.
F. No person shall place or deposit household or commercial solid waste
or recyclable material in sidewalk receptacles or in unauthorized
private or municipal containers.
G. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deposit trash or
recyclables at the municipal facility.
H. It shall also be unlawful to violate any other provision of this article.
A. Private receptacle. Any privately owned/leased receptacle used by any
person other than the owner/lessor without the express permission of
the owner/lessor shall constitute an unauthorized use.
B. Public receptacle. Any publicly owned/leased receptacle used by any
person other than the owner/lessor without the express permission of
the owner/lessor shall constitute an unauthorized use.
A. Any facility not licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. Any public or private property used for littering or dumping, with or
without the property owner's permission.
§ 155-19 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-22.1
153:405
§ 155-23. Enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of the Coordinator of Recycling and/or the
Police Department and/or the Director of Public Works and/or the Health
Department and their designated agents to enforce all provisions of this
article.
§ 155-24. (Reserved)65
§ 155-25. Violations and penalties.
The following fines for violation of this article shall apply:
A. Any application to the Joint Land Use Board of the Township of
Woolwich for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of
multifamily dwelling units of three or more units, single-family
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional, or
industrial development for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) Detailed analysis of the expected composition and amount of solid
waste and recyclables generated at the proposed development.
(2) Locations documented on the applicant's site plan that provides for
convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Joint Land Use Board and
Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Township of
Woolwich, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purpose of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in those
instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provisions shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage
and pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
A. (Reserved)66
B. Failure to separate recyclables from solid waste.
(1) Municipal collection.
(a) First offense: $50.
65.Editor's Note: Former § 155-24, Fees, was repealed 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 02-06.
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding illegal transfer of trash tags, was repealed
7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 02-06.
§ 155-22.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-25
153:406
[1] Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
[2] Said materials may be left for the owner to properly
separate.
(b) Second and subsequent offenses: $100.
[1] Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
[2] Said materials may be left for the owner to properly
separate.
(2) Nonmunicipal collection.
(a) First offense: $50.
[1] Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
[2] Said materials shall be left for the owner to properly
separate.
(b) Second and subsequent offenses: $100.
[1] Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
[2] Said materials shall be left for the owner to properly
separate.
C. Failure to recycle.
(1) Municipal collection.
(a) First offense: $50.
(b) Second and subsequent offenses: $100.
(2) Nonmunicipal collection.
(a) First offense: $250.
(b) Second and subsequent offenses: $500.
D. Placing containers curbside before their collection day and/or failure to
remove containers from curbside after their collection day. First
offense: $50. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such.
§ 155-25 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-25
153:407
E. Failure to file a construction, demolition and diversion form for a
construction or demolition project. [Amended 11-19-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-41]
(1) First offense: $50 to $500. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such.
(2) Second offense: $250 to $1,000. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
(3) Third offense: $500 to $2,000. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
(4) Fourth offense: $1,000 to $3,000. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
(5) Fifth offense and thereafter: $2,000 to $5,000. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
F. Failure to file a recycling report.
(1) First offense: $100. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $250. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
G. Failure to file documentation.
(1) First offense: $100. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $250. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
H. Failure to properly dispose of solid waste.
(1) First offense: $250, and perform the cleanup or pay for cleanup
costs. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable
as such.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $500, and perform the cleanup or
pay for cleanup costs. Each day such violation is committed or
§ 155-25 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-25
153:408
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such.
I. Removal of tagged solid waste containers.
(1) First offense: $50.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $250.
J. Burning solid waste or recyclable materials.
(1) First offense: $500.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $1,000.
K. Failure to contain solid waste.
(1) Municipal collection.
(a) First offense: $50. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
(b) Second and subsequent offenses: $100. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(2) Nonmunicipal collection.
(a) First offense: $50. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
(b) Second and subsequent offenses: $100. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
L. Placing household or commercial solid waste or recyclables in public
receptacles.
(1) First offense: $50. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $100. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
M. Accepting solid waste or recyclable materials for disposal in an
unlicensed disposal facility.
(1) First offense: $250. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such.
§ 155-25 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-25
153:409
§ 155-26. Reward for information on violators.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $500. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
N. Littering.
(1) First offense: $50.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $250.
O. Dumping.
(1) First offense: $250, and perform the cleanup or pay for cleanup
costs. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable
as such.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $500, and perform the cleanup or
pay for cleanup costs. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such.
P. Unauthorized use of a receptacle.
(1) First offense: $50, plus the costs of disposal of the contents of the
container.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $100, plus the costs of disposal of
the contents of the container.
Q. Scavenging.
(1) First offense: $100, plus confiscation of all collected recyclable
materials and/or up to five days of community service.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses: $250, plus confiscation of all
collected recyclable materials and/or up to 15 days of community
service.
R. Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or
equivalent). Monies in the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be
used for the expenses of the municipal recycling program. [Added
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
A. The first person or business who provides information leading to the
arrest and conviction of anyone dumping shall be eligible for a reward
of an amount not to exceed $50, exclusive of court fees.
B. The person or business who provides the information must complete a
form, to remain confidential, by the Township of Woolwich.
§ 155-25 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-26
153:410
C. The person or business who provides the information must be able to
appear in court to testify.
(1) The confidentiality of the person providing testimony will be
provided, with the courts permission, when requested by the
informant.
(2) Notwithstanding the above, nothing shall limit the defendant from
being able to question the witness.
D. The information award shall be awarded after the fine has been
collected.
§ 155-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-26
153:411

ARTICLE III
Construction and Demolition Debris Diversion Program
[Adopted 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-11]
§ 155-27. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the Construction and Demolition
Debris Diversion Program. This program is intended to increase the
diversion of construction and demolition debris from landfill disposal,
conserve the capacity and extend the useful life of landfills, and avoid
the potential financial and other consequences to the Township of failing
to timely meet New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
requirements.
§ 155-28. Definitions.
All defined terms in this article appear in italics and are found in sections
of this code, except for the terms "building permit" and "demolition/removal
permit," which refer to those terms respectively as used in the Code of
Woolwich Township and which, consistent with the Code, are not italicized
in this article. In addition, whenever the following words or phrases are
used in this article, they mean:
APPROVED RECYCLING FACILITY — A recycling, composting, materials
recovery or reuse facility which accepts construction and demolition debris
and which is an approved/licensed NJDEP Class A-D recycling center, or a
recognized facility by the Recycling Coordinator.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — The waste building
materials, packaging, and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling,
repair, alteration, and/or demolition operations on pavements, houses, all
residential and nonresidential developments, and other structures and may
include, but is not limited to, concrete, asphalt, wood, metals, bricks, block
masonry, wallboard, dirt, rocks, landscape waste, and other inert waste.
DEVELOPMENT — Has the same meaning as set forth in § 203-5 of this
Code.
DISPOSAL — The final depositing of solid waste other than construction and
demolition debris at a permitted landfill or facility.
DIVERSION or DIVERT — The reduction or elimination of solid waste from
landfill disposal.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Has the same meaning as set forth in section
66.0102 of this Code.
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The Recycling Coordinator of the Township
(and its successor).
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and
liquid wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, trash, refuse, paper,
§ 155-27 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-28
153:413
rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, construction and demolition debris,
abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial
appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which
is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid
wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. Solid waste does
not include hazardous waste, hazardous substances or medical wastes, as
those terms are defined in this Chapter 6 or in state or federal law.
WASTE MANAGEMENT FORM PART I — The form prepared by the
Recycling Coordinator on which an applicant for a building permit or
demolition/removal permit shall provide information including, but not
limited to, the types and amounts of construction and demolition debris
the applicant anticipates each building/demolition permit application will
generate and the expected construction and demolition debris diversion the
applicant expects to achieve for that permitted action.
WASTE MANAGEMENT FORM PART II — The form prepared by the
Recycling Coordinator on which the applicant for a building permit or
demolition/removal permit shall provide information including, but not
limited to, the documentary evidence in a form satisfactory to the Recycling
Coordinator demonstrating the construction and demolition debris
diversion the applicant achieved for the development.
§ 155-29. Submittal of waste management form and diversion
deposit.
§ 155-30. Construction and demolition debris measurement and
rates.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all applicants for a building
permit or a demolition/removal permit, including the Township of
Woolwich, shall submit a properly completed Waste Management Form
Part I with the building permit or demolition/removal permit
application, in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Code
of Woolwich Township.
B. No building permit or demolition/removal permit shall be issued unless
the applicant has submitted a properly completed Waste Management
Form Part I.
A. Construction and demolition debris shall be measured by weight or by
volume, whichever is most accurate and practicable. To the extent
practicable, all construction and demolition debris shall be weighed on
a scale.
(1) For construction and demolition debris which is weighed, the
applicant shall use a scale which is in compliance with all federal,
state, and local regulatory requirements for accuracy and
maintenance of such scale.
(2) For construction and demolition debris for which measurement by
weight is not practicable, the applicant shall measure by volume
§ 155-28 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-30
153:414
§ 155-31. Approved recycling facilities/centers.
Recycling centers/facilities utilized must be one of the following:
§ 155-32. Diversion program exemptions.
and convert the volumetric measurements to weight using the
standardized rates established in the Township Construction and
Demolition Debris Conversion Rate Tables.
(3) The Recycling Coordinator reserves the right, when appropriate, to
establish standard weights for various types of construction and
demolition debris items based upon accepted average weights for
such items. These standard weights shall be listed in the Township
Construction and Demolition Debris Conversion Rate Tables.
(4) All proof showing satisfactory diversion of construction and
demolition debris must be submitted on a yearly basis (calendar
year) or at the end of the project, whichever is sooner.
B. For building permits or demolition/removal permits issued on or after
the effective date of this article, the diversion rate shall be 65% by
weight of the total construction and demolition debris generated by the
development.
(1) If there are no operating approved recycling facilities or
recognized facilities available for the diversion of construction and
demolition debris, the applicant shall notify the Recycling
Coordinator for verification in writing via certified mail.
A. An approved Class A - D facility per the NJDEP.
B. A facility approved or recognized by the NJDEP or Recycling
Coordinator. The Recycling Coordinator will keep a list of such facilities
on file at the Township offices.
A. The following activities, alone or in combination with one another, are
exempt from this article, except if the activity or activities is/are
undertaken in conjunction with development which otherwise is subject
to this article:
(1) Roofing projects that do not include the tear-off of the existing roof.
(2) Installation, replacement, or repair of a retaining wall.
(3) Installation, replacement, or repair of a carport, patio cover,
balcony, trellis, or fireplace.
(4) Installation, replacement, or repair of a deck.
(5) Installation, replacement, or repair of a fence.
(6) Installation, replacement, or repair of a swimming pool or a spa.
§ 155-30 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-32
153:415
§ 155-33. Recycling area "compound."
For all major subdivisions or major site plans, the Planning/Zoning Board
will allow, for the purpose of meeting this article and for recycling purposes
only, an area designated for recycling containers.
(7) Installation, replacement, or repair of a prefabricated sign which
does not require modification to the structure to which the sign is
attached.
(8) Installation, replacement, or repair of storage racks.
(9) Permitted projects and/or construction which require only an
electrical permit, only a plumbing permit, or only a mechanical
permit.
(10) Any minor permitted application may be exempted at the discretion
of the Recycling Coordinator or Building Code Official.
B. The following activities are exempt from this article:
(1) Development which is expected to generate only hazardous waste
and/or hazardous substances.
A. This area or "compound" shall be used by the developer/contractor of
the project only, and shall be designed to allow secure access via
construction fence or other approved method in order to deter
nonconstruction persons from dumping into contractor's recycling
containers.
B. The "compound" must be clearly defined on the land development plans
submitted to the Township for approval, and must be approved by the
appropriate Board prior to installation.
C. All diversion material temporarily stored on the site prior to being
hauled off-site to an approved facility must be in containers or on a
nonporous (paved) surface to prevent soil and environmental
contamination.
D. The "compound" may utilize the following areas of the proposed
development, provided it is not in any environmentally sensitive or area
otherwise not allowed for construction purposes:
(1) Any proposed residential or commercial lot.
(2) Any area designated for proposed improvements, including
roadways, community facilities.
(3) Any area designated for open space (with exceptions noted below).
E. Areas that will not be allowed include:
(1) Wetlands or wetland buffer areas.
§ 155-32 WOOLWICH CODE § 155-33
153:416
§ 155-34. Fines; violations and penalties.
All applicants will be required to participate and comply with the article.
Fines will be imposed by the Township Police, Building Code Inspector or
designated Township official. Any applicant who does not comply with the
Construction and Demolition Debris Diversion Program or does not provide
the Township with diversion receipts will be fined in accordance with the
graduated scale noted below.
§ 155-35. Validity.
If any part or parts of this article is/are held to be invalid for any reason,
then such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this article.
§ 155-36. Inconsistency.
All ordinances or provisions of ordinances that are inconsistent herewith
are hereby repealed to the extent of their inconsistency.
§ 155-37. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon final adoption and publication in
accordance with the law.
(2) Wooded areas in the Tree Protection Zone that are not otherwise to
be disturbed.
(3) Stormwater management basins, trenches, swales, etc.
(4) Any area designated or noted as an endangered species habitat.
(5) Any area that might otherwise jeopardize the safety of the
construction site.
A. First offense: $50 to $500.
B. Second offense: $250 to $1,000.
C. Third offense: $500 to $2,000.
D. Fourth offense: $1,000 to $3,000.
E. Fifth and subsequent offenses: $2,000 to $5,000.
§ 155-33 SOIL REMOVAL § 155-37
153:417
Chapter 156
STEEP SLOPES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16.
Joint Land Use Board — See Ch. 23.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Grading plans — See Ch. 109.
Soil removal — See Ch. 153.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Topsoil — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 156-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the intensity of use in areas
of steeply sloping terrain in order to limit soil loss, erosion, excessive
stormwater runoff, and the degradation of surface water and to maintain
the natural topography and drainage patterns of land.
§ 156-2. Background.
Disturbance of steep slopes results in accelerated erosion processes from
stormwater runoff and the subsequent sedimentation of water bodies with
the associated degradation of water quality and loss of aquatic life support.
Related effects include soil loss, changes in natural topography and
drainage patterns, increased flooding potential, further fragmentation of
forest and habitat areas, and compromised aesthetic values. It has become
widely recognized that disturbance of steep slopes should be restricted or
prevented based on the impact that disturbance of steep slopes can have on
water quality and quantity and the environmental integrity of landscapes.
§ 156-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to new development or land disturbance on
a steep slope within the Township of Woolwich.
§ 156-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and includes
§ 155-37 WOOLWICH CODE § 156-4
153:418
porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated
structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or improvements on
areas which previously contained structures or other improvements.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 20% as measured over
any minimum run of 10 feet. Steep slopes are determined based on contour
intervals of two feet or less.
§ 156-5. Designation of areas.
The percent of slope (rise in feet per horizontal distance) shall be
established by measurement of distance perpendicular to the contour of the
slope. The percent of slope shall be calculated for each two-foot contour
interval. For example, any location on the site where there is a one-foot rise
over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a ten-percent slope; a 1.5-foot rise
over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a fifteen-percent slope; a two-foot
rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a twenty-percent slope.
§ 156-6. Steep slope limits.
For steep slopes, any disturbance shall be prohibited except as provided
below:
§ 156-7. Conflicts with other provisions; construal of provisions;
severability.
A. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces; and
B. New disturbance necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare,
such as necessary linear development with no feasible alternative; to
provide an environmental benefit, such as remediation of a
contaminated site; to prevent extraordinary hardship on the property
owner peculiar to the property; or to prevent extraordinary hardship,
provided that the hardship was not created by the property owner, that
would not permit a minimum economically viable use of the property
based upon reasonable investment. For example, redevelopment,
within the footprint of existing impervious cover, should be allowed to
support efforts to revitalize development that has fallen into disrepair.
The applicant shall demonstrate through site plans depicting proposed
development and topography that new disturbance is not located in
areas with a twenty-percent or greater slope.
A. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and
the provisions of this chapter apply.
B. Severability.
§ 156-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 156-7
153:419
§ 156-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of the
Township of Woolwich of any person or entity believed to be in violation
hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of this chapter
is discovered, a civil action in the Special Part of the Superior Court, or in
the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties
may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing and
serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to preclude the right of the Township of Woolwich, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court. The
violation of any section or subsection of this chapter shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other
section or subsection or of any order issued pursuant to this chapter. Each
day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 157
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 159.
Subdivision — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
(1) Interpretation. This chapter shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(2) Notwithstanding that any provision of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
remaining provisions of the chapter shall continue to be of full force
and effect.
(3) The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 156-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 156-8
157:420
ARTICLE I
Obstruction of Easements
[Adopted 7-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-9]
§ 157-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to intentionally or
unintentionally act in such a manner so as to impede or obstruct the
storm sewers, culverts, natural and man-made drainage channels, basins,
easement areas and/or other related installations located on lands owned
by the Township or a property in which the Township has an easement or a
dedicated right-of-way.
§ 157-2. Restoration of property; costs.
In the event that property owner(s) have been notified that they are in
violation of this article and have failed to remediate as requested by the
Township, then the Township has the right to restore the property to its
original condition and to recoup such costs of remediation from the
property owner(s) in violation.
§ 157-3. Violations and penalties.
Anyone violating this article or any part of this article shall be subject, upon
conviction, to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a period of community service
not to exceed 90 days in the discretion of the court. Each continuing day
of violation after written notice is given by the Township shall constitute
a separate violation under this section of this article. Additionally, to the
extent permitted by law, violations shall run with the land, making any
potential purchasers liable for the above-stated penalties, provided notice is
given to the purchaser in advance of closure of title.
§ 157-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-3
157:421

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Control
[Adopted 7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-18; amended in its entirety
12-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-29]
§ 157-4. Scope and purpose.
A. Purpose.
(1) It is hereby determined that:
(a) Land development projects and associated disturbance of
vegetation and soil and changes in land cover, including
increases in impervious cover, alter the hydrologic response of
local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and
volumes. If inadequately or improperly managed, this
stormwater runoff can deplete groundwater resources and
increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment
transport and deposition.
(b) This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants.
(c) Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpointsource
pollutants have occurred in the past as a result of land
development, and contribute to the degradation of the water
resources of Woolwich and downstream municipalities.
(d) Woolwich Township's natural resources are to be protected in
accordance with New Jersey's Stormwater Management Rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq., and New Jersey's surface water
quality antidegradation policies contained in the New Jersey
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1 et seq.
Permitted uses shall maintain the ecological character and
quality of Woolwich Township, including good water quality
and natural rates and volumes of flow.
(e) Increased stormwater rates and volumes and the sediments
and pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future
development projects within Woolwich Township have the
potential to adversely affect Woolwich Township's streams and
water resources and the streams and water resources of
downstream municipalities.
(f) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint-source pollution
can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of
stormwater runoff from development sites.
(g) It is in the public interest to regulate the discharge of
stormwater runoff from "major development" projects, as
defined in § 157-10 of this article, conducted within Woolwich
Township, as provided in this article, in order to control and
§ 157-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-4
157:423
minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, to
maintain groundwater recharge, and to control and minimize
soil erosion, stream channel erosion and nonpoint-source
pollution associated with stormwater runoff.
(2) Therefore, it is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development consistent with the statewide stormwater
requirements at N.J.A.C. 7:8 and the provisions of the adopted
Master Plan and land use ordinances of Woolwich Township.
B. Goals and techniques.
(1) Through this article, Woolwich Township has established the
following goals for stormwater control:
(a) To reduce flood damage, including damage to life and property;
(b) To minimize any increase in stormwater runoff from new
development;
(c) To reduce soil erosion from any development or construction
project;
(d) To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and
bridges, and other instream structures;
(e) To maintain groundwater recharge;
(f) To minimize any increase in nonpoint pollution;
(g) To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage;
(h) To restore, protect, maintain and enhance the quality of the
streams and water resources and the ecological character and
quality of Woolwich Township;
(i) To minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff from new and
existing development in order to restore, protect, enhance and
maintain the chemical, physical and biological integrity of the
surface and ground waters of Woolwich Township, to protect
public health and to enhance the domestic, municipal,
recreational, industrial and other uses of water; and
(j) To protect public safety through the proper design and
operation of stormwater management basins.
(2) In order to achieve the goals for stormwater control set forth in this
article, Woolwich Township has identified the following
management techniques:
(a) Implementation of multiple stormwater management best
management practices (BMPs) may be necessary to achieve
§ 157-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-4
157:424
the performance standards for stormwater runoff quantity and
rate, groundwater recharge, erosion control, and stormwater
runoff quality established through this article.
(b) Compliance with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate,
groundwater recharge, erosion control, and stormwater runoff
quality standards established through N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq.,
and this article, shall be accomplished to the maximum extent
practicable through the use of nonstructural BMPs, before
relying on structural BMPs. Nonstructural BMPs are also
known as low-impact development (LID) techniques.
(c) Nonstructural BMPs shall include both environmentally
sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed
to stormwater.
(d) Source control plans shall be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
(e) Structural BMPs, where necessary, shall be integrated with
nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper
maintenance plans.
(f) When using structural BMPs, multiple stormwater
management measures, smaller in size and distributed
spatially throughout the land development site, shall be used
wherever possible to achieve the performance standards for
water quality, quantity and groundwater recharge established
through this article before relying on a single, larger
stormwater management measure to achieve these
performance standards.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by Woolwich Township.
D. Procedures. In addition to other development review procedures set
forth in the Code of Woolwich Township, major developments located
within Woolwich Township shall comply with the stormwater
management requirements and specifications set forth in this article.
§ 157-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-4
157:425
§ 157-5. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
New agricultural development that meets the definition of major
development in § 157-10 of this article shall be submitted to the
appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5.4(b) 7:8.
E. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
(1) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this article are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable ordinance, code, rule, regulation, statute, act or
other provision of law.
(2) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law except that,
where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or
other provision of law, the more restrictive or stringent provisions
or higher standards shall control.
(3) In the event that a regional stormwater management plan(s) is
prepared and formally adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq.
for any drainage area(s) or watershed(s) of which Woolwich
Township is a part, the stormwater provisions of such a plan(s)
shall be adopted by Woolwich Township within one year of the
adoption of a regional stormwater management plan (RSWMP) as
an amendment to an areawide water quality management plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a site
development that is subject to this article, the applicant shall
submit all of the required components of the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan at § 157-5C below as part of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval. Any
and all existing stormwater-related checklist items are hereby
superseded by this article. These required components are in
addition to any other nonstormwater-related information required
under any provisions of Woolwich Township's Land Use
Ordinance.67
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning.
§ 157-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-5
157:426
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the site development project
meets the standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit three copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with § 157-5C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development stormwater plan shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or
official from whom municipal approval is sought. That municipal board
or official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or
Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets
the standards set forth in this article.
C. Checklist requirements. Any application for approval of a major
development shall include at least the following information.
(1) Topographic Base Map. The applicant shall submit a topographic
base map of the site which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond
the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The
map shall indicate the following: existing surface water drainage,
shorelines, steep slopes, soils, highly erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of any Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing surface and subsurface human-made
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and
significant natural and man-made features not otherwise shown.
Woolwich Township may require upstream tributary drainage
system information as necessary.
(2) Environmental site analysis. The applicant shall submit a written
description along with the drawings of the natural and humanmade
features of the site and its environs. This description should
include:
(a) A discussion of environmentally critical areas, soil conditions,
slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site.
Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities for or constraints on development; and
(b) Detailed soil and other environmental conditions on the portion
of the site proposed for installation of any stormwater BMPs,
including at a minimum: soils report based on on-site soil tests;
locations and spot elevations in plan view of test pits and
permeability tests; permeability test data and calculations; and
any other required soil data (e.g., mounding analyses results)
correlated with location and elevation of each test site; cross
§ 157-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-5
157:427
section of proposed stormwater BMP with side-by-side
depiction of soil profile drawn to scale and seasonal high water
table elevation identified; and any other information necessary
to demonstrate the suitability of the specific proposed
structural and nonstructural stormwater management
measures relative to the environmental conditions on the
portion(s) of the site proposed for implementation of those
measures.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). The applicant shall submit a
map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map
indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads,
parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater
management and sediment control, and other permanent
structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where
alterations will occur in the natural terrain and cover, including
lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater
elevations. A written description of the site plan and justification
for proposed changes in natural conditions shall also be provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan.
(a) The applicant shall submit a detailed land use planning and
source control plan which provides a description of how the
site will be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge and stormwater runoff quantity and quality standards
at § 157-7 through use of nonstructural or low impact
development techniques and source controls to the maximum
extent practicable before relying on structural BMPs. The land
use planning and source control plan shall include a detailed
narrative and associated illustrative maps and/or plans that
specifically address how each of the following nine
nonstructural strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the
NJDEP Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5) and set
forth below Subsection C(4)(a)[1] through [9] will be
implemented to the maximum extent practicable to meet the
standards at § 157-7 of this article on the site. If one or more of
the nine nonstructural strategies will not be implemented on
the site, the applicant shall provide a detailed rationale
establishing a basis for the contention that use of the strategy
is not practicable on the site.
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
§ 157-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-5
157:428
[4] Minimize the decrease in the predevelopment time of
concentration;
[5] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction and all other soil disturbance;
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that provides for the
retention and planting of native plants and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas; and
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent
or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. These source controls shall include, but
are not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
[d] Applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules, when establishing vegetation
after land disturbance.
(b) For sites where stormwater will be generated from high
pollutant loading areas or where stormwater will be exposed to
source material, as defined in § 157-10 of this article, the
applicant shall also demonstrate in the land use planning and
source control plan that the requirements of § 157-7 have been
met.
(c) The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the performance
standards in § 157-7 of this article is not required for
development sites creating less than one acre of disturbance.
However, each application for major development and any
other application where Woolwich Township otherwise
requires a landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or
revegetation plan. In addition, the applicant shall demonstrate
that, at a minimum, existing trees and vegetation on the
development site will be preserved and protected according to
§ 157-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-5
157:429
the minimum standards established by provisions of the
Woolwich Township Land Use Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or
by conditions of zoning or variance approval.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The applicant shall submit
a map, at the same scale as the topographic base map, depicting
the following information:
(a) The total area to be disturbed, paved and/or built upon,
proposed surface contours, land area to be occupied by the
stormwater management facilities and the type of vegetation
thereon, and details of the proposed plan to manage and
dispose of stormwater; and
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention (if applicable) and emergency spillway provisions
with maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations (groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff rate,
volume and quality). The applicant shall submit comprehensive
hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for the design
storms specified in § 157-6. The standards for groundwater
recharge and stormwater runoff rate, volume and quality required
by § 157-7 shall be met using the methods, calculations and
assumptions provided in § 157-6.
(7) Inspection, maintenance and repair plan. The applicant shall
submit a detailed plan describing how the proposed stormwater
management measure(s) shall meet the maintenance and repair
requirements of § 157-9 of this article. Said plan shall include, at a
minimum, the following elements:
(a) The frequency with which inspections will be made;
(b) The specific maintenance tasks and requirements for each
proposed structural and nonstructural BMP;
(c) The name, address and telephone number for the entity
responsible for implementation of the maintenance plan;
(d) The reporting requirements; and
(e) Copies of the inspection and maintenance reporting sheets.
(8) Exception from submission requirements. An exception may be
granted from submission of any of these required components
(except Subsection C(7), above, Inspection, maintenance and
repair plan) if its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
§ 157-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-6
157:430
§ 157-6. Methodologies for the calculation of stormwater runoff
rate and volume, stormwater runoff quality and groundwater
recharge.
A. Method of calculating stormwater runoff rate and volume.
(1) In complying with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate
standards in § 157-7B, the design engineer shall calculate the
stormwater runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff Equation, Runoff
Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described
in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology
and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
as amended and supplemented, or the Rational Method for peak
flow and the Modified Rational Method for hydrograph
computations.
(2) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall separately calculate and then combine the
runoff volumes from pervious and directly connected impervious
surfaces within each drainage area within the parcel.
(3) Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the two-step method
described in the current New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual or the NRCS methodology.
(4) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall use appropriate twenty-four-hour rainfall
depths as developed for the project site by the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(5) When calculating stormwater runoff for predeveloped site
conditions, the design engineer shall use the following criteria:
(a) When selecting or calculating runoff curve numbers (CNs) for
predeveloped project site conditions, the project site's land
cover shall be assumed to be woods in good condition.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate runoff
coefficients if:
[1] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof
without interruption for at least five years immediately
prior to the time of application; and
[2] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
(b) If more than one land cover has existed on the site during the
five years immediately prior to the time of application, the land
§ 157-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-6
157:431
cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations.
(c) All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in good
hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to
have conservation treatment.
(d) In calculating predevelopment site stormwater runoff, the
design engineer shall include the effects of all land features
and structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions,
hedgerows and culverts, which affect predeveloped site
stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes.
(e) Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.
B. Method of calculating stormwater runoff quality.
(1) In complying with the stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 157-7F(1), the design engineer shall calculate the stormwater
runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff Equation, Runoff Curve
Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, as
amended and supplemented, or the Rational Method for peak flow
and the Modified Rational Method for hydrograph computations, so
long as the Delmarva hydrograph is employed.
(2) The design engineer shall also use the NJDEP water quality design
storm, which is 1.25 inches of rainfall falling in a nonlinear pattern
in two hours. Details of the water quality design storm are shown in
Table 1.
(3) Calculation of runoff volumes, peak rates, and hydrographs for the
water quality design storm may take into account the
implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures.
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
§ 157-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-6
157:432
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(a).
(4) Total suspended solids (TSS) reduction calculations.
(a) If more than one stormwater BMP in series is necessary to
achieve the required eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site,
the applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate
TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
(b) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eightypercent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area,
unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
(5) TSS removal rates for stormwater BMPs.
(a) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual. The BMP
Manual may be obtained from the address identified in
§ 157-15A or found on the NJDEP's Web site at
§ 157-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-6
157:433
www.njstormwater.org. TSS reduction shall be calculated
based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2.
(b) Alternative stormwater management measures, removal rates
and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the
design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the
capability of these alternative rates and methods to Woolwich
Township. Any alternative stormwater management measure,
removal rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
subject to approval by Woolwich Township and a copy shall be
provided to the following:
[1] The Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418,
Trenton, NJ, 08625-0418.
Table 2
Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management
Practice
TSS Percent
Removal Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal Rate
Total Nitrogen
Percent
Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90 60 30
Constructed
stormwater wetland
90 50 30
Extended detention
basin
40 to 60 (final rate
based upon
detention time;
see New Jersey
BMP Manual,
Chapter 9)
20 20
Infiltration basin 80 60 50
Manufactured
treatment device
Pollutant removal
rates as certified
by NJDEP; see
§ 157-6
Pollutant
removal rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 157-6
Pollutant
removal rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 157-6
Pervious paving
systems
80 (porous paving) 60 50
80 (permeable
pavers with
storage bed)
0 - volume
reduction only
(permeable pavers
without storage
bed)
0 - volume
reduction only
(permeable
pavers without
storage bed)
0 - volume
reduction only
(permeable
pavers without
storage bed)
§ 157-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-6
157:434
Table 2
Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management
Practice
TSS Percent
Removal Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal Rate
Total Nitrogen
Percent
Removal Rate
Sand filter 80 50 35
Vegetative filter strip
(For filter strips with
multiple vegetated
covers, the final TSS
removal rate should
be based upon a
weighted average of
the adopted rates
shown in Table 2,
based upon the
relative flow lengths
through each cover
type.)
60 (turf grass) 30 30
70 (native grasses,
meadow and
planted woods)
80 (indigenous
woods)
Wet pond retention
basin
50 to 90 (final rate
based upon pool
volume and
detention time;
see NJ BMP
Manual)
50 30
[Source: 7:8-5.5(c) and New Jersey BMP Manual Chapter 4.]
(6) Nutrient removal rates for stormwater BMPs. For purposes of
postdevelopment nutrient load reduction calculations, Table 2
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual. If alternative
stormwater BMPs are proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate
that the selected BMPs will achieve the nutrient removal standard
required in § 157-7F.
C. Methods of calculating groundwater recharge.
(1) If complying with the groundwater recharge standards contained
in § 157-7C(1)(a), design engineer may calculate groundwater
recharge in accordance with the New Jersey Groundwater
Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS) computer program incorporated
§ 157-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-6
157:435
herein by reference, as amended and supplemented. Information
regarding the methodology is available in § 157-14A or from the
New Jersey BMP Manual.
(2) Alternative groundwater recharge calculation methods to meet
these requirements may be used upon approval by the Municipal
Engineer.
(3) If complying with the groundwater recharge standards contained
in § 157-7C(1)(b), the design engineer shall:
(a) Calculate stormwater runoff volumes in accordance with the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Runoff
Curve Numbers, as described in the NRCS National
Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and Technical
Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, as
amended and supplemented; and
(b) Use appropriate two-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall depths as
developed for the project site by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(4) When calculating groundwater recharge or stormwater runoff for
predeveloped site conditions, the design engineer shall use the
following criteria:
(a) When selecting land covers or calculating runoff curve
numbers (CNs) for predeveloped project site conditions, the
project site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate runoff
coefficients if:
[1] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof
without interruption for at least five years immediately
prior to the time of application; and
[2] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
(b) If more than one land cover, other than woods, has existed on
the site during the five years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
(including woods) shall be used for the computations.
(c) All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in good
hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to
have conservation treatment.
§ 157-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-7
157:436
§ 157-7. Stormwater management performance standards for major
development.
A. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the performance standards in
§ 157-7 for major development shall be met by incorporating the
nine nonstructural strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the NJ
Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5), and set forth in
§ 157-5C(4)(a), into the design. The applicant shall identify within
the land use planning and source control plan required by
§ 157-5C(4) of this article how each of the nine nonstructural
measures will be incorporated into the design of the project to the
maximum extent practicable.
(2) If the applicant contends that it is not practical for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons to incorporate any of the nine
nonstructural strategies into the design of a particular project, the
applicant shall provide a detailed rationale establishing a basis for
the contention that use of the strategy is not practical on the site.
This rationale shall be submitted in accordance with the checklist
requirements established by § 157-5 to Woolwich Township. A
determination by Woolwich Township that this rationale is
inadequate or without merit shall result in a denial of the
application unless one of the following conditions is met:
(a) The land use planning and source control plan is amended to
include a description of how all nine nonstructural measures
will be implemented on the development site, and the amended
plan is approved by Woolwich Township;
(b) The land use planning and source control plan is amended to
provide an alternative nonstructural strategy or measure that
is not included in the list of nine nonstructural measures but
still meets the performance standards in § 157-7, and the
amended plan is approved by Woolwich Township; or
(c) The land use planning and source control plan is amended to
provide an adequate rationale for the contention that use of the
particular strategy is not practical on the site, and the
amended plan is approved by Woolwich Township.
(3) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each applicant
shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing trees and vegetation
on the development site will be preserved, protected and
maintained according to the minimum standards established by
provisions of the Woolwich Township Land Use Ordinance, Zoning
Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance approval. Existing
trees and vegetation shall be protected during construction
activities in accordance with the standard for tree protection
during construction provided in the New Jersey State Soil
Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
§ 157-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-7
157:437
Control in New Jersey, which is incorporated herein by reference,
as amended and supplemented.
(4) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each
application for major development, and any other application
where Woolwich Township otherwise requires a landscaping plan,
shall contain a landscaping or revegetation plan.
(5) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 157-7 shall be
dedicated to a government entity; shall be subjected to a
conservation easement filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office; or shall be subjected to an equivalent form of restriction
approved by Woolwich Township that ensures that that measure, or
equivalent stormwater management measure, is maintained in
perpetuity, as detailed in § 157-9 of this article.
(6) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, which may be obtained
from the address identified in § 157-15A or found on the NJDEP's
Web site at www.njstormwater.org.
(7) Exception for major development sites creating less than one acre
of disturbance. The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the
performance standards in § 157-7 of this article is not required for
major development creating less than one acre of disturbance.
However, the following requirements shall be met:
(a) Each application for major development and any other
application where Woolwich Township otherwise requires a
landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or revegetation
plan;
(b) Each applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing
trees and vegetation on the development site will be preserved
and protected according to the minimum standards established
by provisions of the Woolwich Township Land Use Ordinance,
Zoning Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance
approval; and
(c) Existing trees and vegetation shall be protected during
construction activities in accordance with the standard for tree
protection during construction provided in the New Jersey
State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is incorporated
herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
B. Stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards.
(1) The design engineer, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations
contained in § 157-6, shall either:
§ 157-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-7
157:438
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
the postdeveloped stormwater runoff hydrographs from the
project site for the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storms do
not exceed, at any point in time, the site's predeveloped runoff
hydrographs for the same storms.
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
under postdeveloped site conditions:
[1] There is no increase in predeveloped stormwater runoff
rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storms; and
[2] Any increased stormwater runoff volume or change in
stormwater runoff timing for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storms will not increase flood damage at or
downstream of the project site. When performing this
analysis for predeveloped site conditions, all off-site
development levels shall reflect existing conditions. When
performing this analysis for postdeveloped site conditions,
all off-site development levels shall reflect full
development in accordance with current zoning and land
use ordinances.
(c) Demonstrate that the peak postdeveloped stormwater runoff
rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storms are 50%, 75% and 80%, respectively, of the site's
peak predeveloped stormwater runoff rates for the same
storms. Peak outflow rates from on-site stormwater measures
for these storms shall be adjusted where necessary to account
for the discharge of increased stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes from project site areas not controlled by the on-site
measures. These percentages do not have to be applied to
those portions of the project site that are not proposed for
development at the time of application, provided that such
areas are:
[1] Protected from future development by imposition of a
conservation easement, deed restriction, or other
acceptable legal measures; or
[2] Would be subject to review under these standards if they
are proposed for any degree of development in the future.
(2) In tidal flood hazard areas, a stormwater runoff quantity analysis in
accordance with Subsections B(1)(a), B(1)(b) and B(1)(c) above
shall only be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff
could increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
(3) The standards for stormwater runoff quantity and rate required by
this section shall be met using the methods, calculations and
assumptions provided in § 157-6.
§ 157-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-7
157:439
C. Groundwater recharge standards.
(1) For all major developments, with the exception of those described
in § 157-7C(4), below, the design engineer, using the assumptions
and factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations contained in Section III, shall either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
the postdeveloped project site maintains 100% of the site's
predeveloped average annual groundwater recharge volume;
or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
any increase in the project site's stormwater runoff volume for
the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm from predeveloped to
postdeveloped conditions is infiltrated onsite.
(2) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all site
groundwater recharge measures so as to avoid adverse hydraulic
impacts. Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to:
raising the groundwater table so as to cause surface ponding;
flooding of basements and other subsurface structures and areas;
preventing a stormwater infiltration basin from completely
draining via infiltration within 72 hours of a design storm event;
and interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems and other surface and subsurface facilities in the
vicinity of the groundwater recharge measure.
(3) The standards for groundwater recharge required by this section
shall be met using the methods, calculations and assumptions
provided in § 157-6.
(4) Exceptions.
(a) The preceding groundwater recharge standards shall not apply
to sites that create less than one acre of disturbance.
(b) The preceding groundwater recharge standards shall not apply
to projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to projects
subject to Subsection C(4)(c) below.
(c) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[1] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or
stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to
be present in grater than "reportable quantities" as
defined by the United States Environmental Protection
§ 157-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-7
157:440
Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge
would be inconsistent with department-approved remedial
action work plan or landfill closure plan and areas with
high risks for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations
and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[2] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material. "Source
material" means any material(s) or machinery, located at
an industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to
process, manufacturing or other industrial activities,
which could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source materials
include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; by-products;
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents,
and detergents that are related to process, manufacturing,
or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
D. Erosion control standards. The minimum design and performance
standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and its
implementing regulations, N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.1 through 1.4.
E. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
total suspended solids (TSS) load in the stormwater runoff from the
postdeveloped site by 80% expressed as an annual average.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce the nutrient load in the stormwater runoff from the
postdeveloped site by the maximum extent practicable. In
achieving this reduction, the design of the development site shall
include nonstructural and structural stormwater management
measures that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the
groundwater recharge, runoff quantity and rate, and TSS removal
standards in this section.
(3) The standards for stormwater runoff quality required by this
section shall be met using the methods, calculations, assumptions
and pollutant removal rates provided in § 157-6.
(4) Exceptions.
(a) The preceding stormwater runoff quality standards shall not
apply to the following major development sites:
[1] Major development sites where less than 0.25 acre of
additional impervious surface is proposed; or
§ 157-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-7
157:441
[2] Major residential development sites that create less than
one acre of disturbance.
(b) The TSS reduction requirement in § 157-7F(2) shall not apply
to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a
numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the NJPDES
rules (N.J.A.C. 7:14A) or in a discharge specifically exempt
under a NJPDES permit from this requirement.
(c) The stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards in § 157-7B
shall still be met for all major development sites.
F. Threatened and endangered species and associated habitat standards.
Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of the
development on habitat for threatened and endangered species, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(c).
G. Exemptions, exceptions and mitigation requirements.
(1) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements established by this article:
(a) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
(2) Exceptions from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements established by this article may be granted, at the
discretion of the municipality, for the enlargement of an existing
public roadway or railroad or the construction or enlargement of a
public pedestrian access, provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis
that, through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements established by this
article to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements established by this article, existing structures
§ 157-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-7
157:442
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have rights
to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection G(2)(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to meet the
requirements established by this article.
(3) Exceptions from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements established by this article may be granted, at the
discretion of Woolwich Township, provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
(a) The exception is consistent with that allowed by Woolwich
Township;
(b) Woolwich Township has an adopted and effective municipal
stormwater management plan in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:8-4.4, which includes a mitigation plan in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.2(c)11. The mitigation plan shall identify what
measures are necessary to offset the deficit created by
granting the exception, and the municipality shall submit a
written report to the county review agency and the NJDEP
describing the exception and the required mitigation.
Guidance for developing municipal stormwater management
plans, including mitigation plans, is available from the NJDEP,
Division of Watershed Management and the New Jersey BMP
Manual.
(c) The applicant demonstrates that mitigation, in addition to the
requirements of the mitigation plan discussed in Subsection
G(3)(b) above, will be provided consistent with one of the
following options:
[1] Mitigation may be provided off site, but within Woolwich
Township and within the same drainage area as the
development site, and shall meet or exceed the equivalent
recharge, quality or quantity performance standard which
is lacking on the development site due to the exception; or
[2] In lieu of the required mitigation, a monetary in-lieu
contribution may be provided by the applicant to Woolwich
Township in accordance with the following:
[a] The amount of the in-lieu contribution shall be
determined by Woolwich Township, but the maximum
in-lieu contribution required shall be equivalent to the
cost of implementing and maintaining the stormwater
§ 157-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-7
157:443
§ 157-8. Design, construction, and safety standards for structural
stormwater management measures.
management measure(s) for which the exception is
granted;
[b] The in-lieu contribution shall be used to fund an offsite
stormwater control mitigation project(s) located
within Woolwich Township, within the same drainage
area as the development site, and shall meet or exceed
the equivalent recharge, quality or quantity
performance standard which is lacking on the
development site. Such mitigation project shall be
identified by Woolwich Township in Woolwich
Township's adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. The stormwater control project to
which the monetary contribution will be applied shall
be identified by Woolwich Township at the time the
exception is granted. The applicant shall amend the
project description and site plan required in
§ 157-5C(3) to incorporate a description of both the
standards for which an on-site exception is being
granted and of the selected off-site mitigation project.
[c] Woolwich Township shall expend the in-lieu
contribution to implement the selected off-site
mitigation project within five years from the date that
payment is received. Should Woolwich Township fail
to expend the in-lieu contribution within the required
time frame, the mitigation option provided in
§ 157-7H(1)(c)[3] of this article shall be void, and
Woolwich Township shall be prohibited from collecting
in-lieu contributions.
A. General design and construction standards.
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
meet the standards established in this section. These standards
have been developed to protect public safety, conserve natural
features, create an aesthetically pleasing site and promote proper
on-site stormwater management. (Though not required by N.J.A.C.
7:8, pursuant to their authority, municipalities may have the option
to require existing basins that pose a public health or safety hazard
to be retrofitted to comply with the standards in this subsection.)
(2) The following structural stormwater management measures may
be utilized as part of a stormwater management system at a major
land development in Woolwich Township, provided that the
applicant demonstrates that they are designed, constructed and
maintained so as to meet the standards and requirements
established by this article. If alternative stormwater management
§ 157-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-8
157:444
measures are proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that the
selected measures will achieve the standards established by this
article.
(a) Bioretention systems;
(b) Constructed stormwater wetlands;
(c) Extended detention basins;
(d) Infiltration basins;
(e) Vegetated filter strips;
(f) Infiltration basins and trenches;
(g) Wet ponds with suitable liners;
(h) Pervious paving systems; and
(i) Manufactured treatment devices, provided their pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the NJDEP.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including
environmentally critical areas, wetlands, flood-prone areas, slopes,
depth to seasonal high water table, soil type, permeability and
texture, and drainage area and drainage patterns.
(4) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed
and constructed to be strong, durable, and corrosion-resistant
(measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the
Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4,
and 7.8 shall be deemed to meet this requirement); to minimize and
facilitate maintenance and repairs; and to ensure proper
functioning.
(5) For all stormwater management measures at a development site,
each applicant shall submit a detailed inspection, maintenance and
repair plan consistent with the requirements of § 157-8 of this
article.
(6) To the maximum extent practicable, the design engineer shall
design structural stormwater management measures on the
development site in a manner that:
(a) Limits site disturbance, maximizes stormwater management
efficiencies, and maintains or improves aesthetic conditions;
(b) Utilizes multiple stormwater management measures, smaller
in size and distributed spatially throughout the land
development site, instead of a single larger structural
stormwater management measures;
§ 157-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-8
157:445
(c) Incorporates pretreatment measures. Pretreatment can extend
the functional life and increase the pollutant removal capability
of a structural stormwater management measure.
Pretreatment measures may be designed in accordance with
the New Jersey BMP Manual or other sources approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
(7) Stormwater management basins shall be designed in a manner that
complements and mimics the existing natural landscape, including
but not limited to the following design strategies:
(a) Use of natural, nonwetland wooded depressions for
stormwater runoff storage; and
(b) Establishment of attractive landscaping in and around the
basin that mimics the existing vegetation and incorporates
native plants.
(8) Stormwater management basins shall be designed with gently
sloping sides. The maximum allowable basin side slope shall be
three horizontal to one vertical (3:1).
(9) Guidance on the design and construction of structural stormwater
management measures may be found in the New Jersey BMP
Manual. Other guidance sources may also be used upon approval
by the Municipal Engineer.
(10) After all construction activities and required field testing have been
completed on the development site, as-built plans depicting design
and as-built elevations of all stormwater management measures
shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor and submitted to the
Municipal Engineer. Based upon the Municipal Engineer's review
of the as-built plans, all corrections or remedial actions deemed by
the Municipal Engineer to be necessary due to the failure to comply
with the standards established by this article and/or any reasons of
public health or safety, shall be completed by the applicant. In lieu
of review by the Municipal Engineer, Woolwich Township reserves
the right to engage a professional engineer to review the as-built
plans. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with such review.
B. Design and construction standards for stormwater infiltration BMPs.
(1) Stormwater infiltration BMPs, such as bioretention systems with
infiltration, dry wells, infiltration basins, pervious paving systems
with storage beds, and sand filters with infiltration, shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to completely drain the total
runoff volume generated by the basin's maximum design storm
within 72 hours after a storm event. Runoff storage for greater
times can render the BMP ineffective and may result in anaerobic
conditions, odor and both water quality and mosquito breeding
problems.
§ 157-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-8
157:446
(2) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be designed, constructed and
maintained to provide a minimum separation of at least two feet
between the elevation of the lowest point of the bottom of the
infiltration BMP and the seasonal high water table.
(3) The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within a BMP
that relies on infiltration shall be 0.5 inch per hour. A factor of
safety of two shall be applied to the soil's field-tested permeability
rate to determine the soil's design permeability rate. For example,
if the field-tested permeability rate of the soil is four inches per
hour, its design permeability rate would be two inches per hour.
The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within a
stormwater infiltration basin shall also be sufficient to achieve the
minimum seventy-two-hour drain time described in Subsection B(1)
above. The maximum design permeability shall be 10 inches per
hour.
(4) A soil's field-tested permeability rate shall be determined in
accordance with the following:
(a) The predevelopment field test permeability rate shall be
determined according to the methodologies provided in
§ 157-14C(3) of this article;
(b) The results of the required field permeability tests shall
demonstrate a minimum tested infiltration rate of one inch per
hour;
(c) After all construction activities have been completed on the
site and the finished grade has been established in the
infiltration BMP, postdevelopment field permeability tests shall
also be conducted according to the methodologies provided in
§ 157-14C(3) of this article;
(d) If the results of the postdevelopment field permeability tests
fail to achieve the minimum required design permeability rates
in Subsection B(4) above utilizing a factor of safety of two, the
stormwater infiltration BMP shall be renovated and re-tested
until such minimum required design permeability rates are
achieved; and
(e) The results of all field permeability tests shall be certified by a
professional engineer and transmitted to the Municipal
Engineer.
(5) To help ensure maintenance of the design permeability rate over
time, a six-inch layer of K5 soil shall be placed on the bottom of a
stormwater infiltration BMP. This soil layer shall meet the textural
and permeability specifications of a K5 soil as provided at N.J.A.C.
7:9A, Appendix A, Figure 6, and be certified to meet these
specifications by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
§ 157-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-8
157:447
New Jersey. The depth to the seasonal high water table shall be
measured from the bottom of the K5 sand layer.
(6) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all stormwater
infiltration basins so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts.
Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to: raising
the groundwater table so as to cause surface ponding; flooding of
basements and other subsurface structures and areas; preventing a
stormwater infiltration basin from completely draining via
infiltration within 72 hours of a design storm event; and
interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems and other surface and subsurface structures in
the vicinity of the stormwater infiltration basin.
(7) The design engineer shall conduct a mounding analysis, as defined
in § 157-10, of all stormwater infiltration basins. The mounding
analysis shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements in
§ 157-14C(1). Where the mounding analysis identifies adverse
impacts, the stormwater infiltration basin shall be redesigned or
relocated, as appropriate.
(8) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be constructed in accordance
with the following:
(a) To avoid sedimentation that may result in clogging and reduce
the basin's permeability rate: All other infiltration BMP
construction in this section shall be followed when the
drainage area is completely stabilized, all accumulated
sediment shall be removed from the infiltration BMP, which
shall then be excavated to its final design elevation in
accordance with the construction requirements of this section
and the performance standards in § 157-7.
(b) To avoid compaction of subgrade soils of BMPs that rely on
infiltration, no heavy equipment such as backhoes, dump
trucks or bulldozers shall be permitted to operate within the
footprint of the BMP. All excavation required to construct a
stormwater infiltration BMP shall be performed by equipment
placed outside the BMP. If this is not possible, the soils within
the excavated area shall be renovated and tilled after
construction is completed to reverse the effects of compaction.
In addition, postdevelopment soil permeability testing shall be
performed in accordance with Subsection B(4) of this section.
(c) Earthwork associated with stormwater infiltration BMP
construction, including excavation, grading, cutting or filling,
shall not be performed when soil moisture content is above the
lower plastic limit.
C. Safety standards for structural stormwater management measures.
§ 157-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-8
157:448
(1) If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. "Escape provisions" means the permanent installation of
ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide readily
accessible means of ingress and egress from the outlet structure.
(2) A trash rack is a device intended to intercept runoff-borne trash
and debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic openings in an
outlet structure of a structural stormwater management measure.
Trash racks shall be installed upstream of such outlet structure
openings as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the
structural stormwater management measures in accordance with
the following:
(a) The trash rack should be constructed primarily of bars aligned
in the direction of flow with one-inch spacing between the bars
to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the bars
shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the hydraulic
opening it is protecting or six inches, whichever is less.
Transverse bars aligned perpendicular to flow should be sized
and spaced as necessary for rack stability and strength.
(b) The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
performance of either the outlet structure opening it is
protecting or the overall outlet structure.
(c) The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under clean
conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity through it to
a maximum of 2.5 feet per second.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the opening in the
top of a stormwater management measure outlet structure. If an
outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance;
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two inches
across the smallest dimension; and
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
§ 157-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-8
157:449
§ 157-9. Inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater
management measures.
(4) The maximum side slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm
shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1).
(5) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
structural stormwater management measures having a permanent
pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in width.
One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below the
permanent water surface, and the second step shall be located one
to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface. See below, for an
illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(a) Illustration of safety ledges.
Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-6 Appendix A.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review pursuant to § 157-4C of this
article shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C
below.
B. General inspection, maintenance and repair plan.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare an inspection, maintenance and
repair plan for the stormwater management measures, including
both structural and nonstructural measures incorporated into the
design of a major development. This plan shall be submitted as part
of the checklist requirements established in § 157-5C. Inspection
§ 157-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-9
157:450
and maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures
are available in the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(2) The inspection, maintenance and repair plan shall contain the
following:
(a) Accurate and comprehensive drawings of the site's stormwater
management measures;
(b) Specific locations of each stormwater management measure
identified by means of longitude and latitude as well as block
and lot number;
(c) Specific preventative and corrective maintenance tasks and
schedules for such tasks for each stormwater BMP;
(d) Cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris or
trash removal; and
(e) The name, address and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for regular inspections and preventative
and corrective maintenance (including repair and
replacement). If the responsible person or persons is a
corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
municipality or political subdivision of this state, the name and
telephone number of an appropriate contact person shall also
be included.
(3) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under § 157-9B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of
all preventative and corrective maintenance performed for the
site's stormwater management measures, including a record of all
inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work orders in
the inspection, maintenance and repair plan. Said records and
inspection reports shall be retained for a minimum of five years.
(4) If the inspection, maintenance and repair plan identifies a person
other than the developer (for example, a public agency or
homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
inspection and maintenance, the plan shall include documentation
of such person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
measure to such person under an applicable ordinance or
regulation.
(5) If the person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under § 157-9B(2) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on § 157-9B(6)
below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property
on which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan shall
be undertaken.
§ 157-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-9
157:451
(6) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under § 157-9B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness
of the inspection, maintenance and repair plan at least once per
year and update the plan and the deed as needed.
(7) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under § 157-9B(2) above shall submit the updated
inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the documentation
required by § 157-9B(2) and B(3) above to Woolwich Township once
per year.
(8) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under § 157-9B(2) above shall retain and make available,
upon request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental or safety authority over the site the inspection,
maintenance and repair plan and the documentation required by
§ 157-9B(2) and B(3) above.
C. Responsibility for inspection, repair and maintenance shall not be
assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property
in a residential development or project, unless such owner or tenant
owns or leases the entire residential development or project.
D. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including, but not limited to: repairs or replacement to any associated
appurtenance of the measure; removal of sediment, debris or trash;
restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or
replacement; restoration of vegetation; repair or replacement of
linings; and restoration of infiltration function.
E. Stormwater management measure easements shall be provided by the
property owner as necessary for facility inspections and maintenance
and preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and facilities. The purpose of the easement shall be
specified in the maintenance agreement.
F. In the event that the stormwater management measure becomes a
public health nuisance or danger to public safety or public health, or if
it is in need of maintenance or repair, Woolwich Township shall so notify
the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair
of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or
the municipal engineer's designee. Woolwich Township, at its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and
repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to
perform such maintenance and repair within the allowable time,
Woolwich Township may immediately proceed to do so with its own
forces and equipment and/or through contractors. The costs and
expenses of such maintenance and repair by Woolwich Township shall
be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and
§ 157-9 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-9
157:452
collected with any other taxes levied for the year in which the
maintenance and repair was performed.
G. Requirements for inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater
BMPs that rely on infiltration. If a stormwater infiltration BMP is
incorporated into the design of a major development, the applicant shall
include the following requirements in its inspection, maintenance and
repair plan:
(1) Once per month (if needed); Mow side slopes, remove litter and
debris, stabilize eroded banks, repair erosion at inflow structure(s);
(2) After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall: Ensure that
infiltration BMPs drain completely within 72 hours after the storm
event. If stored water fails to infiltrate 72 hours after the end of the
storm, corrective measures shall be taken. Raking or tilling by light
equipment can assist in maintaining infiltration capacity and break
up clogged surfaces;
(3) Four times per year (quarterly): Inspect stormwater infiltration
BMPs for clogging and excessive debris and sediment
accumulation within the BMP, remove sediment (if needed) when
completely dry;
(4) Two times per year: Inspect for signs of damage to structures,
repair eroded areas, check for signs of petroleum contamination
and remediate;
(5) Once per year: Inspect BMPs for unwanted tree growth and remove
if necessary, disc or otherwise aerate bottom of infiltration basin to
a minimum depth of six inches; and
(6) After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall, inspect and, if
necessary, remove and replace K5 sand layer and accumulated
sediment to restore original infiltration rate.
(7) Additional guidance for the inspection, maintenance and repair of
stormwater infiltration BMPs can be found in the New Jersey BMP
Manual.
H. Maintenance guarantee.
(1) The applicant shall provide a maintenance guarantee in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 to ensure that all stormwater management
measures required under the provisions of this article will be
maintained in accordance with the specifications established
herein.
(2) Additionally, for those stormwater management measures that are
to be inspected, maintained and repaired by a public agency,
Woolwich Township shall collect an upfront fee from the applicant
in the amount Woolwich Township determines is needed to provide
long-term inspection, maintenance and repair of all stormwater
§ 157-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-9
157:453
management measures. This upfront fee shall be placed in a
dedicated cash management account and expended by Woolwich
Township for the sole purpose of conducting inspection,
maintenance and repair activities for all stormwater management
measures required under the applicant's major development
application approval. The calculation of the fee shall be based upon
the inspection, maintenance and repair plan (plan) required to be
prepared by the applicant and approved by Woolwich Township.
The plan shall include an estimate of the present value of the
cost to inspect, maintain and repair the stormwater management
measure(s) in accordance with the plan for the useful life of those
measure(s). The Woolwich Township shall furnish the applicant
their published hourly rates as prescribed by their salary ordinance
for public works' and other personnel having responsibilities
associated with stormwater management. Added to this fee shall
be an amount mutually determined by WOOLWICH TOWNSHIP
and the applicant to account for the reconstruction of stormwater
management measures that are reasonably anticipated to be
subject to long-term failure. After an agreed number of years,
depending on the type of measure(s), the measure(s) will need
to be reconstructed. The amount shall be based on the future
value of the measure(s) being reconstructed. Both inflation rates
and bank interest rates shall be based on the ten-year average
published in the Wall Street Journal or other approved publication.
Interest accruing in the account must also be accounted for at an
agreed upon interest rate to arrive at an amount. The costs for
reconstructing the measure(s) shall be taken from the engineer's
probable cost estimate that is utilized to determine the amount of
the required performance guarantee. It is acceptable to attach a
percentage of failure to certain line items in the estimate.
(3) Additionally, for those stormwater management measures that are
to be inspected, maintained and repaired by a homeowners'
association, condominium association or some other form of
nonpublic ownership, no fee shall be collected by Woolwich
Township. Instead, the ownership entity shall establish and
maintain a fund for the annual inspection and testing program,
annual maintenance and repair program and annual contribution to
a contingency fund for long-term reconstruction.
(a) The initial costs agreed to for the annual inspection and testing
program and annual maintenance and repair program shall be
based upon actual itemized proposals offered to the applicant
by prospective vendors. The annual cost expended on
inspection, testing and maintenance shall be reported to
Woolwich Township to verify that maintenance is not being
deferred and to inform Woolwich Township on the magnitude
of those service.
§ 157-9 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-9
157:454
§ 157-10. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. When used in this
article, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to
them.
AQUACULTURE — The propagation, rearing and subsequent harvesting
of aquatic organisms in controlled or selected environments, and their
subsequent processing, packaging and marketing, including, but not limited
to, activities to intervene in the rearing process to increase production
such as stocking, feeding, transplanting and providing for protection from
predators.
CERTIFICATION — A written statement signed and sealed by a licensed
New Jersey professional engineer attesting that a BMP design or
stormwater management system conforms to or meets a particular set of
standards. Depending upon the context in which the term is used, the term
"certify" and "certified" shall be construed accordingly.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting
soil to greater-than-normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil
infiltration and permeability rates.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion, demolition, removal or equipping of buildings, structures or
components of a stormwater management system, including but not limited
to collection inlets, stormwater piping, swales and all other conveyance
systems, and stormwater BMPs.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
(b) The contingency fund shall require sufficient funds to be
committed for long-term reconstruction of the stormwater
management measure(s). Major reconstruction activities will
necessitate proper financial planning. After an agreed number
of years, depending on the type of measure(s), the measure(s)
will need to be reconstructed. The contingency fund in the
financial schedule shall be based on the future value of the
measure being reconstructed. Both inflation rates and bank
interest rates shall be based on the ten-year average published
in the Wall Street Journal or other approved publication.
Interest accruing in the account must also be accounted for at
an agreed upon interest rate, to arrive at an annual
contribution amount.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
B.
§ 157-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-10
157:455
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGN PERMEABILITY — The tested permeability rate with a factor of
safety of two applied to it (e.g., if the tested permeability rate of the soils is
four inches per hour, the design rate would be two inches per hour).
DEVELOPMENT —
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
The change of or enlargement of any use or disturbance of any land, the
performance of any building or mining operation, the division of land
into two or more parcels, and the creation or termination of rights of
access or riparian rights, including, but not limited to:
(1) A change in type of use of a structure or land;
A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the
external appearance of a structure or land;
(2)
A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an
increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing
establishments, offices or dwelling units in a structure or on land;
(3)
Commencement of resource extraction or drilling or excavation on
a parcel of land;
(4)
(5) Demolition of a structure or removal of trees;
(6) Commencement of forestry activities;
(7) Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of land;
In connection with the use of land, the making of any material
change in noise levels, thermal conditions, or emissions of waste
material; and
(8)
Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore, bank or
floodplain, seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or artificial
body of water.
(9)
A.
In the case of development on agricultural land, i.e., lands used for
an agricultural use or purpose as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:50-2.11,
development means: any activity that requires a state permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Boards (CAB) and the
State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal
review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A.
4:1C-1 et seq.
B.
§ 157-10 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-10
157:456
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
article is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — All development other than major development.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a BMP, a stormwater
management system, a particular receiving water body or a particular point
along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened animal species; threatened or endangered plants of the
Pinelands pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:5-6.27(a); large areas of contiguous open
space or upland forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and
groundwater recharge areas. T & E habitat constitutes habitat that is
critical for the survival of a local population of threatened and endangered
species or habitat that is identified using the Department's Landscape
Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame
Species Program, whichever is more inclusive.
EXCEPTION — The approval by the approving authority of a variance or
other material departure from strict compliance with any section, part,
phrase or provision of this article. An exception may be granted only under
certain specific, narrowly-defined conditions described herein.
EXTENDED DETENTION BASIN — A facility constructed through filling
and/or excavation that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
It has an outlet structure that detains and attenuates runoff inflows and
promotes the settlement of pollutants. An extended detention basin is
normally designed as a multistage facility that provides runoff storage
and attenuation for both stormwater quality and quantity management.
The term "stormwater detention basin" shall have the same meaning as
"extended detention basin."
FINISHED GRADE — The elevation of the surface of the ground after
completion of final grading, either via cutting, filling or a combination
thereof.
GRADING — Modification of a land slope by cutting and filling with the
native soil or redistribution of the native soil which is present at the site.
GROUNDWATER — Water below the land surface in a zone of saturation.
GROUNDWATER MOUNDING ANALYSIS — A test performed to
demonstrate that the groundwater below a stormwater infiltration basin will
not mound up, encroach on the unsaturated zone, break the surface of the
ground at the infiltration area or downslope, and create an overland flow
situation.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Equipment, machinery, or vehicles that exert
ground pressure in excess of eight pounds per square inch.
§ 157-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-10
157:457
HIGH POLLUTANT LOADING AREA — An area in an industrial or
commercial development site: where solvents and/or petroleum products
are loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied; where pesticides are loaded/
unloaded or stored; where hazardous materials are expected to be present
in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; where recharge
would be inconsistent with NJDEP-approved remedial action work plan or
landfill closure plan; and/or where a high risk exists for spills of toxic
materials, such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities. The term
"HPLA" shall have the same meaning as "high pollutant loading area."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which precipitation enters the soil
through its surface.
IN-LIEU CONTRIBUTION — A monetary fee collected by Woolwich
Township in lieu of requiring strict on-site compliance with the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and/or stormwater runoff quality
standards established in this article.
INSTALL — To assemble, construct, put in place or connect components of
a stormwater management system.
MITIGATION — Acts necessary to prevent, limit, remedy or compensate
for conditions that may result from those cases where an applicant has
demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict compliance with the
stormwater management requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an
adopted regional stormwater management plan, or in a local ordinance
which is as protective as N.J.A.C. 7:8, and an exception from strict
compliance is granted by Woolwich Township.
NEW JERSEY STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUAL
— Guidance developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, in coordination with the New Jersey Department of Agriculture,
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, municipal engineers, county engineers,
consulting firms, contractors, and environmental organizations to address
the standards in the New Jersey Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:8. The BMP Manual provides examples of ways to meet the standards
contained in the rule. An applicant may demonstrate that other proposed
management practices will also achieve the standards established in the
rules. The Manual, and notices regarding future versions of the Manual,
are available from the Division of Watershed Management, NJDEP, PO
Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; and on the NJDEP's Web site,
www.njstormwater.org. The term "New Jersey BMP Manual" shall have the
same meaning as "New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual."
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJPDES — The New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., and in N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
§ 157-10 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-10
157:458
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the NJDEP pursuant to the authority
of the Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C.
7:14A for a discharge of pollutants.
NONPOINT SOURCE — Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor,
or condition, other than a point source, from which pollutants are or may
be discharged; any human-made or human-induced activity, factor, or
condition, other than a point source, that may temporarily or permanently
change any chemical, physical, biological, or radiological characteristic of
waters of the state from what was or is the natural, pristine condition of
such waters, or that may increase the degree of such change; or any activity,
factor, or condition, other than a point source, that contributes or may
contribute to water pollution. The term "NPS" shall have the same meaning
as "nonpoint source."
NONSTRUCTURAL BMP — A stormwater management measure, strategy
or combination of strategies that reduces adverse stormwater runoff
impacts through sound site planning and design. Nonstructural BMPs
include such practices as minimizing site disturbance, preserving important
site features, reducing and disconnecting impervious cover, flattening
slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing turf grass lawns, maintaining
natural drainage features and characteristics and controlling stormwater
runoff and pollutants closer to the source. The term "low-impact
development technique" shall have the same meaning as "nonstructural
BMP."
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a saturated
unit area of soil or rock material at hydraulic gradient of one, determined
as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (tube permeameter test), N.J.A.C. 6.5
(pit bailing test) or N.J.A.C. 6.6 (piezometer test). Alternative permeability
test procedures may be accepted by the approving authority, provided
the test procedure attains saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for
hydraulic head effects on infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate
with units expressed in inches per hour and is accompanied by a published
source reference. Examples of suitable sources include hydrogeology,
geotechnical, or engineering text and design manuals, proceedings of
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peerreview
journals. Neither a soil permeability class rating test, as described
in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a percolation test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4,
are acceptable tests for establishing permeability values for the purpose of
complying with this article.
PERMEABLE — Having a permeability of one inch per hour or faster. The
terms "permeable soil," "permeable rock" and "permeable fill" shall be
construed accordingly.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, municipality or political subdivision of this state subject to
§ 157-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-10
157:459
municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
PINELANDS COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The Commission created
pursuant to Section 5 of the Pinelands Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 13:18A-5.
PINELANDS CMP — The New Jersey Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50 1.1 et seq).
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel, or other floating craft,
from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include
return flows from irrigated agriculture.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substances [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, suspended solids, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the
state, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous
and nonhazardous pollutants.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice professional
engineering in the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:8-27 et seq.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REPLICATE — One of two or more soil samples or tests taken at the same
location (within five feet of each other) and depth, within the same soil
horizon or substratum. In the case of fill material, replicate tests are tests
performed on subsamples of the same bulk sample packed to the same bulk
density.
SAND — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which
are between 0.05 millimeters and 2.0 millimeters in equivalent spherical
diameter. Also, a soil textural class having 85% or more of sand and a
content of silt and clay such that the percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the
percentage of clay does not exceed 15, as shown in § 157-14C(1) (USDA Soil
Textural Triangle).
SEASONALLY HIGH WATER TABLE — The upper limit of the shallowest
zone of saturation which occurs in the soil, identified as prescribed in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.8.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
§ 157-10 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-10
157:460
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin which
is not a rock substratum, including sediments below the biologically active
and/or weathered zones.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility, which is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to
process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER INFILTRATION BMP — A basin or other facility constructed
within permeable soils that provides temporary storage of stormwater
runoff. An infiltration BMP does not normally have a structural outlet to
discharge runoff from the stormwater quality design storm. Instead, outflow
from an infiltration BMP is through the surrounding soil. The terms
"infiltration measure" and "infiltration practice" shall have the same
meaning as "stormwater infiltration basin."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances. This includes, but is not limited to, structural
and nonstructural stormwater best management practices described in
the New Jersey BMP Manual and designed to meet the standards for
stormwater control contained within this article. The terms "stormwater
best management practice" and "stormwater BMP" shall have the same
meaning as "stormwater management measure."
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
SUITABLE SOIL — Unsaturated soil, above the seasonally high water table,
which contains less than 50% by volume of coarse fragments and which has
a tested permeability rate of between one and 20 inches per hour.
SURFACE WATER — Any waters of the state which are not groundwater.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for runoff to travel from
the hydraulically most distant point of the drainage area to the point of
interest within a watershed.
§ 157-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-10
157:461
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The insoluble solid matter suspended in
water and stormwater that is separable by laboratory filtration in
accordance with the procedure contained in the Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and
the Water Pollution Control Federation. The term "TSS" shall have the same
meaning as "total suspended solids."
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface and ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of a zone of saturation.
WELL — A bored, drilled or driven shaft, or a dug hole, which extends below
the seasonally high water table and which has a depth which is greater than
its largest surface dimension.
WETLANDS — Those lands which are inundated or saturated by water at
a magnitude, duration and frequency sufficient to support the growth of
hydrophytes. Wetlands include lands with poorly drained or very poorly
drained soils as designated by the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the
Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture.
Wetlands include coastal wetlands and inland wetlands, including
submerged lands. The New Jersey Pinelands Commission Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Pinelands Area Wetlands: A Pinelands
Supplement to the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated January 1991, as amended, may be utilized in
delineating the extent of wetlands based on the definitions of wetlands and
wetlands soils contained in this section, N.J.A.C. 7:50 2.11, 6.4 and 6.5. The
term "wetland" shall have the same meaning as "wetlands."
WET POND — A stormwater facility constructed through filling and/or
excavation that provides both permanent and temporary storage of
stormwater runoff. It has an outlet structure that creates a permanent
pool and detains and attenuates runoff inflows and promotes the settling
of pollutants. A stormwater retention basin can also be designed as a
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1). Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
§ 157-10 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-10
157:462
multistage facility that also provides extended detention for enhanced
stormwater quality design storm treatment and runoff storage and
attenuation for stormwater quantity management. The term "stormwater
retention basin" shall have the same meaning as "wet pond."
WOOLWICH TOWNSHIP — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment or other board, agency or official of Woolwich Township with
authority to approve or disapprove subdivisions, site plans, construction
permits, building permits or other applications for development approval.
For the purposes of reviewing development applications and ensuring
compliance with the requirements of this article, Woolwich Township may
designate the Municipal Engineer or other qualified designee to act on
behalf of Woolwich Township.
§ 157-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties: (municipality to specify).
§ 157-12. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the following:
§ 157-13. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of
this article.
§ 157-14. Appendixes.
A. Approval by the county review agency in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-97.
A. Methods for calculating groundwater recharge.
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32: A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey. Available
at http://www.njgeology.org/geodata/dgs99-2.htm.
(2) The New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS).
Available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, Chapter 6, at
http://www.njstormwater.org/bmp_manual2.htm.
B. NJDEP Nonstructural Strategies Point System. The New Jersey
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(a), and § 157-7A of
this article, require nonstructural stormwater management strategies
to be incorporated into the site design of a major development. A total
of nine strategies are to be used to the maximum extent practical to
§ 157-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-14
157:463
meet the groundwater recharge, stormwater quality, stormwater
quantity requirements of the rules prior to utilizing structural
stormwater and management measures. The New Jersey Nonstructural
Stormwater Management Strategies Point System (NSPS) provides a
tool to assist planners, designers and regulators in determining that
the strategies have been used to the maximum extent practical at
a major development as required by the rules. Refer online to
http://www.njstormwater.org for information on the NSPS.
C. Soils.
(1) USDA Soil Textural Triangle.
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this appendix, the following terms
shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
§ 157-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-14
157:464
A-HORIZON — The uppermost mineral horizon in a normal soil
profile. The upper part of the A-horizon is characterized by
maximum accumulation of finely divided, dark-colored organic
residues, known as humus, which are intimately mixed with the
mineral particles of the soil.
ARTESIAN ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which
exists immediately below a hydraulically restrictive horizon, and
which has an upper surface which is at a pressure greater than
atmospheric, either seasonally or throughout the year.
CHROMA — The relative purity or strength of a color, a quantity
which decreases with increasing grayness. Chroma is one of the
three variables of soil color as defined in the Munsell system of
classification.
CLAY — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are smaller than 0.002 millimeters in equivalent spherical
diameter. Also, a soil textural class having more than 40% clay, less
than 45% sand, and less than 40% silt, as shown in § 157-14C(1)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having 27% to 40% clay and
20% to 45% sand, as shown in § 157-14C(1) (USDA Soil Textural
Triangle).
COARSE FRAGMENT — A rock fragment contained within the
soil which is greater than two millimeters in equivalent spherical
diameter or which is retained on a two-millimeter sieve.
COUNTY SOIL SURVEY REPORT — A report prepared by the
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service which includes maps showing the
distribution of soil mapping units throughout a particular county
together with narrative descriptions of the soil series shown and
other information relating to the uses and properties of the various
soil series.
DIRECT SUPERVISION — Control over and direction of work
carried out by others with full knowledge of and responsibility for
such work.
EQUIVALENT SPHERICAL DIAMETER — Of a particle means the
diameter of a sphere which has a volume equal to the volume of the
particle.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE HORIZON — A horizon of limited thickness
within the soil profile which provides inadequate removal of
pollutants from stormwater due to a high coarse fragment content,
excessively coarse texture and/or excessively rapid permeability.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum below the
soil profile which extends beyond the depth of soil profile pits and
borings and which provides inadequate removal of pollutants from
§ 157-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-14
157:465
stormwater due to a high coarse fragment content, excessively
coarse texture and/or excessively rapid permeability.
EXTREMELY FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose
moist aggregated mass crushes only under very strong pressure;
cannot be crushed between the thumb and forefinger and shall be
broken apart bit by bit.
FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose moist
aggregated mass crushes under moderate pressure between the
thumb and forefinger but resistance is distinctly noticeable.
HARD CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose dry
aggregated mass is moderately resistant to pressure; can be
broken in the hands without difficulty but is barely breakable
between the thumb and forefinger.
HUE — The dominant spectral color, one of the three variables of
soil color defined within the Munsell system of classification.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE HORIZON — A horizon within
the soil profile which slows or prevents the downward or lateral
movement of water and which is underlain by permeable soil
horizons or substrata. Any soil horizon which has a saturated
permeability less than one inch per hour is hydraulically restrictive.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum
below the soil profile which slows or prevents the downward or
lateral movement of water and which extends beyond the depth of
profile pits or borings or to a massive substratum. A substratum
which has a saturated permeability less than one inch per hour is
hydraulically restrictive.
LOAMY SAND — A soil textural class, as shown in § 157-14C(1)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum of 85% to 90%
sand with a percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the percentage of
clay not in excess of 15; or a minimum of 70% to 85% sand with
a percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the percentage of clay not in
excess of 30.
LOWER PLASTIC LIMIT — The moisture content corresponding
to the transition between the plastic and semisolid states of soil
consistency. This corresponds to the lowest soil moisture content at
which the soil can be molded in the fingers to form a rod or wire, 1/
8 inches in thickness, without crumbling.
MOTTLING — A color pattern observed in soil consisting of
blotches or spots of contrasting color. The term "mottle" refers to
an individual blotch or spot. The terms "color variegation," "iron
depletion" and "iron concentration" are equivalent to the term
"mottling." Mottling due to redoximorphic reactions is an indication
of seasonal or periodic and recurrent saturation.
MUNSELL SYSTEM — A system of classifying soil color consisting
of an alphanumeric designation for hue, value and chroma, such
§ 157-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-14
157:466
as "7.5 YR 6/2," together with a descriptive color name, such as
"strong brown."
O-HORIZON — A surface horizon, occurring above the A-horizon
in some soils, which is composed primarily of undecomposed or
partially decomposed plant remains which have not been
incorporated into the mineral soil.
PERCHED ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which
occurs immediately above a hydraulically restrictive horizon and
which is underlain by permeable horizons or substrata which are
not permanently or seasonally saturated.
PIEZOMETER — A device consisting of a length of metal or plastic
pipe, open at the bottom or perforated within a specified interval,
and used for the determination of depth to water, permeability or
hydraulic head within a specific soil horizon or substratum.
PLATY STRUCTURE — Characterized by a soil aggregate which
has one axis distinctly shorter than the other two and oriented with
the short axis vertical.
REGIONAL ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which
extends vertically without interruption below the depth of soil
borings and profile pits.
SANDY CLAY — A soil textural class having 35% or more of clay
and 45% or more of sand, as shown in § 157-14C(1) (USDA Soil
Textural Triangle).
SANDY LOAM — A soil textural class, as shown in § 157-14C(1)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum of 20% clay,
and the percentage of silt plus twice the percentage of clay exceeds
30, and contains 52% or more sand; or less than 7% clay, less than
50% silt, and between 43% and 52% sand.
SILT — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are between 0.002 millimeters and 0.05 millimeters in
equivalent spherical diameter. It also means a soil textural class
having 80% or more of silt and 12% or less of clay, as shown in
§ 157-14C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SILT LOAM — A soil textural class having 50% or more of silt and
12% to 27% of clay; or 50% to 80% of silt and less than 12% of clay,
as shown in § 157-14C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SILTY CLAY — A soil textural class having 40% or more of clay and
40% or more of silt, as shown in § 157-14C(1) (USDA Soil Textural
Triangle).
SILTY CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having 27% to 40% of
clay and less than 20% of sand, as shown in § 157-14C(1) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle).
§ 157-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-14
157:467
SOIL AGGREGATE — A naturally occurring unit of soil structure
consisting of particles of sand, silt, clay, organic matter, and coarse
fragments held together by the natural cohesion of the soil.
SOIL COLOR — The soil color name and Munsell color designation
determined by comparison of the moist soil with color chips
contained in a Munsell soil color book.
SOIL CONSISTENCE — The resistance of a soil aggregate or clod
to being crushed between the fingers or broken by the hands.
Terms for describing soil consistence are in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(h).
SOIL HORIZON — A layer within a soil profile differing from layers
of soil above and below it in one or more of the soil morphological
characteristics, including color, texture, coarse fragment content,
structure, consistence and mottling.
SOIL LOG — A description of the soil profile which includes the
depth, thickness, color, texture, coarse fragment content, mottling,
structure and consistence of each soil horizon or substratum.
SOIL MAPPING UNIT — An area outlined on a map in a county
soil survey report and marked with a letter symbol designating a
soil phase, a complex of two or more soil phases, or some other
descriptive term where no soil type has been identified.
SOIL PHASE — A specific type of soil which is mapped by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service and which belongs to a
soil series described within the County Soil Survey Report.
SOIL PROFILE — A vertical cross section of undisturbed soil
showing the characteristic horizontal layers or horizons of the soil
which have formed as a result of the combined effects of parent
material, topography, climate, biological activity and time.
SOIL SERIES — A grouping of soil types possessing a specific
range of soil profile characteristics which are described within the
County Soil Survey Report. Each soil series may consist of several
soil phases which may differ in slope, texture of the surface horizon
or stoniness.
SOIL STRUCTURAL CLASS — One of the shape classes of soil
structure described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(g).
SOIL STRUCTURE — The naturally occurring arrangement, within
a soil horizon, of sand, silt and clay particles, coarse fragments and
organic matter, which are held together in clusters or aggregates
of similar shape and size.
SOIL TEST PIT — An excavation made for the purpose of exposing
a soil profile which is to be described.
SOIL TEXTURAL CLASS — One of the classes of soil texture
defined within the USDA system of classification. (Soil Survey
Manual, Agricultural Handbook No. 18, USDA Soil Conservation
Service 1962.)
§ 157-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-14
157:468
SOIL TEXTURE — The relative proportions of sand, silt and clay
in that portion of the soil which passes through a sieve with twomillimeter
openings.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The depth below the ground surface or
the elevation with respect to some reference level of the water level
observed within a soil profile pit or boring or within a piezometer
after this level has stabilized or become relatively constant with the
passage of time.
SUBSTRATUM — A layer of soil or rock material present below the
soil profile and extending beyond the depth of soil borings or profile
pits.
UNSUITABLE SOIL — All soil other than suitable soil.
USDA SYSTEM OF CLASSIFICATION — The system of classifying
soil texture used by the United States Department of Agriculture
which defines 12 soil textural classes based upon the weight
percentages of sand, silt and clay in that portion of the soil which
passes through a sieve with two-millimeter openings. The soil
textural classes are shown graphically on the USDA Soil Textural
Triangle, as shown in § 157-14C(1).
VALUE — The relative lightness or intensity of a color, one of the
three variables of soil color defined within the Munsell system of
classification.
VERY FIRM CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a moist soil which
crushes under strong pressure; barely crushable between thumb
and forefinger.
VERY HARD CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a dry soil which
is resistant to pressure, can be broken in the hands only with
difficulty; not breakable between the thumb and forefinger.
ZONE OF SATURATION — A layer within or below the soil profile
which is saturated with groundwater either seasonally or
throughout the year. This includes both regional and perched
zones.
(3) Methods for assessing soil suitability for infiltration stormwater
management BMPs. The results of a subsurface investigation shall
serve as the basis for the site selection and design of stormwater
infiltration BMPs. The subsurface investigation shall include, but
not be limited to, a series of soil test pits and soil permeability tests
conducted in accordance with the following:
(a) All soil test pits and soil permeability results shall be
performed under the direct supervision of a professional
engineer. All soil logs and permeability test data shall be
accompanied by a certification by a professional engineer. The
results and location (horizontal and vertical) of all soil test pits
§ 157-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-14
157:469
and soil permeability tests, both passing and failing, shall be
reported to Woolwich Township.
(b) During all subsurface investigations and soil test procedures,
adequate safety measures shall be taken to prohibit
unauthorized access to the excavations at all times. It is the
responsibility of persons performing or witnessing subsurface
investigations and soil permeability tests to comply with all
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations
governing occupational safety.
(c) A minimum of two soil test pits shall be excavated within the
footprint of any proposed infiltration BMP to determine the
suitability and distribution of soil types present at the site.
Placement of the test pits shall be within 20 feet of the basin
perimeter, located along the longest axis bisecting the BMP.
For BMPs larger than 10,000 square feet in area, a minimum of
one additional soil test pit shall be conducted within each
additional area of 10,000 square feet. The additional test pit(s)
shall be placed approximately equidistant to other test pits, so
as to provide adequate characterization of the subsurface
material. In all cases, where soil and or groundwater
properties vary significantly, additional test pits shall be
excavated in order to accurately characterize the subsurface
conditions below the proposed infiltration BMP. Soil test pits
shall extend to a minimum depth of eight feet below the lowest
elevation of the basin bottom or to a depth that is at least two
times the maximum potential water depth in the proposed
infiltration BMP, whichever is greater.
(d) A soil test pit log shall be prepared for each soil test pit. The
test pit log shall, at a minimum, provide the elevation of the
existing ground surface, the depth and thickness (in inches) of
each soil horizon or substratum, the dominant matrix or
background and mottle colors using the Munsell system of
classification for hue, value and chroma, the appropriate
textural class as shown on the USDA textural triangle, the
volume percentage of coarse fragments (larger than two
millimeters in diameter), the abundance, size, and contrast of
mottles, the soil structure, soil consistence, and soil moisture
condition, using standard USDA classification terminology for
each of these soil properties. Soil test pit logs shall identify the
presence of any soil horizon, substratum or other feature that
exhibits an in-place permeability rate less than one inch per
hour.
(e) Each soil test pit log shall report the depth to seasonally high
water level, either perched or regional, and the static water
level based upon the presence of soil mottles or other
redoximorphic features, and observed seepage or saturation.
Where redoxomorphic features including soil mottles resulting
§ 157-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-14
157:470
from soil saturation are present, they shall be interpreted to
represent the depth to the seasonal high water table unless
soil saturation or seepage is observed at a higher level. When
the determination of the seasonally high water table shall be
made in ground previously disturbed by excavation, direct
observation of the static water table during the months of
January through April shall be the only method permitted.
(f) Any soil horizon or substratum which exists immediately below
a perched zone of saturation shall be deemed by rule to exhibit
unacceptable permeability (less than one inch per hour). The
perched zone of saturation may be observed directly, inferred
based upon soil morphology, or confirmed by performance of a
hydraulic head test as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.9.
(g) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be installed in soils that
exhibit artesian groundwater conditions. A permeability test
shall be conducted in all soils that immediately underlie a
perched zone of saturation. Any zone of saturation which is
present below a soil horizon which exhibits an in-place
permeability of less than 0.2 inches per hour shall be
considered an artesian zone of saturation unless a minimum
one-foot-thick zone of unsaturated soil, free of mottling or
other redoximorphic features and possessing a chroma of four
or higher, exists immediately below the unsuitable soil.
(h) A minimum of one permeability test shall be performed at each
soil test pit location. The soil permeability rate shall be
determined using test methodology as prescribed in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-6.2 (tube permeameter test), 6.5 (pit bailing test) or 6.6
(piezometer test). When the tube permeameter test is used, a
minimum of two replicate samples shall be taken and tested.
Alternative permeability test procedures may be accepted by
the approving authority, provided the test procedure attains
saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic head
effects on infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate with
units expressed in inches per hour and is accompanied by a
published source reference. Examples of suitable sources
include hydrogeology, geotechnical or engineering text and
design manuals, proceedings of American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peer-review journals.
Neither a soil permeability class rating test, as described in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a percolation test, as described in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests for establishing
permeability values for the purpose of complying with this
article.
(i) Soil permeability tests shall be conducted on the most
hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum to be left in
place below the basin as follows. Where no soil replacement is
proposed, the permeability tests shall be conducted on the
§ 157-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-14
157:471
most hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum within
four feet of the lowest elevation of the basin bottom or to a
depth equal to two times the maximum potential water depth
within the basin, whichever is greater. Where soil replacement
is proposed, the permeability tests shall be conducted within
the soil immediately below the depth of proposed soil
replacement or within the most hydraulically restrictive
horizon or substratum to a depth equal to two times the
maximum potential water depth within the basin, whichever
is greater. Permeability tests may be performed on the most
hydraulically restrictive soil horizons or substrata at depths
greater than those identified above based upon the discretion
of the design or testing engineer. The tested infiltration rate
should then be divided by two to establish the soil's design
permeability rate. Such division will provide a one-hundredpercent
safety factor to the tested rate.
(j) The minimum acceptable "tested permeability rate" of any soil
horizon or substratum shall be one inch per hour. Soil
materials that exhibit tested permeability rates slower than
one inch per hour shall be considered unsuitable for
stormwater infiltration. The maximum reportable "tested
permeability rate" of any soil horizon or substratum shall be no
greater than 20 inches per hour regardless of the rate attained
in the test procedure.
(k) After all construction activities have been completed on the
development site and the finished grade has been established
in the infiltration BMP, a minimum of one permeability test
shall be conducted within the most hydraulically restrictive soil
horizon or substratum below the as-built BMP to ensure the
performance of the infiltration BMP is as designed. Hand tools
and manual permeability test procedures shall be used for the
purpose of confirming BMP performance. In addition, the
infiltration BMP shall be flooded with water sufficient to
demonstrate the performance of the BMP. Test results shall be
certified to the Municipal Engineer.
(l) A groundwater mounding analysis shall be provided for each
stormwater infiltration BMP. The groundwater mounding
analysis shall calculate the maximum height of the
groundwater mound based upon the volume of the maximum
design storm. The professional engineer conducting the
analysis shall provide the Municipal Engineer with the
methodology and supporting documentation for the mounding
analysis used and shall certify to Woolwich Township, based
upon the analysis, that the groundwater mound will not cause
stormwater or groundwater to break out to the land surface or
cause adverse impact to adjacent surface water bodies,
wetlands or subsurface structures, including but not limited to
§ 157-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-14
157:472
basements and septic systems. If there is more than one
infiltration BMP proposed, the model shall indicate if and how
the mounds will interact. The mounding analysis shall be
calculated using the most restrictive soil horizon that will
remain in place within the explored aquifer thickness unless
alternative analyses is authorized by the Municipal Engineer.
The mounding analysis shall be accompanied by a cross section
of the infiltration BMP and surrounding topography and the
mound analysis shall extend out to the point(s) at which the
mound intersects with the preexisting maximum water table
elevation.
(m) The applicant shall demonstrate that stormwater infiltration
BMPs meet the seventy-two-hour drain time requirement
established in § 157-8B(1) of this article.
D. Pretreatment measures for infiltration BMPs. By reducing incoming
velocities and capturing coarser sediments, pretreatment can extend
the functional life and increase the pollutant removal capability of
infiltration measures. Therefore, the installation of pretreatment
measures is recommended for all development sites. Pretreatment
measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Vegetative filter strips;
(2) Bioretention systems. Used in conjunction with a bioretention
system, the infiltration basin takes the place of the standard
underdrain;
(3) Sand filters;
(4) Grassed swales; and
(5) Detention basins.
E. Collection and conveyance.
(1) Bicycle-safe inlet grates. Site development plans that incorporate
site design features that help to prevent discharge to trash and
debris from drainage systems shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through
storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended or settleable solids.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
§ 157-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-14
157:473
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 157-6 are conveyed through any device (e.g.,
end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 157-6 of this article; or
[4] Where the NJDEP determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 157-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-14
157:474
§ 157-15. Additional sources for technical guidance.
(2) Catch basins. Catch basins are storm drain inlets with or without
sumps. Catch basins may provide pretreatment for other
stormwater BMPs by capturing large sediments. The sediment and
pollutant removal efficiency of catch basins depends on the size of
the sump and the performance of routine maintenance to retain the
available sediment storage space in the sump. Where catch basins
with sumps are proposed, the minimum two feet separation
between the bottom of the sump and seasonally high water table
shall be provided.
(3) Open or perforated conveyance piping. Where adequate separation
to the seasonal high water table exists, stormwater from the
development site may be conveyed to a stormwater basin via a
system of perforated pipes. These pipes may be made of PVC or
corrugated metal and are available with perforations of varying
size and spacing. Perforated pipe specifications shall be certified by
a professional engineer. A professional engineer shall certify that
perforated conveyance piping will not act to intercept the seasonal
high water table and convey groundwater to the stormwater basin.
All open or perforated stormwater conveyance systems shall be
installed with a minimum separation of two feet from the seasonal
high water table.
A. NJDEP technical guidance sources.
(1) New Jersey BMP Manual. Available from the Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; or online at
http://www.njstormwater.org.
(2) NJDEP Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual.
Available from the Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; or online at http://njedl.rutgers.edu/ftp/PDFs/
1188.pdf.
B. Additional guidance sources.
(1) New Jersey Pinelands Commission, PO Box 7, 15 Springfield Road,
New Lisbon, New Jersey 08064; Phone: (609) 894-7300; Web site:
http://www.state.nj.us/pinelands.
(2) State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey. Available from all state soil
conservation districts including Burlington County Soil
Conservation District, Tiffany Square, Suite 100, 1289 Route 38,
Hainesport, New Jersey 08036; Phone: (609) 267-7410; Fax: (609)
267-3347; Web site: http:/bscd.org.
(3) State soil conservation districts.
§ 157-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 157-15
157:475
(4) New Jersey Department of Transportation, PO Box 600, Trenton, NJ
08625-0600; Phone: (609) 530-3536; Web site:
http://www.state.nj.us/transportation.
§ 157-15 WOOLWICH CODE § 157-15
157:476
Chapter 159
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 90.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 159.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 182.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 157-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 157-15
159:477

ARTICLE I
Construction Materials, Sidewalks
[Adopted as Article XIX of an ordinance adopted 4-3-1961]
§ 159-1. Sidewalks to be kept clean during construction.
All lumber and other materials used in the construction of buildings shall be
placed or located as in no way to interfere with the safety or convenience
of persons traveling on or over the sidewalks, and at least four feet of
sidewalk must be free at all times from any material that is to be used in the
construction of said buildings, and after sunset red lanterns must be placed
around any materials or excavation located on streets or highways. Nothing
shall be left as a nuisance on premises at any time during construction.
§ 159-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
§ 159-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 159-2
159:479

ARTICLE II
Street Excavations and Openings
[Adopted 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1668]
§ 159-3. Title.
This article may be cited as the “Street Openings and Excavations
Ordinance of the Township of Woolwich.”
§ 159-4. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association or corporation
to cut, break into, excavate or open any road, street, avenue or highway
in the Township of Woolwich, or any portion of the right-of-way, without
first making written application to the Township Clerk stating the kind,
character and purpose of the proposed excavation or opening and such
other information which may be reasonably required to fulfill the
requirements of this article. Applications shall be accompanied by six copies
of a scaled plan, showing its location and size, and all construction details
to be distributed, copies to the Township Engineer, and the final copy to be
filed with Township. There shall be obtained from the Clerk a permit for
each and every opening.
§ 159-5. Issuance of permit.
Permits shall be issued, subject to the terms hereof, by the Clerk upon
the approval of the application by the Township Engineer, which approval
shall be given if the application and plans conform to the requirements of
this article and provide for the work to be performed in accordance with
Woolwich Township ordinances and the current New Jersey State Highway
Department Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. The
permit (application and plans) must be signed by both Township Clerk and
Township Engineer to be valid.
§ 159-6. Engineer’s review and inspection.
Upon review and approval of the permit (application and plan), with any
necessary revisions, the Township Engineer shall return three signed sets
of same to the Township Clerk, and the Township Clerk shall, after signing
the permit, distribute same as follows:
A. One copy to the applicant.
B. One copy to the Township Engineer.
C. One copy to the Township files.
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, adopted 9-17-1979 by Ord. No.
79-2, as amended, which article consisted of § 159-3 through § 159-13.
§ 159-3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 159-7
159:481
§ 159-7. Time limit of valid permit.
The permit for street opening shall be valid, as prescribed herein, for
a period of one year from the date of issuance. All proposed work and
all temporary and permanent repairs shall be completed in this one-year
period.
§ 159-8. Time sequence of permit and repairs.
§ 159-9. Fees and cash security performance deposit.
Before an issuance of any street opening permit, fees and a cash security
performance deposit shall be received in the offices of the Township Clerk
as follows:
A. The proposed construction shown on the permit (application and plan)
shall proceed, during the one-year permit period, in accordance with
the following phase sequence.
Time Frame
(month)
Actual Time
(months)
Activity
0 to 2 2 Proposed construction and all
temporary repairs to be
completed
2 to 6 4 Time period to allow disturbed
subsurface soil to settle and/or
compact
6 to 7 1 Temporary repairs removed
and permanent repairs
completed
7 to 12 5 Time period for permanent
repairs to be tested and
inspected
B. The one-year permit validation period may be changed or revised as
may be necessary when recommendation by the Township Engineer is
reviewed and approved by the Committee.
A. The application fee shall be $100. The application review fee deposit
shall be $300.
B. The applicant must post a cash performance guaranty in the amount of
$50 per square yard of trench excavation, with the minumum
performance guaranty being not less than $750.
C. The escrow inspection fee to be paid upon filing an application for a
utility openings permit for the improved roads shall be based on the
following:
§ 159-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 159-9
159:482
§ 159-9.1. Mandatory liability insurance requirement. [Added
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-22]
(1) Five hundred dollars for trench areas totaling 60 square yards or
less.
(2) An amount equal to 5% of the performance guaranty as determined
by Subsection B above for trench areas greater than 60 square
yards.
D. Where trenching is to take place outside the cartway but within the
R.O.W., fees and bonding requirements will be as in Subsections A, B,
and C above.
E. Where tunneling or trenchless technology is utilized in lieu of the open
cut method, a bond will be posted as required in Subsection B above,
with the provision that the trench width will be based upon the open cut
method. All fees will be as required in Subsections A, B and C above.
F. No fee shall be charged for a permit to construct a curb on any street
unless such construction will result in damage to the street surface. In
such an event, an escrow fee shall be determined by the Inspections
and Approval Officer in such amount as shall be required to pay the cost
of repairing the surface of such street by Woolwich Township should the
permittee fail in his responsibility to repair the road surface as
required. Curbing broken or removed during the installation of utilities
covered under a utility opening permit shall he repaired or replaced by
the permittee. The cost of the repair shall be borne by the permittee.
Should the permittee fail to repair curbing broken by his activities,
Woolwich Township shall repair the curb and assess the permittee for
all costs incurred.
G. In the event that the Inspection and Approval Officer determines that
any excavation for which a permit has been issued is of greater
dimensions than those stated in the permit, or if the Inspection and
Approval Officer determines that any street surface has been damaged
in connection with the constructions of curbs and such damage has not
been repaired, then and in either case the Inspection and Approval
Officer shall notify the applicant, who shall pay any additional fee and
post any additional bond as required forthwith and before continuing
any further work in connection with such excavation or construction.
H. In all cases where the forgoing bonds are posted, the permittee shall
restore the surface of the street upon the completion of the work by the
permittee in accordance with the provisions of this section. Upon
verification of completion of the restoration of the street surface by the
Inspection and Approval Officer, and a six-month maintenance period,
the bond fees shall be released to the permittee. Any unused escrow
fees shall be returned to the permittee.
§ 159-9 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 159-9.1
159:483
§ 159-10. Permit rules and regulations.
All permits issued under this section shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations and requirements:
A. Every contractor must supply proof of insurance coverage to Woolwich
Township prior to obtaining any permit.
B. Every contractor shall provide an insurance certificate to the Township
naming the Township of Woolwich and its Engineer as an additional
named insured on the policy.
C. The minimum amount of liability insurance required shall be $100,000
with a maximum amount of liability insurance of $300,000. The
Township Engineer shall have the sole discretion to determine the
amount of liability coverage required above the $100,000 minimum
limit based upon the scope of the work to be completed.
A. Every permittee shall keep each opening properly guarded and shall
backfill and close open trench areas by the end of each workday.
Restoration with bituminous stabilized base material must occur within
24 hours of opening the trench. Under no circumstances will trenches
be left backfilled to grade with stone or similar material for more than
24 hours. Additional devices shall be installed by the applicant as
required by the Inspection and Approval Officer. All work done under
any permit shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel along the affected street. No street shall be
closed to traffic unless specific permission therefor has been granted by
the Inspection and Approval Officer and proper notification has been
provided to the Woolwich Township Police Department and all
emergency service agencies.
B. Each permittee shall, as a condition of accepting any permit issued
hereunder, save, hold and keep harmless and indemnify the Township of
Woolwich, its officers, and agents against any claims, demands or
expense arising out of any suit or claim for damage or injury alleged to
have been sustained as a result of any work done under such permit.
C. Upon application being made therefor, the Inspection and Approval
Officer may extend the time during which any permit shall be valid for
such a period as the Inspection and Approval Officer deems it advisable.
In the event that the work required to be done by a permittee shall not
be completed within the time stated on any permit or any extension
thereof, then the Inspection and Approval Officer may complete the
work required to be done by the permittee and restore the surface of
the street affected. The permittee shall, upon demand, pay Woolwich
Township the cost of completing such work as the permittee is required
to do under this section, and such amount may be recovered by
Woolwich Township in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 159-9.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 159-10
159:484
§ 159-11. Restoration of surface.
In all cases where permits are issued hereunder wherein the permittee is
to restore the surface of the street, the following rules, regulations and
requirements shall apply:
D. No work for which a permit is issued hereunder shall be conducted in
such a manner as to interfere with any water main or sewer line or any
connection from either of the same to any building, unless specific
permission to interfere with such main or line is obtained in advance
from the Inspection and Approval Officer. No excavation which may
result in damage to or destruction of any trees or shrubbery or any
Woolwich Township property shall be made unless specific permission
therefor is granted by the Inspection and Approval Officer prior to the
work being done.
E. Every permittee shall completely backfill any excavation made and
replace as much as possible of the material excavated. Such material
shall be compacted by rolling, tamping or other suitable means as
directed by the Inspection and Approval Officer. Any additional backfill
material required shall be furnished by the permittee. In any case
where the Inspection and Approval Officer determines that the
excavation material is unsatisfactory for backfill, the permittee shall
backfill the excavation with sand, gravel or other approved material,
which shall be placed in layers not exceeding six inches in depth,
moistened and thoroughly compacted as directed by the Inspection and
Approval Officer as to achieve minimum 95% modified proctor density.
Upon completion of the work, the permittee shall remove any excess
material and leave the premises in a clean condition. Upon
determination of the Inspection and Approval Officer that any backfilled
excavation has settled or caved in, the permittee shall promptly upon
notice of such determination continue backfilling as above described
until the Inspection and Approval Officer determines that the
settlement is complete.
F. In the event that tunneling operations shall be required to reach a point
of connection with any main line, the backfill in any such tunnel shall
consist of rammed cement concrete or flowable fill material.
A. No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street foundation
or surface until the Inspection and Approval Officer deemed that the
settlement of the subsurface is complete and the area properly
prepared for restoration.
B. All subbases and base courses shall be restored to a width of 12 inches
wider than the width of the excavation and to a length of 12 inches
longer than the length of the excavation.
C. The street surface shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than
the width of the restored foundation and to a length of 12 inches longer
than the length of the restored foundation.
§ 159-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 159-11
159:485
§ 159-12. Moratorium on openings.
No permits shall be granted on a newly improved Township road for a
period of five years except in cases of emergency. Emergencies shall include
utility repairs and any other emergency certified by the Township
Committee, Construction Code Official, Manager and the Township
Engineer or Public Works Director.
§ 159-13. Regulating street and right-of-way openings.
“Improved road” shall mean any Township road surfaced with existing
asphalt, concrete, bituminous concrete, or similar pavement. Minimum
standards for improved roads shall be six inches of dense graded aggregate
or soil aggregate, (I-5), four inches of bituminous-stabilized-concrete base
course (Mix I-2) and two inches of FABC (Mix I-5) surface course.
§ 159-13.1. Backfilling and repaving.
Upon such notice to the Township Engineer and under his inspection,
the contractor securing the permit hereunder shall immediately, after
completing the work necessitating the excavating or opening, refill with
material suitable to the Township Engineer, properly tamped, and restore
the excavation or opening with a temporary cover as follows: earth and
gravel roads with gravel not less than eight inches thick; all other roads
and walks with two inches of patch, Type R.R. or F.A.B.C. No. 1 or No. 2.
D. When any foundation is restored by the use of cement concrete, the
same shall consist of 4,000 psi concrete in accordance with NJDOT.
E. All foundations and surfaces of improved roads shall be restored to
their original thickness, width and grade with the same type of material
as existed prior to the making of the excavation. Care should be taken
to reconstruct the trench areas so as to recreate or improve upon the
road cross section. In no case, however, shall restoration be completed
with less than the following materials and thickness:
(1) Six inches compacted dense graded aggregate or soil aggregate,
I-5.
(2) Four inches bituminous stabilized base course, Mix I-2 constructed
in layers not more than two inches compacted thickness.
(3) Two inches FABC Mix I-5 surface course applied and tack coated to
existing edge of pavement.
(4) A hot sealer shall be applied to all joints where new and old
bituminous material meet.
F. The foundations and surfaces of improved roads shall he made with the
materials as specified herein or as directed by the Inspection and
Approval Officer.
§ 159-11 WOOLWICH CODE § 159-13.1
159:486
The applicant shall maintain the area of excavation free from potholes and
depressions until the final surface has been applied and approved.
§ 159-13.2. Completion of repairs by Township.
§ 159-13.3. Restrictions.
Unless written permission is obtained from the Township Clerk, no permit
holder shall be allowed permission to cut, break into, excavate or open a
road, street, avenue or highway for a greater distance than 300 feet at
one time, or keep the same open for a longer period than one week. For
all the period during which such road, street, avenue or highway is being
cut, broken into, excavated or opened by the permit holder, there shall be
provided by the permit holder a space of street level of at least 10 feet in
width for the purpose of allowing vehicles free and unimpeded use of the
same. In no event shall a permit be valid for a period of time in excess of 60
days after its issuance without the written approval of the Township Clerk.
§ 159-13.4. Work regulations.
All cuts, breaks, excavations or openings shall conform in size to the
application on which the permit is based and shall be performed in neat,
even and rectangular sections. All excavations to a depth of six feet or over,
and such other excavations as may be required by the Township Engineer,
shall be shored and braced to support the walls of the trench for the
protection of workmen and to prevent the unintentional widening of the
trench.
§ 159-13.5. Safety precautions.
All permit holders shall, whenever any cut, excavation or opening would
be dangerous if left exposed, erect a suitable barricade or railing around
the same in such manner as to prevent danger to pedestrians or vehicles
and place upon such fence or railing and upon any building materials
A. If the Township completes either temporary or permanent repairs
following a street opening, all costs incurred by the Township shall be
deducted from the cash security performance deposit along with new
filing fee and new engineer inspection and review fees. Costs for such
repairs shall include but shall not be limited to all labor, wages,
supervision, equipment, materials, gas, oil and advertising.
B. If the Township completes both temporary and permanent repairs, the
entire cash security performance deposit shall be made available to a
cost incurred by the Township to affect said repairs with the balance of
deposit, if any, to be credited to the general revenues of the Township.
The holder of the permit shall be considered to fault on the permit when
the applicant fails to make needed repairs within 10 days after written,
regular mail, notification from the Township Clerk. After a permit is in
fault, the Township shall make all necessary repairs without any further
notification to the holder of the permit.
§ 159-13.1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 159-13.5
159:487
and appliances suitable and sufficient warning lights during the period of
darkness.
§ 159-13.6. Maintenance of area.
All permit holders shall keep the area of their work clear of dirt and debris
at all times and shall carry away and dispose of excess dirt, debris and other
materials resulting from their work.
§ 159-13.7. Disposition of monies.
All monies received hereunder by the Township Clerk shall be accounted for
and deposited with the Township Treasurer.
§ 159-13.8. Emergencies.
In case of any emergency involving any underground gas, water, sewer,
telephone or electric facility, where immediate repair is imperative to
prevent loss or damage to streets or property or discontinuance of service,
it shall not be necessary to obtain a permit before commencing such repair,
but such permit shall be obtained within two days thereafter, and this
section shall not be held or taken in any case to exempt the person,
partnership, association or corporation repairing said facility from any
other of the provisions of this article.
§ 159-13.9. Exceptions.
The terms of this article shall not apply to a street in any subdivision
approved by the Township of Woolwich Planning Board prior to acceptance
of said street for maintenance by the Township.
§ 159-13.10. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person to whom a permit is issued who fails to provide the
appropriate notices to either the Township Clerk, the Township
Engineer or any Township employee charged with the responsibility of
inspecting said street opening shall be required to reimburse the
Township of Woolwich for any and all costs incurred in correcting any
deficiencies in the street opening or the subsequent repair of same.
B. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, in addition to the liability as set forth above, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $500 and may be
imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days at the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
and shall be punishable as same.
§ 159-13.5 WOOLWICH CODE § 159-13.10
159:488
ARTICLE III
Maintenance of Streets, Sidewalks and Curbs
[Adopted 11-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-28]
§ 159-14. Notice to repair.
Whenever any sidewalk or curb shall be in need of repair, the Administrator,
pursuant to a resolution of the Township Committee, may notify, in writing,
the owner or owners of said lands, requiring the necessary specified work
to said curbs or sidewalks to be done by said owner or owners within a
period of not less than 30 days from the date of service of said notice,
either personally or by leaving the same at his, her or their usual place
of residence with a member of their family above the age of 14 years,
if such owner or owners are residents in the township. In case any such
owner or owners shall not reside in the township, such notice may be served
upon him personally or mailed to his, her or their last known post office
address, certified mail, return receipt requested, or it may be served upon
the occupant of the property or upon the agent of the owner thereof. In case
such owner is a nonresident of the municipality or his or her post office
address cannot be ascertained, then the notice may be inserted for four
weeks, once a week, in some newspaper of some municipality, or if none
is published therein, then in some newspaper published in the state and
circulating in said municipality.
§ 159-15. Contents of notice.
Such notice above mentioned shall contain a description of the lands,
sufficiently definite in terms to identify the same, as well as the description
of the required repairing, and also a notice that said repairs shall be
completed within 30 days after the service thereof. It is the intention of
the township to make such repairs or cause the same to be done and paid
for out of the municipal funds available for that purpose, that the cost of
such work shall be certified by the Township Engineer to the Tax Collector
within the township; that upon filing said certificate, the amount of the cost
of such work shall be and become a lien upon said abutting lands in front of
which said work was performed to the same extent that assessment for local
improvements are liens in the Township of Woolwich and shall be collected
in the manner provided by law for the collection of such other assessments
and shall bear interest at the same rate; and that, in addition thereto, the
township may have an action to recover said amount against the owner of
said lands in any court having competent jurisdiction thereof.
§ 159-16. Collection of assessed costs.
Whenever any curb or sidewalk shall be repaired by the township, a true
and accurate account of the cost and expense thereof shall be kept, and a
true statement of such cost, under oath or affirmation, shall be forthwith
filed with the Clerk of the township, and the Township Committee shall
examine the same and, if the same is properly made, shall confirm the same
and file such report with the Tax Collector of the township, and he shall
§ 159-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 159-16
159:489
record the same in the same book as other assessments, which costs and
expenses of repairing such sidewalks and curbs, when so recorded, shall be
collected in the same manner and bear interest at the same rate as taxes. In
addition thereto, the township may have an action to recover said amount
against the owner of said lands in any court having competent jurisdiction
thereof. A certified copy of the aforesaid certificate shall in such action be
prima facie evidence of the existence of a debt due from said owner to the
township.
§ 159-17. Snow and ice removal; duty of owners or occupants to
remove.
§ 159-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons or corporation or corporations neglecting to comply
with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof, for every such neglect.
A. The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of
premises abutting or bordering upon any street in the Township of
Woolwich shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of
such streets or, in the case of ice which may be so frozen as to make
removal impractical, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand, salt or cinders within 24 hours after the same shall fall or be
formed thereon.
B. In case the building is occupied by more than one family or business
unit, then the tenant or occupant of the first floor or story thereof is
hereby required to remove all snow and ice from such portion of the
sidewalk or, in the case of ice which is impractical to remove, cover the
same with sand, salt or cinders within 24 hours after the same shall be
formed or fall thereon. The sidewalk shall be cleared from snow and ice,
creating a clear open path not less than 24 inches in width.
C. No person, firm or corporation, owner, tenant or occupant of any
premises abutting on any street shall throw, place or deposit any snow
or ice into or upon any street in said township, it being the intent and
purpose of this provision to prohibit all persons from throwing, casting,
placing or depositing snow and ice, which accumulated within the
private property belonging to said person, upon the sidewalks or streets
of the Township of Woolwich.
§ 159-16 WOOLWICH CODE § 159-18
159:490
ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal or Unaccepted and Unapproved Roads
[Adopted 10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 01-14]
§ 159-19. Owner, developer or subdivider responsible for removal.
Any owner, developer or subdivider of real property on or adjacent to
which said owner, developer or subdivider has constructed a street or road
open to the public but not yet accepted and approved by the Township
as a public road or street, and on which real property or subdivision has
been constructed at least three separate dwelling houses or an apartment
building or buildings containing three or more units of dwelling space,
which dwelling houses or units are occupied or intended to be occupied
by three or more persons who live independently of each other and whose
occupants depend on such street or road for access to and egress from their
dwelling houses or units to the public road system, and even though said
street or road has been deeded or dedicated to the Township but is not yet
finally approved or accepted by the Township, shall be obligated to remove
all snow and ice from such street or road within 12 hours of daylight after
the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 159-20. Written plan for removal.
§ 159-21. Costs of removal; lien to be placed.
The Township of Woolwich may provide for the removal of such snow or ice
by its own personnel and equipment or by a contractor where the owner,
developer or subdivider obligated by this article to do so shall fail to remove
snow or ice from such street or road as provided by this article. The cost
of such removal of any such snow or ice from any such street or road by
A. Every such owner, developer or subdivider while so obligated shall file
with the Township Clerk, within 12 days after the effective date of this
article and annually on November 1 of each calendar year, a written
plan for snow and ice removal. Said plan shall include:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of a person responsible
for snow and ice removal from such street or roadway who can be
reached 24 hours a day.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of any contractor who is
responsible for such snow removal.
(3) A list of all equipment and supplies available for such snow and ice
removal.
(4) The response time for the contractor to take action for snow and ice
removal.
B. Such owner, developer or subdivider shall notify the Township Clerk
within 10 days of any changes in the information set forth in said plan.
§ 159-19 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 159-21
159:491
the Township or a Township contractor shall be certified to the governing
body of Woolwich Township by the officer in charge thereof. The governing
body shall examine such certificate, and if found to be correct, shall cause
such cost to be charged against such real property owned by such owner,
developer or subdivider who is obligated by this article to perform such
ice and snow removal over which or through which such street or road is
located. The amount so charged shall be paid to the Township within 14
days of written notice thereof, mailed or delivered to said owner, developer
or subdivider, and that amount if not so paid shall become a lien and tax
upon such real property and be added to and be part of the taxes next to be
levied and assessed thereon and enforced and collected with interest by the
same officers and in the same manner as other taxes. Such removal of snow
and ice by the Township or its contractor shall not constitute acceptance of
such street or road by the Township as a public street or road.
§ 159-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of the
following: by a fine not exceeding $1,000; or by imprisonment not exceeding
90 days. Each additional day in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate violation under this section.
§ 159-21 WOOLWICH CODE § 159-22
159:492
ARTICLE V
Parking Prohibited for Snow Removal
[Adopted 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-06]
§ 159-23. Establishment.
Parking prohibited for snowplowing and snow removal regulations are
hereby established in the Township of Woolwich.
§ 159-24. Prohibited parking.
§ 159-25. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the costs of the removal and storage which may result
from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 159-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of the
following: by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding
90 days. Each additional day in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate violation under this section.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the public thoroughfares, public streets or public highways, an
emergency shall exist, and no vehicle shall be parked on any of the
public thoroughfares, public streets or public highways or parts thereof
in the Township of Woolwich.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect until the snow has
ceased, and until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the
extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic and
snowplowing activities.
§ 159-23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 159-26
159:493

ARTICLE VI
Basketball Standards
[Adopted 6-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
§ 159-27. Establishment.
Basketball standard regulations are hereby established in the Township of
Woolwich.
§ 159-28. Portable basketball units prohibited in streets.
All portable basketball units shall be prohibited from being placed within
the confines of the streets, roadways, cartways and highways within the
Township of Woolwich.
§ 159-29. Permitted areas; use specifications.
Portable basketball units shall be permitted on or within the easement
areas between the curb and private property as long as actively in use.
All portable basketball units shall be used according to manufacturer
specifications. No use of any cinderblocks, sandbags, or any other objects
may be used to weigh down or secure the portable basketball unit. Units
must remain movable.
§ 159-30. Permanent basketball poles prohibited within easements.
Permanent basketball pole standards are prohibited from being installed
within the easement area between curb and private property line.
§ 159-31. Enforcement.
The Township’s Zoning Officer, the Police Department and any other
Township Official designated to be in charge of code enforcement or citizen
safety within the Township of Woolwich shall be authorized to take action to
enforce this article.
§ 159-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of the
following: by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding
90 days. Each additional day in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate violation under this section.
§ 159-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 159-32
159:495
Chapter 163
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 23.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Earth removal — See Ch. 90.
Development fees and escrow deposits — See
Ch. 95.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 159-32 WOOLWICH CODE § 159-32
159:496
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 163-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require approval of subdivisions within the
Township of Woolwich by the Planning Board or, in appropriate cases, by
the Board of Adjustment, for the purposes set forth in the Municipal Land
Use Law69 and to exercise the power to regulate subdivisions granted to
municipalities of the State of New Jersey.
§ 163-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Woolwich Township
Subdivision Ordinance of 1977."
§ 163-3. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR-SIGHT DISTANCE — A line of unobstructed vision from a point
3.75 feet above the center line of a street to a point on the same center
line.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area at a street intersection
with any other street, an alley or a driveway, where vision from an
automobile is unobstructed, formed by the intersecting street lines
and a line drawn between points on the street center lines located a
required distance in feet from the intersection of the center lines.
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street with access closed at one end by a
vehicular turnaround.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision that
is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance
with this chapter and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper
County Recording Officer.
HIGH DENSITY — Those residential and zoning districts in which the
density is equal to or greater than five or more dwelling units for acre.
69.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 163-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-3
159:497
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOW DENSITY — Those residential and zoning districts in which the
density is equal to or less than three dwelling units per acre.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any
improvements required by the Municipal Land Use Law. 70
MEDIUM DENSITY — Those residential and zoning districts in which
the density is between three and five dwelling units per acre.
OBLIGOR — One that places himself under a legal obligation.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article 5 of
the Municipal Land Use Law.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having a proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, which may be accepted
by a municipality, including cash, provided that a municipality shall not
require more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PLANNING BOARD — The Township Planning Board.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision and site improvements that is submitted to
the Township Clerk for Planning Board consideration and preliminary
approval and meeting the requirements of § 163-13 of this chapter.
SITE PLAN — The development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes, waterways, the location of all existing and proposed buildings,
drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress,
drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, streets, curbing,
sidewalks, structures and signs, lighting, screening devices and any
other information that may reasonably be required by the Planning
Board.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting
the requirements of § 163-12 of this chapter.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way that is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action of the Township or a
70.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 163-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-3
159:498
street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of the Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats,
and includes the land between the street lines whether improved or
unimproved and may compose pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose
of this chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within
the meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created: divisions
of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof
appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all
resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size; divisions of property by
ALLEYS — Minor service streets used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or side of abutting properties.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREETS — The street intended to move traffic
between local streets to and from secondary arterials. A collector
street serves a neighborhood or large subdivision.
(2)
LOCAL STREETS — A street intended to provide access to other
streets from individual properties and to provide right-of-way
beneath it for sewer, water and storm drainage pipes.
(3)
MAJOR ARTERIALS — A street intended to move through traffic
to and from such major attractors as central business districts,
regional shopping centers, colleges and/or universities, military
installations, major industrial areas and similar traffic generators
within the governmental unit; and/or as a route for traffic between
communities or large areas. They should be so designed so that no
residential properties face onto them.
(4)
MINOR ARTERIALS — A street intended to collect and distribute
traffic in a manner similar to primary arterials, except that these
streets service minor traffic generating from areas such as
community-commercial areas, primary and secondary educational
plants, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches and offices,
and/or designed to carry traffic, from collector streets to the system
of primary arterials. They should be so designed so that no
residential properties face onto them.
(5)
SERVICE ROADS — Low-volume roads parallel to and adjacent to
arterials and highways that provide access and frontage to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
(6)
§ 163-3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-3
159:499
testamentary or intestate provisions; divisions of property upon court
order; and conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or
other instrument. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the
purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, and such other duties relating to land subdivision which
may be conferred on this Committee by the Board.
SUBDIVISION, INDUSTRIAL — A division of a tract or parcel of land
into sites, lots or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development for industrial
uses. An industrial subdivision shall not be accorded minor subdivision
treatment regardless of the number of lots involved. However, after
approval of an industrial subdivision as a result of following the major
subdivision procedures, the interior divisions of the aforesaid industrial
tract shall be treated as minor subdivisions regardless of the number
thereof, provided that they shall meet with the criteria as set forth
under the definition of "subdivision, minor," excluding items in
Subsection (3) thereof which pertain to the number of prior
subdivisions. They must comply, however, with the provisions for site
plan review. 71
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — All subdivisions not classified as industrial or
minor subdivisions.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land that does not involve
the creation of more than three lots in addition to any one retained
parcel, planned development, any new street or extension of any offtract
improvement. In determining whether a proposed subdivision
qualifies as a minor subdivision, lots shall be counted as
follows:[Amended 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-01]
(1) All lots to be created by the proposed subdivision.
(2) All lot(s) in excess of one that are to be retained by the subdivider.
All lots created within the preceding 10 years as the result of
subdivisions of land that include the subject parcel.
(3)
(4) No lot shall be counted twice.
B. Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in P.L. 1975, c.
291,72 such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the
definition of such term found in such statute, unless a contrary
intention is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Site Plan Review.
72.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 163-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-3
159:500
ARTICLE II
Site Plan Approval
§ 163-4. General approval requirements.
§ 163-5. Minor subdivision.
A. No one shall subdivide or resubdivide land in the Township of Woolwich
without first obtaining approval by the Township Planning Board.
B. No approval shall be granted until the payment of the appropriate fees
as specified by Township ordinance.73
C. No minor or major subdivision shall be finally approved until proof has
been submitted that no taxes or assessments for local improvement are
due or delinquent on the property for which the subdivision application
is made.
D. Unless otherwise specified herein, applications and approval
procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Chapter
23, Land Use Procedures, and the Municipal Land Use Law.74
E. In the event any single property owner or consortium of property
owners owns property located within the Woolwich Regional Center
and Auburn Road Village, as defined in Part 2 of the Zoning
Ordinance,75 entitled "Woolwich Regional Center and Auburn Road
Village Regulations and Design Standards," consisting of 15 acres or
more, he/she or it may apply to the Joint Land Use Board for General
Development Plan (GDP) approval for its portions of either Center and
shall be subject to the provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 et seq. regarding
GDP review and approvals. Both property owners or consortiums of
property owners who obtain GDP approval and those who do not obtain
a GDP approval for their property shall be required to obtain site plan
and/or subdivision approval as may be required by law in addition to
complying with the conditions of Part 2 of the Zoning Ordinance.76
[Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-17]
A. The Planning Board shall waive notice and pubic hearing for an
application for development if the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee of the Board appointed by the Chairman finds that the
application for development based on a sketch plat submission
conforms to the definition of "minor subdivision."
B. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision by the Board, provided that the Board or said subcommittee
may condition approval on terms assuring the provision of
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 93, Fees.
74.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning, Part 2.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning, Part 2.
§ 163-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-5
159:501
§ 163-6. Preliminary and final approval of major subdivision.
improvements pursuant to Section 29, 29.1, 29.2, and 41 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.77 The provisions of N.J.S.A 40:55D-47 shall
govern such application and approval.
C. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or denied within 45 days
of the date of submission of a complete application to the Planning
Board or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from
the date of Planning Board approval unless within such period a plat in
conformity with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing
Law,78 or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivisions, is
filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer, the Municipal
Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed must
be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board before
it will be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer.79
A. In order to obtain preliminary major subdivision approval, the Planning
Board shall require that the developer submit to the Administrative
Officer a preliminary plat and such other information that is reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for preliminary approval have been met,
provided that minor subdivisions shall not be subject to this section.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48 shall govern such application
procedure and approval, in addition to the provisions of the Land Use
Procedures Ordinance of the Township of Woolwich.
B. Upon submission of a complete application for a subdivision of 10 or
fewer lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 45 days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days
of the date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be
deemed to have granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.80
C. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to exercise its ancillary
powers before the granting of a variance as set forth in § 23-1G(8) of
Chapter 23, Land Use Procedures, the Planning Board shall grant or
deny approval of the application within 95 days after submission by the
developer of a complete application or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application
77.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 40:55D-39, 40:55D-40 and 40:55D-53.
78.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
80.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 163-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-6
159:502
§ 163-7. Granting of exceptions.
The Planning Board when acting upon application for a preliminary or minor
subdivision approval shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements for subdivision as may be reasonable and within the general
purpose and intent of the provisions for subdivision review and approval
of this chapter, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this
chapter is impractical or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.81
D. Provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49 shall apply in the event of preliminary
approval of a major subdivision.
E. Final approval.
(1) Effect of final approval of major subdivision. The provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52 shall apply to the final approval of a major
subdivision.
(2) The Planning Board shall grant final approval of a major
subdivision if the detailed drawings, specifications, final plat and
estimates of the application for final approval conform to the
standards established by ordinances of the Township of Woolwich,
the conditions of preliminary approval and the standards
prescribed by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c.141 (N.J.S.A
46:23-9.9 et seq). All fees required by ordinance of the Township of
Woolwich shall be paid prior to final approval of a major
subdivision. The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50 shall apply to final
approval of major subdivisions. Deeds for all easements to the
Township, as required by the Planning Board and approved by the
Municipal Engineer as to content and by the Municipal Attorney as
to form, shall be delivered by the subdivider prior to final approval.
(3) Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of submission of a complete application or
within such further time as may be considered to by the applicant.82
(4) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days
from the date of signing the plat. 83
81.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
82.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
83.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 163-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-8
159:503
§ 163-8. Simultaneous review and approval of conditional uses.
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses simultaneously with the review for subdivision approval
without the developer being required to make further applications to the
Planning Board or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearing. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board, whether
it be for subdivisions or conditional use, shall apply. Whenever approval of
a conditional use is requested by the developer pursuant to this section,
notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for
such conditional use.
§ 163-9. Distribution of copies of plats.
Copies of any plats received in application for approval of a minor
subdivision or preliminary or final approval of a major subdivision shall
upon receipt by the Administrative Officer or Secretary of the Board be
immediately forwarded to the following persons:
§ 163-9.1. Notice to local school districts. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
A. Municipal Clerk.
B. Municipal Engineer.
C. Zoning Officer.
D. County Planning Board.
E. Tax Assessor.
F. County Board of Health.
G. Local Fire Department or Fire Marshal (major subdivisions only).
A. Final approval for major final subdivision approval involving residential
housing shall be conditioned upon the applicant furnishing final
development plans to both the Swedesboro-Woolwich School District
and the Kingsway Regional School District. Said plans shall include the
following:
(1) Plot plan showing all lots and number of lots contained therein.
(2) Street map of development, including street names.
B. Proof of service. The Township of Woolwich will not sign approved plans
until the applicant has provided a certification of proof of service to the
school districts on a form to be provided to the applicant along with
proof of return receipt of certified mailing.
§ 163-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-10
159:504
§ 163-10. Improvements or guaranties prior to final approval.
Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the developer will have
installed the improvements required by the preliminary approval, the
Planning Board and this chapter, or prior to final approval, the approving
authority may require a corporate surety bond, a certified check returnable
to the subdivider after full compliance or any other type of surety approved
by the governing body and approved to form by the Municipal Solicitor
for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract
improvements and for installation of off-tract improvements. The provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall govern said bonds and the completion, inspection
and approval of said improvements and the payment of inspection fees.
§ 163-10.1. Nonapplicability to commercial development. [Added
5-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-07]
The requirement for performance guarantees as set forth in § 163-10 shall
not apply to commercial development.
§ 163-11. Installation of utilities or filing of performance guaranty.
The final plat of a major subdivision shall be accompanied by a statement
by the Municipal Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities
and exact location and elevation identifying those portions already installed
and those to be installed and that the subdivider has complied with one or
both of the following:
A. Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations or
B. Filed a performance guaranty which has been approved by the
Municipal Solicitor and is in sufficient amount to assure the completion
of all required improvements.
§ 163-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-11
159:505

ARTICLE III
Plat Detail Requirements
§ 163-12. Sketch plat requirements.
The sketch plat shall be legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale as large as
practicable, but in no case smaller than one inch equals 400 feet, prepared
by a New Jersey licensed surveyor or planner and shall show or include the
following information:
A. A key map showing the subdivision and its relation to surrounding
areas.
B. The location and clear indication of that portion which is to be
subdivided in relation to the entire tract.
C. All land owners, municipal boundaries, existing zoning, existing
structures and wooded areas within the subdivision and within 200 feet
thereof.
D. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
E. All existing and proposed streets or roads in or within 500 feet of the
subdivision with the right-of-way widths clearly indicated.
F. All proposed lot lines and lot lines to be eliminated by the subdivision
clearly indicated.
G. Certification by the owner that the applicant is an agent of the owner of
the land and/or the owner has given consent under an option
agreement.84
H. The location, size and direction of flow of all streams, brooks, drainage
structures and drainage ditches in the subdivision or within 500 feet of
the subdivision and the location of federal flood hazard areas where
delineated within the subdivision.
I. The location and width of all existing and proposed utility and other
easements in the subdivision.
J. A copy of any protective covenants or restrictions applying to the land
being subdivided.
K. A certificate of the tax collector that all taxes on the subdivision are
paid.
L. North arrow.
M. Scale of the plat.
N. Acreage of the entire tract and the area being subdivided.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 163-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-12
159:507
§ 163-13. Preliminary plat requirements.
The preliminary plat shall be legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of
no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet. Deviations form this requirement
may be permitted for certain items of the plans upon request at the sketch
plat submission and upon the recommendation of the Planning Board. The
preliminary plat shall be prepared under the supervision of a New Jersey
licensed land surveyor and a New Jersey licensed engineer and shall show
or include the following information:
O. The number of new lots created.
P. The name and address of the owner, subdivider and person preparing
the plat.
A. A key map at a scale if one inch equals 2,000 feet if greater than five
acres, clearly showing the location of the proposed subdivision within
the Township and in relation to major streets, water bodies and political
boundaries within the area.
B. The tract or subdivision name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers,
North arrow, graphic scale, reference meridian, date and the zoning
district in which the lot or lots are located and the following names and
addresses:
(1) The name and address of the record owner or owners.
(2) The name and address of record owner or owners of tracts abutting
onto and within 200 feet of the tract to be subdivided.
(3) The name and address of the person who prepared the map.
C. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to the nearest 1/10 of an acre.
D. The location of existing and proposed property lines, building setback
lines from streets, existing buildings and structures with an indication
of whether they will be retained or removed.
E. All existing elements, including but not limited to sidewalks, street,
paved areas, building utilities, plant materials and drainage lines that
are to be removed and/or demolished.
F. Typical profiles and cross sections of proposed streets within the
subdivision and existing streets and highways abutting the subdivision;
detailed plans and specifications for all proposed culverts and bridges
in the subdivision; traffic patterns and access aisles. The typical cross
sections of streets shall clearly indicate the type and width of pavement
and location of curbs, location of sidewalks and shade tree planting
strips, any existing or proposed sight triangles and radii of curblines at
intersections.
G. All existing and proposed setback dimensions, landscaped areas,
freestanding trees over six-inch caliper, the boundaries of all wooded
§ 163-12 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-13
159:508
areas and rows of trees, the location and extent of rock formations and
fencing within 100 feet of a street right-of-way line or proposed street
right-of-way.
H. Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals referenced to the
United States Coast and Geodetic datum and extending 200 feet beyond
the lot lines where possible and necessary. Two-foot contour intervals
are not necessary for retained parcels unless required by the Planning
Board.
I. All existing watercourses within the subdivision accompanied by the
following information or data:
(1) When a brook or stream is proposed for alteration, improvement or
relocation or when a drainage structure is proposed on a running
stream with a drainage area of 1/2 square mile or greater, evidence
of submission of the improvement to the New Jersey Division of
Water Policy and Supply as a condition of preliminary approval.
(2) When a ditch, stream, brook or watercourse is to be altered,
improved or relocated, the method of stabilizing slopes and
measures to control erosion and siltation, as well as typical ditch
sections and profiles.
J. The location and extent of the one-hundred-year floodplain within and
adjacent to the subdivision.
K. The total acreage in the drainage basin of any watercourse running
through or adjacent to the subdivision in the area upstream of the
subdivision.
L. The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest downstream
drainage structure and the acreage in the subdivision that drains to the
structure.
M. The location and extent of drainage and conservation easements and
stream encroachment lines within the subdivision.
N. The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing or proposed
lakes or ponds within or adjacent to the subdivision.
O. Plans and computations showing existing and proposed drainage
systems serving the subdivision, including the following:
(1) All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or adjacent to the
subdivision showing size and profile of the lines, direction of flow
and the location of each manhole and inlet.
(2) The location and extent of any proposed dry wells, groundwater
recharge basins, retention basins or other water conservation
devices.
§ 163-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-13
159:509
P. Plans showing existing and proposed sanitary sewerage facilities
serving the subdivision, including the following:
(1) Location, size and profiles of all sanitary sewer lines, pumping
stations and connections to existing facilities.
(2) Location of any proposed sanitary sewage treatment plants within
or adjacent to the subdivision.
Q. Plans showing the size and location of all water mains within the
subdivision.
R. Identification of lands within the subdivision to be dedicated or
reserved for public use.
S. The location of any other underground utilities and easements to
accommodate them.
T. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying or to
apply to the land being subdivided.
U. For any subdivision in which buildings at the time of construction will
not be connected to a public sewerage disposal system, three copies of
a subdivision sewage disposal report as required required in § 163-14.
V. After preliminary approval and prior to consideration of the final plat,
detailed plans and specifications for all proposed culverts and bridges
within county jurisdiction or improvements to existing county culverts
or bridges which shall be submitted to the County Planning Board for
review and approval of the County Engineer. The plans shall also be
accompanied by the permit of the New Jersey Division of Water Policy
and Supply indicating its approval of the proposed facility.
W. Erosion-sedimentation control plan as required by law for review by the
Gloucester County Soil Conservation District.
X. Environmental impact statement. [Added 4-3-1989 by Ord. No. 89-9;
amended 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-17]
(1) The applicant for preliminary approval of a major subdivision
consisting of more than five lots counting any retained parcels shall
also submit an environmental impact statement, in triplicate,
signed and sealed by a New Jersey licensed engineer. As used in
this chapter, an environmental impact statement means a written
description and analysis of all possible direct and indirect effects
the development will have upon the development's site as well as
upon the surrounding region affected thereby, with particular
reference to the effect of the development upon the public health,
welfare and safety, the protection of public and private property
and the preservation and enhancement of the natural environment.
Every environmental impact statement shall contain the following:
§ 163-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-13
159:510
(a) A key map showing the location of the development and how it
relates to the surrounding region affected thereby.
(b) A description of the development specifying, in the form of
maps, drawings, graphs or similar visual aids, and also by
narrative, what is to be done and how it is to be done during
and after construction of the development, including
information and technical data adequate to permit a careful
assessment of the environmental impact of the development.
(c) An inventory of the existing environmental conditions at the
development site and in the surrounding region affected
thereby which shall describe the following:
[1] Physical characteristics air quality.
[a] Air quality.
[b] Hydrology, including maps and descriptions of
streams, water bodies and floodplains and a
discussion of water quality.
[c] Geology.
[d] Soils and their properties, including capabilities and
limitations.
[e] Topography and slope.
[f] Drainage.
[g] Vegetation.
[h] Air quality and water quality which shall be described
with reference to the standards promulgated by the
Department of Environmental Protection of the State
of New Jersey and soils shall be described with
reference to criteria contained in the Gloucester
County, New Jersey Soil Survey standards and
specifications, issued by the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
[2] Wildlife.
[a] Fish and aquatic organisms.
[b] Wild animals.
[3] Man-made conditions and structures.
[a] Sanitary and storm sewer systems, including planned
construction.
[b] Noise characteristics and levels.
§ 163-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-13
159:511
[c] Traffic volume.
[d] Land use, including maps and descriptions of zoning
and Master Plan delineation of the development area.
[e] Aesthetics.
[4] Community character.
[a] History, including maps and descriptions of sites of
historic and archaeological significance.
[b] Demography.
[c] Culture.
[d] Maps and descriptions of sites reserved or planned for
recreational purposes or as wildlife refuges.
(d) A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals required by
municipal, county or state law, the status of each and proof that
the applicant has contacted officials of any federal state,
county or municipal agency affected by the proposed
development.
(e) An assessment of the probable impact of the development upon
all of the topics listed in Subsection X(1)(c) above.
(f) A listing and evaluation of adverse environmental impacts
which cannot be avoided, with particular emphasis upon air or
water pollution, increase in noise during and after
construction, damage to plants, tree and wildlife system
damage to natural resources, displacement of people and
businesses, increase in sedimentation and siltation, flooding,
potential stormwater runoff damage both on and off site,
increase in municipal services and the health, safety and wellbeing
of the public. Off-site and off-tract impact shall also be
set forth and evaluated.
(g) A thorough description of the steps to be taken to minimize
adverse environmental impact before, during and after
construction of the development, both at the development site
and in the surrounding region affected thereby, such
description to be accompanied by necessary maps, schedules
and other explanatory data as may be needed to clarify and
explain the actions to be taken.
(h) Identification and description of any irreversible and
irretrievable commitment of resources which would be
involved in the proposed action.
(i) A statement of alternatives to the proposed development which
might avoid some or all of the adverse environmental effects,
§ 163-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-13
159:512
§ 163-14. Soil percolation test requirements.
§ 163-15. Final plat requirements.
including a no-action alternative, with an objective evaluation
of each alternative including the no-action alternative.
(j) A reference list of available pertinent, published information
relating to the development, the development site and the
surrounding region affected thereby.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the reviewing board may waive the
requirement far an environmental impact statement if sufficient
evidence is submitted by the applicant to support a conclusion that
the proposed development will have a slight or negligible
environmental impact. Portions of such requirement may likewise
be waived upon a finding by the reviewing board that a complete
statement need not be prepared in order to evaluate adequately the
environmental impact of the development.
A. Soil percolation tests shall be performed for all subdivisions containing
buildings that at the time of construction will not be connected to a
public sewage disposal system.
B. Soil percolation tests shall be made in accordance with the applicable
state and local regulations.
C. The applicant's engineer shall enter the results of the tests on three
copies of a subdivision sewage disposal report and shall submit these
with the preliminary or sketch plat; provided, however, that, where the
approval of the proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities by the
appropriate county or state health agency is otherwise required, two
copies of its report of investigation and approval may be submitted in
lieu of the subdivision sewage disposal report as required in this
§ 163-14.
D. Soil percolation tests shall be performed at the site(s) of the proposed
on-site sanitary sewage disposal facility throughout the tract being
subdivided.
E. The results of the soil percolation tests shall be analyzed by the
Planning Board and the County Planning Board in conjunction with the
appropriate county and state agencies in relation to the physical
characteristics of the tract being subdivided and the general area
surrounding the tract being subdivided, and the final plat lot layout
shall be based on this analysis.
A. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale
no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet.
B. The size of all maps and plats shall be consistent with the sizes
permitted under N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., known as the "New Jersey
§ 163-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-15
159:513
Map Filing Act," as follows: 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches, 15 inches by 21
inches, 24 inches by 36 inches, 30 inches by 42 inches.
C. The final plat shall be prepared under the supervision of a licensed land
surveyor of the State of New Jersey. It shall be accompanied by a
development plan prepared by a New Jersey licensed engineer and
include all the information required and approved on the preliminary
plat and shall also include the following:
(1) All existing and proposed signs, lighting, utility poles and their
locations.
(2) The location of existing and proposed principal buildings or
structures and tentative grade elevations. The building envelope
shall be sufficient for one- and two-family dwelling units.
(3) The location, type and size of all existing and proposed catch
basins, storm drainage and erosion control facilities, including
drainage channels, sediment and retention basins and utilities and
all required design data supporting the adequacy of the existing or
proposed facilities to handle future storm flows.
(4) The location and design of existing and proposed water systems,
sanitary waste disposal systems, water mains and appurtenances.
(5) The location, type and size of all existing and proposed curbs,
sidewalks driveways, fences, retaining walls, parking space areas
and the layouts thereof and all off-street loading areas, together
with the dimensions of all the foregoing within the subdivision in
question and within 100 feet of the subdivision. This requirement is
limited to those items that are shown on the approved preliminary
plat or are required by the preliminary approval or by any other
governmental agency.
(6) The location, size and nature of all existing and proposed rights-ofway,
easements and other encumbrances which may affect the lot
or lots in question and the location, size and description of any
lands to be dedicated to the Township, to the county or to the state.
(7) Even though only a portion of the entire property is involved in the
plan for which approval is sought, the location, size and nature of
the entire lot or lots in question, and any contiguous lots owned by
the applicant or in which the applicant has a direct or indirect
interest.
(8) The location, names and widths of all existing and proposed streets,
including cross sections and profiles of streets abutting the lot or
lots in question and within 200 feet of said lot.
(9) Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall
be numbered consecutively beginning with number 1. Such
numbering shall be established by the Township Tax Assessor.
§ 163-15 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-15
159:514
(10) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided shall have been submitted.
(11) A certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes on the subdivision
are paid to date and that any local improvement assessments
against the tract being subdivided have been paid in full or that
such local improvement assessments have been apportioned
among the lots of the subdivision upon the application of the
subdivider, and in the event of such apportionment, that such local
improvement assessments are paid to date.
(12) When final approval is requested for an area which is less than the
full area for which tentative approval was given, a key map at a
scale of no less than 1 inch equals 2,000 feet which clearly and
accurately shows the entire subdivision for which tentative
approval was granted, including all proposed streets and property
lines and that portion for which final approval is being requested.
(13) Any or all other information and data as may be reasonably
required by the Planning Board to meet the criteria set forth in
Chapter 149, Site Plan Review.
(14) Location and description of all monuments.
(15) Certification that the Municipal Engineer has been provided
accurate record plans for any improvements that have been
installed.
(16) Certification by the County Soil Conservation District of
compliance with sediment and soil erosion control regulations.
(17) Copies of all supplemental agreements between the developer and
any and all agencies or bodies of the Township.
§ 163-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-15
159:515

ARTICLE IV
Improvement Specifications
§ 163-16. General requirements.
§ 163-17. Cartway width.
All streets intended to be dedicated to public use shall be in accordance
with Township or county requirements as applicable to full cartway width
and shown on the final plat.
§ 163-18. Curbs.
Curbs shall be installed along both sides of all streets.
§ 163-19. Sidewalks.
All collector and arterial streets shall be provided with paved all weather
sidewalks as required in § 163-39.
§ 163-20. Erosion and sediment control.
Erosion and sediment control facilities shall be installed in accordance with
the design principles and requirements contained in § 163-44.
§ 163-21. Sewers.
Storm sewers and related facilities shall be installed in accordance with the
design principles and requirements contained in § 163-43.
A. All lots shown on a plat shall be adaptable for the intended purposes
without danger to health or peril from flood, fire, erosion or other
menace.
B. Physical improvements to the property being subdivided shall be
provided, constructed and installed as shown on the final plat, in
accordance with the requirements of the Township as set forth in this
chapter.
C. All required improvements, such as curbs, gutters, sidewalks and
roads, shall be constructed in accordance with current New Jersey
State Highway Department construction methods utilizing approved
materials.
D. Supervision of the installation of the required improvements shall in all
cases be the responsibility of the developer.
E. All of the required improvements shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Municipal Engineer, who shall be notified by the
developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved.
§ 163-16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-22
159:517
§ 163-22. Sanitary sewage disposal.
Sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be installed in accordance with the
design principles and requirements contained in § 163-45.
§ 163-23. Water supply.
Water supply shall be installed in accordance with the design principles and
requirements contained in § 163-46.
§ 163-24. Access roads.
Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land located in
another municipality, the Planning Board may request assurance from the
Township Attorney that access is legally established and from the Municipal
Engineer that the access road is adequately improved or that a performance
guaranty has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the
construction of the access road.
§ 163-25. Monuments.
The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in accordance
with the requirements of the Map Filing Law of the State of New Jersey,
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11.
§ 163-26. Street signs.
Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections. The design
and placement of such signs shall conform to § 163-37E and be subject to
approval by the Township and the county, as required.
§ 163-27. Streetlights. [Amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
In accordance with such conditions as may be agreed upon by the Township
and the county as applicable and the appropriate utility, streetlights shall
be installed in all subdivisions in accordance with Chapter 149, Site Plan
Review, Article V, Improvement Specifications, § 149-37.
§ 163-28. Recommended improvements.
The following improvements are recommended: All portions of a subdivision
not covered with buildings or other impermeable surfaces and not retained
in their natural state shall be suitably landscaped.
§ 163-22 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-28
159:518
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 163-29. General.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof, as well
as the requirements of the Gloucester County Subdivision Review Manual
and the Gloucester County Site Plan Review Manual.
A. The subdivision shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the Township. If either or both an
Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon The
streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map
shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats.
B. The subdivision plat shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to preserve the natural environment and scenic beauty of
Woolwich Township. In reviewing a major subdivision consisting of
more than five lots counting any retained parcels, the reviewing
authority shall take into consideration the effect of the development
upon all aspects of the environment as outlined in the environmental
impact statement requirements, as well as the sufficiency of the
applicant's proposal in his environmental impact statement for dealing
with any immediate or projected adverse environmental effects. The
reviewing authority may require, as a condition of approval of the
application, that steps be taken to minimize the adverse environmental
impact during and after construction, and no final approval shall be
issued until all such requirements shall have been complied with or
compliance is guaranteed by a performance guaranty meeting the
requirements of § 163-10 of this chapter. [Amended 8-21-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-17]
C. Existing features which would add value to residential development or
to the Township as a whole, such as trees and other vegetation,
watercourses and falls, beaches, historic spots and similar
irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
D. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of
grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has
been granted.
E. The preliminary plat shall show the number and location of existing
trees as required by these regulations and shall further indicate all
those marked for retention and the location of all proposed shade trees
required along the street side of each lot as required by these
regulations.
§ 163-29 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-29
159:519
§ 163-30. Street location.
F. The protection of specimen trees of four-inch caliper or over shall be a
factor in determining the location of open space, buildings,
underground services, walks, paved areas, playgrounds, parking areas
and finished grade levels.
G. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and all
trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of
grade.
H. Every effort should be made to avoid removal of trees having a caliper
of five inches or greater from the property in the process of subdividing,
grading or installing improvements. Where, in the judgment of the
Planning Board, such removal is unavoidable, a plan and a statement of
material to be removed, replaced and/or demolished shall be submitted
for approval.
I. The subdivision plat shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to provide optimum open space and to create a man-made
environment for human use or occupancy compatible and harmonious
with the natural environment.
J. The subdivision plat shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to require the minimum feasible amounts of land coverage,
and the minimum feasible disturbance of soil and site by grading,
excavation and other land alterations.
K. The subdivision plat shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to avoid substantial probabilities of:
(1) Accelerated erosion.
(2) Pollution, contamination or siltation of water bodies, including
ponds, lakes, rivers and streams.
(3) Damage to vegetation to remain in the subdivision.
(4) Injury to wildlife and fish habitats.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
B. Local streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
C. If, in the opinion of the Planning Board, it is desirable to provide for
street access to adjoining property, streets shall be extended to the
boundary of such property.
D. Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication and included
within the lot area of residential, commercial and industrial
development for purposes of internal circulation, service and access to
§ 163-29 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-30
159:520
§ 163-31. Partial or half streets.
§ 163-32. Street design criteria.
In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width and improvement
to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police,
fire-fighting, snow removal, sanitation and street maintenance equipment,
and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and avoid
undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for
streets are hereby required. [Street classification may be indicated on the
Master Plan or Official Map (if any); otherwise, it shall be determined by the
Planning Board.]
parking and loading areas) shall be permitted. The minimum width of
cartway for an internal private street shall be 10 feet for each direction
of movement. A private street shall not be a through street and shall be
intended only for the internal use of the subdivision.
A. New half or partial streets and temporary culs-de-sac will not be
permitted, except where essential to the reasonable subdivision of a
tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards of this
chapter and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of
the remaining part of the street can be obtained.
B. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other
half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider.
The Planning Board may authorize a new perimeter street where the
subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-ofway
width within his own subdivision boundaries.
C. The subdivider shall provide the entire required right-of-way as
specified by § 163-32 or as much thereof as is possible within his
property, along all existing streets that traverse or abut his property.
D. Where subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the Master
Plan or Official Map (if any) or zoning setback regulations indicate
plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of
some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to
improve and dedicate such areas for widening or realignment of such
roads. Such frontage roads and streets shall be improved and dedicated
by the applicant to the full width as required by these subdivision
regulations for acquisition. Provision for cost allocation of such
improvements shall be in accordance with Article VI.
E. Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying
yard or area requirements of Chapter 203, Zoning, whether the land is
to be dedicated to the Township in fee simple or an easement is granted
to the Township.
A. All street pavement, shoulders, draining improvements and structures,
curbs, turnarounds and sidewalks shall conform to all construction
§ 163-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-32
159:521
standards and specifications as set forth in this chapter, or as required
by the Planning Board in the site plan review process. Such
improvements shall be incorporated into the construction plans
required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval.
B. After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer, the
applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to
be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in this chapter.
C. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains and bridges.
D. Subdivisions that adjoin or contain existing Township or county streets
that do not conform to widths as shown on the adopted Township or
County Master Plan or Official Map (if any) or the standards set forth in
this § 163-32 shall have dedicated additional width along either one or
both sides of said street. If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of
the required extra width shall be dedicated.
E. Minimum street right-of-way and cartway width shall be shown on the
Township Master Plan or Official Map (if any), or if not shown thereon,
shall be as set forth below. The right-of-way width shall be measured
from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than the following, provided
that no street of a width greater than 50 feet within the right-of-way
lines shall be required unless said street constitutes an extension of an
existing street of the greater width or already has been shown on the
Master Plan at the greater width or already has been shown in greater
width on the Official Map.
Improvement
Residential
(feet)
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
(feet)
Minimum width of right-of-way:
Local street 50 52
Collector streets 50 52
Minor arterial 60 70
Major arterial 80 80
Minimum width of cartway
(with concrete firm curbs)
Local street 30 32
Collector street 32 40
Minor arterial 40 44
Major arterial 48 48
F. Service roads or frontage streets shall have a minimum right-of-way
width of 40 feet with a minimum paved cartway width of 10 feet per
lane.
§ 163-32 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-32
159:522
G. Alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 25 feet with a paved
cartway width of one ten-foot lane per direction.
H. All arterial streets shall have a median at channelized intersections not
less than 16 feet in width. The design at channelized intersections shall
conform to established federal and New Jersey Department of
Transportation safety standards.
I. Slope rights shall be provided in addition to the right-of-way whenever,
due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate
earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one.
J. Other street design criteria are as follows:
Maximum Grade
Type of Street
Residential
(percent)
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
(percent)
Local street 6 4
Collector street 5 4
Secondary arterial 4 3
Primary arterial 4 3
Minimum grade 0.5 0.5
Service roads and alleys shall have a maximum grade of 6%. The
cross slopes on all streets shall be 2% or less.
Minimum Radius of Curve
Type of Street
Residential
(feet)
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
(feet)
Local street 250 350
Collector street 375* 375*
Secondary arterial 475* 475*
Primary arterial 700* 700*
*Maximum superelevation = 0.06
§ 163-32 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-32
159:523
Minimum Length of Vertical Curves
Local street 100 feet, but not less than 25 feet,
for each 1% algebraic difference in
grade
Collector street 150 feet, but not less than 35 feet,
for each 1% algebraic difference in
grade
Secondary arterial 200 feet, but not less than 50 feet,
for each 1% algebraic difference in
grade
Primary arterial 300 feet, but not less than 100
feet, for each 1% algebraic
difference in grade
Requirement Residential
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
Minimum length of tangents
between reverse curves (feet):
Local street 100 200
Collector street 240 240
Secondary arterial 260 260
Primary arterial 300 300
Minimum sight distance (feet):
Local street 200 250
Collector street 240 250
Secondary arterial 275 300
Primary arterial 350 400
Minimum turnaround (feet):
Local street
Right-of-way diameter 120 160
Pavement 100 140
Center island diameter (if
required)
40 60
Design speed (miles per hour)
Local streets 30 30
Collector streets 35 35
Secondary arterial 40 40
Primary arterial 50 50
Minimum radius (feet):
§ 163-32 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-32
159:524
Requirement Residential
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
At right-of-way 25 30
At pavement 25 30
K. The pavement thickness design shall, as a minimum, conform to the
following Schedule of Pavement Thickness Design:
Type of Street FABC Stab. Base
Soil
Aggregate
Type II, C1.B
Industrial 2" FABC-1 5" 6"
Primary arterial 2" FABC-1 5" 6"
Secondary street 2" FABC-1 4" 6"
Collector street 3" FABC-2 -- 8"
Local street 2" FABC-1 -- 8"
L. (Reserved)85
M. To provide visual continuity, only one variety of street tree shall be
installed on the street. A mixture of varieties of street trees on a street
may be installed upon approval of the Planning Board.
N. Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the
Planning Board, shall be constructed at the full expense of the
subdivider without reimbursement from the Township. The sharing
expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the
subdivider as determined by the Planning Board will be fixed by special
agreement between the Township Committee and the subdivider. Said
cost shall be charged to the subdivider pro rata as the percentage of his
land developed and so served. In the absence of such an agreement, the
provisions of Article VI of this chapter shall apply.
O. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as
to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:
(1) In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in
addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall
be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access
highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be
designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The
placement of structure hereon is prohibited."
(2) In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses, the
nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the
85.Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, regarding shade trees, was repealed 12-15-2003 by
Ord. No. 203-24.
§ 163-32 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-32
159:525
§ 163-33. Street intersections.
railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance
therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial
sites.
(3) Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which
crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such
distance shall be determined with due consideration of the
minimum distance required for future separation of grades by
means of appropriate approach gradients and may be required to
be at a distance in excess of 150 feet.
A. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than 75º shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved
approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right
angles for at least 100 feet therefrom.
B. No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
C. Intersections along an arterial street shall not be closer than 800 feet
(measured from center line to center line) along the center line of the
arterial street.
D. Local and collector streets intersecting another local or collector street
shall either intersect directly opposite each other or shall be separated
by at least 150 feet between center lines, measured along the center
line of the street being intersected.
E. Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight leveling
area, the grade of which shall not exceed 2% within 60 feet of the
intersection of the center lines.
F. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of:
(1) Twenty feet for intersections involving local streets.
(2) Thirty feet for all intersections involving a collector street.
(3) Forty 40 feet for all intersections involving an arterial street.
G. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall
have the corners cut off in accordance with good engineering practice
to permit safe vehicular movement.
H. Street right-of-way lines at intersections shall be parallel to (concentric
with) curb arcs.
I. Deceleration lanes of not less than 12 feet in width shall be provided on
through-arterial streets at intersections between arterial streets or
§ 163-32 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-33
159:526
§ 163-34. Sight distance at intersections.
§ 163-35. Access.
between arterial and collector streets. The length and geometry of
deceleration lanes shall be subject to approval by the Municipal
Engineer.
J. Arterial streets shall be directly intersected only by other arterial
streets or by collector streets.
K. Where any arterial or collector street intersects an arterial or collector
street, the right-of-way requirements shall be adequate to
accommodate deceleration lanes as approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
A. In addition to the right-of-way widths required in accordance with this
chapter, clear-sight triangle easements shall be dedicated as follows:
The area bounded by the right-of-way lines and a straight line
connecting sight points on street center lines shall be as follows:
(1) From a point on the minor (stop control) road center line at least 20
feet from the edge of the major (through) road pavement.
(2) From the intersection of the center lines, along the major road
center line, 300 feet for a local road, 350 feet for a collector road,
400 feet for a minor arterial road and 500 feet for a major arterial
road.
B. Curb ramps shall be designed in accordance with state and federal
requirements for maneuverability by the physically handicapped.
C. The Township and county shall have the right of entry to remove any
obstruction to vision within the clear-sight triangle not conforming to
the standards controlling the area upon proper and sufficient notice to
the property owner.
D. No earth bank, hedge, shrub or wall higher than 2 1/2 feet above
(proposed or existing) curb level, nor any obstruction to vision, other
than a post or tree not exceeding one square foot in cross-section area,
shall be permitted to remain within the clear-sight triangle.
A. When subdivisions result in lots abutting a primary or secondary
arterial street, a service road shall be provided or the frontage shall be
reversed so that the lots contiguous to such arterial will front on an
internal street with no direct access to the arterial.
B. Screening through the use of appropriate plant materials, fences or
walls subject to site plan review shall be provided in a strip of land
along the rear property line of lots with reversed frontage to buffer lots
from the arterial street.
§ 163-33 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-35
159:527
C. Drainage facilities made necessary by the construction of the
subdivision shall be provided by the subdivider.
D. Where subdivisions abut an arterial street and service roads or reverse
frontage is provided, the improvements to the arterial shall be limited
to the following: Additional right-of-way or easement for the arterial
street shall be uniformly graded to a minimum slope of 1/4 inch to the
foot toward the pavement of the arterial. Topsoil at a minimum depth of
four inches shall be uniformly distributed over the graded area and the
area seeded with a perennial grass seed or other suitable vegetation
approved by the Planning Board.
E. Curbs shall be provided for a distance of 200 feet from the curb return
on each side of any new street which connects with an arterial street.
F. Where a subdivision results in lots with frontage on a primary or
secondary arterial street that, due to its size, shape or other peculiar or
unusual circumstances, makes the provision of a service road or
reverse frontage impractical or unnecessary, the lot or lots in said
subdivision shall have driveways so laid out that it is possible to turn
passenger vehicles on the lot and it is not necessary to back any
passenger vehicle into the street.
G. No subdivision containing reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be approved except where the control and disposal of land
comprising such strips has been placed in the Township under
conditions approved by the Planning Board.
H. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a
proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent
property to such street.
I. Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least 40 feet from
the point of intersection of the nearest street right-of-way lines.
J. In order to provide a safe and convenient means of access from the
street, grades on private driveways located within a street right-of-way
should not exceed 10%.
K. In order to provide safe and convenient ingress and egress, private
driveway entrances shall be rounded at a minimum radius of five feet or
shall have a flare constructed that is equivalent to this radius, at a point
of intersection with the cartway edge.
L. No driveway shall be constructed or maintained that does not meet the
following regulations:
(1) Entrance to the street shall be at a horizontal angle of 75º to 105º
with the intersecting street.
(2) The driveway between the right-of-way of the street and the
cartway shall be paved.
§ 163-35 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-35
159:528
§ 163-36. Cul-de-sac streets.
§ 163-37. Street names.
(3) All curb cuts shall be properly constructed to the satisfaction of the
Municipal Engineer when curbing is provided. If curbing is not
provided, then an adequate drain pipe shall be installed.
(4) Driveways in commercial and industrial districts shall have a
minimum width of 12 feet for each direction of movement.
(5) Driveways in residential districts shall have a minimum width of 10
feet and a maximum width of 20 feet excluding any parking bay or
turnaround.
A. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 600 feet to the turning
circle, except that this distance shall be increased to 800 feet if an
emergency vehicular access and pedestrian walkway at least 10 feet
wide is provided from the head of a cul-de-sac giving direct access to an
adjacent street, and provided that the cul-de-sac serves no more than
25 dwelling units or an equivalent traffic-generating use.
B. Culs-de-sac shall have a turnaround at a radius of 40 feet to the outside
edge of the paved cartway, exclusive of any parking area, and 50 feet to
the outside edge of the right-of-way. The length of the cul-de-sac shall
be measured along its center line from the center section with the
intersecting street center line to the center of the radius of the cul-desac.
C. Culs-de-sac shall be readily identifiable as such by traffic moving on the
collector street to which it is connected, such as by Court or Circle
names. Culs-de-sac shall not be located so as to appear to terminate
collector streets.
D. P-loops (loop streets from a single access point) shall have an entrance
leg not exceeding 900 feet. The loop of a P-loop shall have a street
length not exceeding 3,000 feet.
A. A proposed street that is in alignment with an existing and named street
shall bear the name of the existing street.
B. In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the Township, irrespective of the type of suffix.
C. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Planning Board. All street names must conform to a comprehensive
street naming program (if any).
D. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other
street names in the Township so as not to cause confusion.
E. Street signs shall be placed at each street's intersection. They shall be
four-way signs of such material, size, height and location, in accordance
§ 163-35 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-37
159:529
§ 163-38. Alleys (service streets).
§ 163-39. Sidewalks.
with state and local standards, and in conformity with the existing signs
already established in the Township (if any).
A. Service streets are prohibited in subdivisions for single-family detached
residences, except where required to avoid direct driveway access to
arterial or collector streets.
B. Dead-end service streets shall be avoided, but if necessary, service
streets shall be terminated with a turnaround with a minimum radius to
the outer pavement edge of 40 feet if parking is prohibited on the
turnaround or with a minimum radius to the outer pavement edge of 50
feet if parking is permitted on the turnaround.
C. Service street intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but if necessary, then corners shall be rounded or cut back
sufficiently to permit safe vehicular circulation.
A. Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement right-ofway
of all streets as shown in the following table:
Nature of Road Residential
Nonresidential,
Business or
Industrial
Local road Both sides 4 feet wide Both sides 5 feet wide
Collector road Both sides 4 feet wide Both sides 5 feet wide
Secondary arterial Both sides 4 feet wide Both sides 5 feet wide
Primary arterial Both sides 4 feet wide Both sides 5 feet wide
B. Sidewalk requirements may be revised or waived by the Planning Board
during site plan review if demonstrated as creating reasonable
alternative sidewalk configurations.
C. Concrete curbs are required for all roads. They shall be of a design
acceptable to the Planning Board upon recommendation of the
Municipal Engineer.
D. Sidewalks, constructed of four-inch thick concrete or equivalent, shall
be improved as required in § 163-19 of this chapter. A median strip of
grassed or landscaped areas shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent
curbs.
E. The Planning Board may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access
from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby roads,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 10 feet in width. Easements
shall be indicated on the preliminary plat.
§ 163-37 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-40
159:530
§ 163-40. Blocks.
§ 163-41. Lots.
A. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be
permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways.
B. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated.
C. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials shall be not less
than 1,000 feet in length.
D. In long blocks, the Planning Board may require the reservation of an
easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage
facilities or pedestrian traffic.
E. Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide, may be
required by the Planning Board through the center of blocks more than
800 feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access
to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other
community facilities.
F. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as
may be determined suitable by the Planning Board for the prospective
use.
A. Size, shape and orientation of lots shall conform with Chapter 203,
Zoning, and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Where lots are more than double the minimum required areas for the
zoning district, the Planning Board may require that such lots be
arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future
streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all
in compliance with Chapter 203, Zoning, and these regulations.
C. If feasible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines
or radial to curved street lines.
D. If feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather than cross
them in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
E. The depth of a residential lot for a single-family detached home shall
not be less than one nor more than 2 1/2 times its width. [Amended
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
F. Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall be
adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide satisfactory
space for on-site parking, loading and unloading, setbacks and
landscaping.
§ 163-40 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-41
159:531
§ 163-42. Buffer areas.
In the instance where the Planning Board determines that buffer planting
or fencing is necessary to protect the general welfare of the public, planted
buffer areas shall be installed to provide a year-round visual screen of such
width, height and location as approved by the Planning Board. The size,
variety and planting design of the buffer area shall be as approved by the
Township Planning Board. Fencing shall be installed to provide a physical
barrier as approved by the Planning Board.
§ 163-43. Storm drainage.
G. Each lot must front upon a public or private street approved in
accordance with the requirements and standards of this chapter.
Private streets shall have direct access to public streets.
H. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except
where necessary to provide separation of residential development from
traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
and orientation.
I. Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from an arterial
street. Where driveway access from an arterial street may be necessary
for several adjoining lots, the Planning Board may require that such lots
be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic
hazards on such street.
J. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
A. Storm sewers, culverts, natural and man-made drainage channels and
retention basins and related installations shall be provided as necessary
to permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses, to ensure adequate
drainage of all low points along streets, to intercept stormwater runoff
along streets at intervals related to the extent and grade of the area
drained and to provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage
disposal facilities where such facilities are permitted.
B. Where existing storm sewers are reasonably accessible, proposed
subdivisions shall be required, if necessary, to connect therewith.
C. In subdivisions containing lots less than 15,000 square feet in area and
in business and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems
shall be constructed throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to
an approved outfall.
D. Permanent natural and/or man-made drainage channels and detention
basins shall be provided to control the increased storm runoff that may
result from increasing the impervious area within the subdivision. In all
instances the detention shall be such as to reduce the rate of runoff
§ 163-41 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-43
159:532
from the ten-percent (so-called ten-year) storm in the developed
condition to that which would have occurred the undeveloped
condition. In instances where there is no provision for conducting the
water to natural streams, the detention shall be adequate for all of
the runoff from a two-percent (so-called fifty-year) storm. Spillways
or emergency spillways of any detention facility shall be capable of
passing the runoff from at least the one-percent (so-called one-hundredyear)
storm. In the design of storm drainage facilities, special
consideration shall be given to avoidance of problems that may arise
from the concentration of stormwater runoff onto adjacent developed
or undeveloped properties.
E. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from entire upstream drainage area,
whether inside or outside the subdivision. The Municipal Engineer shall
review the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of
construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of
maximum potential watershed development permitted by Chapter 203,
Zoning.
F. The developer shall study the effect of each subdivision on existing
downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision.
These studies, together with such other studies as shall be appropriate,
shall serve as a guide to needed improvements.
G. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the
development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream
drainage facility, the Planning Board may withhold approval of the
subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said
potential conditions by a contribution from the developer in such sum
as the Planning Board shall determine adequate.
H. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be
provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.
I. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of
such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream at least 15 feet wide
or of such width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of
natural drainage or for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating,
maintaining, improving or protecting such drainage facilities.
J. Any changes in an existing drainageway shall be subject to the approval
of the Township Planning Board and the Gloucester County Planning
Board as applicable, as well as meeting the requirements for any state
permits.
K. The applicant shall be required by the Planning Board to carry away by
pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either
previous to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities
shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible or in perpetual
unobstructed easements of appropriate width and shall be constructed
§ 163-43 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-43
159:533
in accordance with appropriate construction standards and
specifications and shall be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
L. Trash bars shall be installed on all pipes equal to or greater than 30
inches in diameter.
M. Pipeline design:
(1) Storm sewer pipelines shall be designed by either of the following
two methods. Both shall be based on the Manning equation and
shall utilize the following friction factors:
n = 0.015 concrete pipe
n = 0.021 corrugated metal pipe
(2) The minimum allowable pipe size is 15 inches.
N. Pipeline submerged.
(1) This method is based on the assumption that when the storm sewer
system is under maximum load the hydraulic gradient will be at or
above the crown of the pipe and that flow in the lines will be
controlled by head differentials between structures or other
locations where the system is open to the ground surface, such as
inlets or outlets manholes and stream inlets or outlets. The head of
water above the crown of any pipe can range from zero feet to a
point which will not cause surface flooding.
(2) The slope of the hydraulic gradient in any section of storm sewer
between opening to the surface shall be calculated on the
assumption that the pipe is flowing full at a constant velocity and at
the required capacity.
(3) The elevation of the hydraulic gradient at any point in the pipe shall
be no lower than the crown of the pipe and no higher than the
surface of the ground.
(4) At all structures such as manholes, inlets, etc., where the pipe size
does not change, the elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be
dropped 0.2 feet to allow for losses therein. Where the inlet and
outlet pipe sizes are not the same, the elevation of the hydraulic
gradient shall be dropped an amount based on the following
formula:
H = 0.2 feet + 0.8 (D2-DI) feet
D1 = Diameter of inlet pipe
D2 = Diameter of outlet pipe
If D1 is larger than D2, head loss = 0.2 feet
§ 163-43 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-43
159:534
(5) The minimum slope of any pipe shall be such that a minimum
velocity of 2.5 feet per second shall be maintained when the pipe is
flowing 1/4 full.
O. Pipeline flowing full.
(1) This method is based on the assumption that the hydraulic gradient
will match the inside top of the pipe when the system is under
maximum hydraulic load.
(2) For this method, head losses through manholes, inlets, etc., shall be
ignored.
(3) The minimum slope of any pipe shall be such that a minimum
velocity of 2.5 feet per second shall be maintained when the pipe is
flowing 1/4 full.
(4) When the pipe sizes change, the inside tops of the pipes shall be
matched.
(5) Continuous profiles for each reach of pipe shall be plotted along
with the location of the hydraulic gradient and the hydraulic
information pertinent to each reach within the system. This
information shall include the pipe size and type, the "n" factor, the
slope of the hydraulic gradient, slope of the pipe, the design
capacity and the velocity at the design capacity.
P. Inlet design:
(1) Stormwater inlets shall be equal to New Jersey State Highway
Department inlet Type B. The maximum collecting capacities of the
inlets shall be considered to be:
(a) When installed on the streets where the grade is 1.00%: 5
cubic feet per second.
(b) When installed on streets where the grade is 2.00%: 4.8 cubic
feet per second.
(c) When installed on streets where the grade is 3.00%: 4.6 cubic
feet per second.
(d) When installed on streets where the grade is 4.00%: 4.4 cubic
feet per second.
(e) When installed on streets where the grade is 5.00%: 4.2 cubic
feet per second.
(f) When installed on streets where the grade is 6.00%: 4 cubic
feet per second.
(2) Sufficient inlets shall be located and that the length of surface
runoff will not contribute a runoff to the inlet exceeding the
preceding designated collecting capacities.
§ 163-43 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-43
159:535
(3) The gutter grate of all inlets shall be set not less than two inches,
nor more than four inches, below the gutter grade. The surface of
the paving adjacent to the inlets shall be constructed to blend into
the lowered gutter grade at the inlet in such a manner that a
sudden dropoff or dip at the inlet will not be created. At such
locations where drainage is entirely dependent on inlets, the
collecting capacities of the inlets shall be designed for 1/2 of the
preceding consider capacities.
(4) Where surface water is collected from two directions at one street
corner, inlets shall be placed at or near the tangent points of both
ends of the radius. The use of one inlet in the radius will not be
allowed.
(5) Access manholes shall be spaced at five-hundred-foot intervals
(maximum) through rights-of-way and at sewer junctions where
there are no catch basins.
Q. Open channel design. Open channel design should be based on the
following hydraulic considerations:
(1) Manning's equation
(a) Friction factor.
n = .015 - best concrete-lined ditch
n = .025 - best unlined ditch
n = .03 to .05 - fair to poor natural streams and watercourses
(b) Velocity range.
Excavation Material Velocity
(feet per second)
Fine sand and firm loam 2.50 to 3.5
Stiff clay and hardpan 3.75 to 6.0
Concrete lined ditch 15
(2) Ample freeboard should be provided on all channels.
(3) The channel should be designed to conform, wherever possible, to
the adjacent ground conditions. This means that it should not be
projecting excessively above the surrounding ground or placed
excessively below the surrounding ground.
(4) Continuous profiles for each reach of open channel shall be plotted,
along with the adjacent average ground and the hydraulic
information pertinent to each reach within the system. This
information shall include the type of channel lining, the "n" factor,
the width of the channel bottom, the side slopes, the water depth,
the design capacity and the velocity at the design capacity.
§ 163-43 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-43
159:536
(5) Open channels shall have a maximum side slope of three to one and
shall have adequate slope protection.
(6) Culverts. All culverts shall be limited to a single opening; multiple
pipes will not be permitted. The design of culverts shall be such as
to minimize the probability of debris accumulation.
(7) Retention basin design. Retention basins shall be required on all
major subdivisions unless deemed unnecessary by the Municipal
Engineer.
(8) Determination of project area runoff:
(a) Using natural ground coefficient.
(b) Using ultimate developed ground coefficient.
(9) Require storage for 5.5 inches maximum rainfall (twenty-four-hour
rainfall occurring in 1960), or as required by the New Jersey Water
Policy and Supply Council.
(10) Indicate flooded area if additional 2 inches of rainfall occurred
during 24 hours following the design storm.
(11) Allowance for percolation and evaporation out of basins during and
after the storm will not be considered in the calculations.
(12) 86Basin storage capacities shall be calculated as follows:
Storage volume (in cubic feet) =
Project area (in square feet) x difference
in coefficients x total rainfall (in inches)
12
- outflow (in cubic feet)
(13) The outlet structure shall be capable of discharging water at a rate
equal to or less than the contribution calculated for the drainage
basin area in its natural state before development for a ten-year
storm period.
(14) If required, profiles and sections indicating downstream capacities
and proposals and/or easements for reconstruction or cleaning of
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 163-43 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-43
159:537
§ 163-44. Erosion and sediment controls.
all streams shall be submitted prior to consideration of the first
final section.
A. No topsoil shall be used as spoil, and topsoil shall be removed from the
site only if necessary and after approval of the Planning Board. On all
sites, topsoil shall be stripped to a depth of nine inches or to the depth
of the topsoil from all areas which are to be disturbed. Topsoil shall be
stockpiled and stabilized with straw mulch until respread at a minimum
depth of at least six inches. The topsoil to be respread shall contain no
particles over two inches in diameter.
B. Following earthmoving during development, all areas which include
steep slopes, highly erodible soils or are poorly drained and which are
not to be covered by roads or buildings shall be sodded as soon as
possible or stabilized in such a manner as is acceptable to the Municipal
Engineer.
C. All other areas which will not be covered by a permanent hard or
impervious surface within one month of commencement of earthmoving
must be stabilized immediately upon completion of the disturbance.
Stabilization, either temporary or permanent, is to be done by
mulching, seeding, sodding, macadam, crushed stone or gravel,
bituminous or any other appropriate stabilizing method. A minimum top
dressing of three inches shall be required when mulching, crushed
stone or gravel is to be used as a stabilizing medium.
D. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones soil, junk, rubbish or
other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land or left or
deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, and removal of same shall be required prior to issuance of
any certificate of occupancy on a subdivision, nor shall any be left or
deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of the
performance guaranty or dedication of public improvements, whichever
is sooner.
E. Where lawn is to be provided by the subdivider or developer, lawn-grass
seed shall be sown at not less than four pounds to each 1,000 square
feet of land area. In the spring, the seed shall be sown between March 1
and May 15, and in the fall, the seed shall be sown between August 15
and October 15. The seed shall consist of a maximum of 10% rye grass
by weight and a minimum of 90% of permanent bluegrass and/or fescue
grass by weight. All seed shall have been tested for germination within
one year of the date of seeding, and the date of testing shall be on the
label containing the seed analyses. Sod of an appropriate grass may be
used to comply with any requirements of seeding set forth herein.
F. All temporary streets, turning areas, or building sites used during
construction should be given a dressing of at least three inches of
crushed stone or gravel. Permanent streets and parking areas should be
§ 163-43 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-44
159:538
§ 163-45. Sewerage facilities.
graded to required elevations, then applied with a permanent subbase
and/or base course which should be brought to final grade and the
permanent surface applied.
G. At a point where runoff leaves each site a sediment basin or basins shall
be constructed. The sediment basin(s) shall be designed in a manner
approved by the Municipal Engineer and the Gloucester County Soil
Conservation District. Following permanent stabilization of the site, the
basin may be removed or retained. If retained, silt must be removed
within one year after completion of development.
H. Sediment basins designed for watershed areas less than 70 acres that
include provisions for periodic cleanout shall be designed to contain 0.6
inches of runoff or 0.05 acre-feet per acre of contributing runoff water
and sediment.
I. Sediment basin cleanout shall be required when the storage capacity is
reduced by sediment accumulation to 0.02 acre-feet per acre of
drainage area or within one year after completion of development.
J. Sediment basins serving watershed areas larger than 70 acres, and
those for which periodic cleanout is not anticipated, shall be designed
to contain sediment capacities appropriate for the size of the
watershed.
K. In general the average sediment basin length should be at least twice
the average width.
L. The performance guaranty shall include an amount to guarantee
completion of all requirements contained in Article V of these
regulations and will also include but not be limited to soil preservation,
final grading, lot drainage, lawn-grass seeding where appropriate,
removal of debris and waste, fencing and all other lot improvements
required by the Planning Board.
M. Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, at the
expiration of the performance guaranty, the Township Committee may
enforce the provisions of the guaranty where the provisions of this
section or any other applicable law, guaranty, ordinance or regulation
have not been met.
A. Regulations for sewerage facilities.
(1) All sanitary sewer systems, sewage and industrial waste treatment
works shall comply with the rules and regulations established by
the Department of Environmental Protection of the State of New
Jersey, the Township and any sewerage utility franchised by the
Township.
§ 163-44 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-45
159:539
(2) Sanitary sewerage facilities (including the installation of laterals in
the right-of-way) shall be subject to the specifications, rules,
regulations and guidelines of the Health Officer, Municipal
Engineer and appropriate state agency.
(3) Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create
a sanitary sewer district for the purpose of providing sewerage
facilities to the subdivision where no district exists for the land to
be subdivided.
(4) Sanitary sewers shall not be used to carry stormwater.
(5) For lots on which on-site disposal is permitted in Chapter 203,
Zoning, sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows:
(a) Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably
accessible, the applicant shall connect with same and provide
sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision.
(b) Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably
accessible but will become available within a reasonable time
(not to exceed 10 years), the applicant may choose one of the
following alternatives:
[1] Central sewerage system, the maintenance cost to be
assessed against each property benefited. Where plans for
future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the
applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals and mains to
be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready
for connection to such public sewer mains; or
[2] Individual disposal systems, provided that the applicant
shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals and mains from
the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary
where a future connection with the public sewer main
shall be made.
(6) Sewer lines shall be laid from the house to the street line, and a
connection shall be available in the home to connect from the
individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public
sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until
ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the
public sewer system, where such exist, and shall be ready for
connection to such public sewer main.
(7) Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and
will not become available for a period in excess of 10 years, the
applicant may install a sewerage systems as follows:
(a) Medium- and high-density residential uses shall be serviced by
a central sewerage system only. No individual disposal system
will be permitted.
§ 163-45 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-45
159:540
(b) For low-density residential uses, individual disposal systems or
central sewerage systems may be used.
(8) For all other lots, sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed
as follows: Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public
sanitary sewerage systems.
(9) Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes
required by the standards referenced in Subsection A(1).
(10)No on-site disposal system or treatment plant for the use of more
than one residence or its equivalent shall be permitted.
(11) When on-site facilities are required and permitted, a carefully
engineered facility shall be installed. Before covering and
backfilling, all on-site facilities must be inspected by the Health
Officer and must be so installed that they can be approved as
complying with the approved engineering drawings that are part of
the plans and with applicable regulations and ordinances. Such
approval shall be in writing.
(12) Two copies of an accurate sketch of on-site facilities shall be
provided on the final plat showing the location of all important
features, including pipe size, the run of the various pipes, the
location of the tile field, location of vents and cleanouts for septic
tanks and septic tank capacity.
(13) If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is
placed in a street or alley abutting upon private property, the owner
thereof shall be required to connect to said sewer for the purpose
of disposing of waste, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or
occupant to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage
disposal system.
(14) If public sewerage facilities are not available and individual
disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to
the requirements of Chapter 203, Zoning, and percolation tests and
boring logs shall be made as directed by the local government
Health Officer and the results submitted to the Health Department.
The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic
tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment
device, shall also be approved by the Health Officer.
(15) These design criteria for sanitary sewers are not intended to cover
extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be
required in those instances where considered justified by the
Municipal Engineer and the Health Officer.
(16) Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the ultimate
tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current
zoning regulations and approved planning and zoning reports
where applicable.
§ 163-45 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-45
159:541
(17) Sewer capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated
maximum hourly quantity of sewerage and industrial waste,
together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other
extraneous flow.
(18) The unit design flows presented hereinafter should be adequate in
each case for the particular type of development indicated. Sewers
shall be designed for the total tributary area.
Type of Development
Design Factor
(cubic feet per second per
acre)
One- and two-family dwellings .02
Multiple dwellings:
One- and two-story .02
Three- through six-story .03
Commercial:
Small stores, offices and
miscellaneous business
.02
Shopping centers .02
High rise To be submitted for approval of
Municipal Engineer
Industrial To be submitted for approval of
Municipal Engineer
(19) These design factors apply to watersheds of 300 acres or less.
Design factors for watersheds larger than 300 acres and smaller
than 1,000 acres may be computed on the basis of a linear decrease
from the applicable design factor for an area of 300 acres to a
design factor of .01 cubic feet per second per acre for an area of
1,000 acres unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer.
Design factors for watersheds larger than 1,000 acres may be .01
cubic feet per second per acre unless otherwise approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
(20) The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the diameter of
the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless
otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(21) No public sewer shall be less than eight inches in diameter.
(22) All sewers shall be designed to give mean velocities when flowing
full of not less than 2.0 feet per second. All velocity and flow
calculations shall be based on the Manning formula using an N
value of 0.013 unless otherwise approved. The slopes shall be at
least the minimum for the size indicated.
§ 163-45 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-45
159:542
(23) Exceptions to these minimum slopes shall be made at the upper
end of lateral sewers serving under 30 houses. Said sewers shall
have a minimum slope of 0.75%.
(24) Where lateral sewers serve less than 10 houses, the minimum slope
shall not be les than 1%.
(25) The minimum slopes for sewer pipe are indicated in the regulations
of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(26) All sewers shall be laid with a straight alignment between
manholes, unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(27) Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line; at all changes in
grade, size or alignment; at all intersections; and at distances not
greater than 400 feet for sewers 15 inches and smaller and 500 feet
for sewers 18 inches in diameter and larger.
(28) The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer and the
manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches, except where required
to match crowns.
(29) The use of drop manholes will require approval by the Municipal
Engineer. The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall
conform to those approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(30) When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the crown of the smaller
sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one. The minimum
drop through manholes shall be 0.2 feet.
(31) Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley rights-of-way
unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in easements
on private property, access shall be maintained to all manholes.
(32) A manhole shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End
lines shall be extended to provide access from a street or alley
right-of-way where possible. Imposed loading shall be considered
in all locations.
(33) Not less than six feet of cover shall be provided over top of pipe in
streets and alley rights-of-way or three feet in another areas.
(34) Cleanout and lampholes will not be permitted.
(35) There shall be no physical connection between a public or private
potable water supply system and a sewer which will permit the
passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply.
(36) Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other
water supply sources and structures.
(37) A minimum horizontal distance of 10 feet shall be maintained
between parallel water and sewer lines.
§ 163-45 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-45
159:543
§ 163-46. Water facilities.
(38) At points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be
constructed of cast-iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance
of 10 feet in each direction from the crossing, measured
perpendicular to the waterline. This will not be required when the
water main is at least two feet above the sewer.
A. All water supplies and water treatment works shall comply with the
rules and regulations established by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the State of New Jersey and Woolwich Township, as
amended and revised.
B. Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a
water supply district for the purpose of providing a water supply system
capable of providing domestic water and fire protection.
C. Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall install
adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the
specifications of the state or Township and the National Board of Fire
Underwriters. All water mains shall be at least six inches in diameter.
Fire hydrants must be compatible with local fire company equipment
and be approved by the Township Fire Marshal.
D. Water main extensions shall be approved the officially designated
agency of the state and Township.
E. To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply
improvements and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating
all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the
preliminary plat, and the cost of installing same shall be included in the
performance guaranty to be furnished by the developer.
F. In low-density zoning districts, at the discretion of the Planning Board,
if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be used or
a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate
supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision.
Water samples shall be submitted to the Health Department for its
approval, and individual wells and central water systems shall be
approved by the appropriate health authorities. Orders of approval
shall be submitted to the Planning Board.
G. If the Planning Board requires that a connection to a public water main
be eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well
or central water system, the subdivider shall make arrangements for
future water service at the time the plat receives final approval.
Performance guaranties or cash bonds may be required to insure
compliance.
H. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions serviced by a public
water system.
§ 163-45 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-46
159:544
§ 163-47. Public open space and community facilities.
I. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and within
500 feet of an structure and shall be approved by the applicable
protection unit.
J. In general, criteria affecting valve and hydrant locations shall be that
not more than one hydrant is affected by shutting off any one section;
not more than three valves are necessary to shut off any one section,
and the number of residences affected by shutting off any one section
shall be limited to approximately 25. The Fire Department must be
notified of shut downs during improvements or connections to the
system.
K. A copy of the approval of such fire hydrant installations by the
appropriate public agency and utility company shall be submitted with
the final plat, along with suitable agreement (in a form determined by
the Township Attorney) establishing that the ownership of the fire
hydrants shall be conveyed to the Township at no cost to the Township
at the time the fire hydrants are first available for their intended use.
L. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire
hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other
supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a
street shown on the subdivision plat.
A. In reviewing subdivision plans, the Planning Board shall consider
whether community facilities in the area, especially schools, are
adequate to serve the needs of the additional dwellings proposed by the
subdivision and shall make such report thereon as it deems necessary
in the public interest. The applicant should provide a brief impact
statement for review by the Board.
B. Subdividers shall reserve land for both public and quasi-public
community facilities and will reserve areas for facilities normally
required in residential neighborhoods, including churches, libraries,
schools and other public buildings and parks, playgrounds and
playfields.
C. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
suitably prepared to provide for such use. Prior to the preparation of
plans, subdividers of large tracts should review with the Planning Board
the minimum standards for various community facilities applicable to
the tract being subdivided.
D. In subdivisions that are intended to contain five or more dwelling units,
the Planning Board shall consider the need for suitable open areas for
recreation and shall make a recommendation thereon. Standards to be
used by the Planning Board in determining space for recreation shall be
as follows: [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6; 4-7-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-02]
§ 163-46 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-47
159:545
Dwelling Units
Minimum Playground and
Neighborhood Park Acreage to
be Recommended
5 to 10 0.5
11 to 20 1
21 to 30 1.5
31 to 40 2
41 to 50 2.5
51 to 70 3
For each additional 20 units 0.5
E. An individual area of less than two acres shall not be reserved for
recreation purposes if it will be impractical or impossible to secure
additional lands in order to increase its area unless such smaller area is
approved by the Planning Board, as for example, to provide a tot-lot.
F. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and
location suitable for use as a playground, playfield or for other
recreation purposes, shall be relatively level and dry and shall be
improved by the developer to the standards required by the Planning
Board, which improvements shall be included in the performance
guaranty.
G. Reservation of public areas.
(1) If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation
of designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or
public areas within the proposed development, before approving a
subdivision or site plan, the Planning Board may further require
that such streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in
locations and sizes suitable to their intended uses. The Planning
Board may reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways,
basins or areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the
approval of the final plat or within such further time as may be
agreed to by the developer. Unless during such period or extension
thereof the municipality shall have entered into a contract to
purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according to law
for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets,
ways, basins or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land
for private use in accordance with applicable development
regulations. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
streets and roads, flood control basins or public drainageways
necessitated by the subdivision or land development and required
for final approval.
(2) The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation
§ 163-47 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-47
159:546
of use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the
fair market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for
the period of reservation, provided that determination of such fair
market value shall include but not be limited to consideration of the
real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved and prorated
for the period of reservation. The developer shall be compensated
for the reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering or other
professional services incurred in connection with obtaining
subdivision approval or site plan approval, as the case may be,
caused by the reservation. The procedure for the payment of all
compensation payable under this subsection shall be as follows:
(a) After the termination of a period of one year after the approval
of the final plat or after such further time as may be agreed to
between the developer and the Planning Board, and no later
than 90 days thereafter, the developer shall file in triplicate
with the Township Clerk a verified petition requesting
compensation payable under this subsection and setting forth
a detailed, itemized list with separate dollar amounts for each
item for which he seeks compensation.
(b) The governing body, after receipt of such petition, shall fix a
time, place and date for a public hearing on the petition, which
date shall be no later than 60 days from the date of receipt of
the petition by the Municipal Clerk.
(c) Notice of such hearing shall be delivered or mailed by certified
mail to the developer at least 20 days in advance of the
hearings date.
(d) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions for hearings by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
(e) At the hearing the developer shall have the burden of
establishing by good and sufficient evidence his entitlement to
compensation and the amounts of such compensation.
(f) Such hearings may be continued by the governing body from
time to time but must be completed within 90 days from the
first hearing date.
(g) Within 90 days after the date of conclusion of hearing, the
Township Committee shall, by resolution, set forth its findings
and determination as to what amount, if any, shall be paid to
the developer. A certified copy of said resolution shall be
delivered or mailed by certified mail to the developer within 10
days of its adoption.
(h) Any payments to be made pursuant to such resolution shall be
made to the developer within 120 days from the date of
adoption of such resolution.
§ 163-47 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-47
159:547
H. Recreational facilities for future residential population. [Added
9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13; amended 2-7-2000 by Ord. No.
00-2; 11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-26]
(1) All lands set aside for open space shall be developed with active
recreational facilities to service the needs of the future residential
population. The Planning Board shall have complete and final
determination as to the adequacy, usefulness and functionalism of
the lands set aside for open space. Active recreational facilities
shall include but not be limited to the following: ball fields,
multipurpose fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, multipurpose
court areas, children’s playground equipment, and swimming
pools. In all developments restricted to the elderly or which are
marketed primarily for single adults, additional facility geared to
the recreational interests of the specific target population of the
development may be chosen by the developer with the approval of
the Planning Board to replace the tot-lot requirements described
herein. In all other residential developments, the developer shall
install, as a minimum, the following recreational facilities upon the
land which has been identified as recreational and/or play areas:
Minimal Recreation Facilities
Dwelling
units Tot-Lot
Multipurpose
Field
Other Recreational
Facilities
5 to 30 1 — —
31 to 100 1 — 1
101 to 150 1 — 2
151 to 200 2 1 2
201 to 250 2 1 3
251 to 300 3 1 4
301 to 350 3 1 4
351 to 400 4 2 4
401 to 450 4 2 5
451 to 500 5 2 5
(2) In order to promote public health and safety, a primary design
criterion shall be the separation of pedestrian traffic and vehicular
traffic. To this end, subdivisions shall be required to provide for
pedestrian multipurpose paths separated from vehicular use
streets. The location and construction of such multipurpose paths
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board and the
Township Engineer. Multipurpose paths shall be a minimum of 10
feet wide and construction and lighting shall be installed prior to
occupancy. Prior to final approval for any section, the responsibility
for the construction, operation, maintenance and liability for these
multipurpose paths shall be clearly established. Grade-separated
§ 163-47 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-47
159:548
pedestrian crossings shall be provided across primary roads at
points required by the Planning Board.
(3) (Reserved)87
(4) The Board may require a developer to make certain site
preparation improvements to the open spaces. These may include
the following:
(a) Removal of dead trees or diseased trees.
(b) Thinning of trees or other growth to encourage more desirable
growth.
(c) Grading and seeding.
(d) Improvements of protection of the natural drainage system by
the use of protective structures, stabilization measures and
similar improvements.
(5) Development of open space and recreational facilities shall proceed
at the same rate as development of the dwelling units. To assure
compliance with this subsection, the Planning Board shall require
the approval of an open space and recreational amenity phasing
map which shall become part of an overall phasing plan and
approval for any subdivision, planned and/or clustered
development.
(6) Recreational fee contribution in lieu of on-site recreational
facilities. The requirements of this subsection relating to the
construction of active and passive recreation facilities and the total
percentage of open space required within a development may be
modified and/or waived by the Planning Board, if requested by the
developer, upon the Planning Board’s determination that both the
area local to the development and Woolwich Township’s park and
recreation needs would be better served by an agreed cash request
based on the cost of the proposed recreational amenities as listed
below, which sums shall be added to the current year municipal
budget when received as a dedication by rider in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-39.
(7) Amount of contribution. The amount of the contribution required
pursuant to this provision shall be determined by the Planning
Board based upon an evaluation of the cost of the additional impact
upon the existing recreational facilities which service the
community and the need for additional or increased recreational
facilities that will occur as a result of the planned development. The
Board shall also consider the market value of the building lots
which will be achieved by making this payment instead of reserving
87.Editor's Note: Subsection H(3), pertaining to estimated construction costs, was deleted
11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-26.
§ 163-47 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-47
159:549
the land to recreation facilities. The Board shall assess the
estimated cost of the construction and equipment associated with
the recreational facilities which would be required pursuant to this
section and other costs associated with the provision of adequate
recreational facilities as a community resource to address the
increased population caused by the development and the added
demand for recreational facilities, as well as the added cost to the
Township to maintain the already existing recreational facilities
within the Township which will be subject to a more intensive use
as a result of the increase in population. This assessment may
be made through the testimony of professionals or other such
evidence as may be required by the Board. The cost of this
assessment by professionals shall be borne by the developer. The
total amount of the contribution once so calculated shall be
prorated over the total number of dwelling units as shown on the
preliminary plan for the development or the site plan submitted
by the developer and approved by the Planning Board in order
to determine the actual dwelling unit amount. The Township of
Woolwich has given consideration to these cost factors and has
determined that the amount of the contribution shall in no case
be less than $3,500 per dwelling unit based on the following
methodology:
(a) Calculated cost for recreational amenities (Costs provided
below are based on private contracts. Municipal contracts may
receive lower quotes.):
[1] Tennis court: $50,000.
[2] Basketball court: $50,000.
[3] Tot-lot (2,000 square feet): $40,000.
[4] Ball field: $25,000.
[5] Multipurpose field: $20,000.
(b) Calculated land value (based on a one-hundred-acre site):
100 acres x 60% typical yield = 60 units
100 acres x 10% required open space = 10 acres
10 acres x 60% typical yield = 6 additional units
6 additional units x $100,000 lot value = $600,000
$600,000 x 75% per ordinance = $450,000
$450,000/66 units = $6,818 per unit for required open space
(c) Required recreational facilities for a sixty-six-unit development
is one tot-lot plus one additional recreation facility:
§ 163-47 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-47
159:550
§ 163-48. Certain easements.
1 Tot-lot + 1 tennis court = $40,000 + $50,000 = $90,000
$90,000/66 units = $1,364
(d) Total recreation and open space value: $1,364 plus $6,818
equals $8,182 per unit.
(8) Payment of contribution. Payment of the prorated contribution
required pursuant thereto shall be made prior to the signing of the
final plans by the Planning Board Chairman, Planning Board
Secretary and Township Clerk and shall be made payable to the
designated parks and recreation fund. For good cause shown, the
Planning Board may enter into an agreement to provide that the
payment or payments shall be made at some later time, subject to
the posting of adequate performance guaranties in an amount of
120% of the agreed contribution; subject, however, that the
delayed period of time shall in no event be later than the issuance
of the first certificate of occupancy.
(9) The cash bequest shall be used exclusively for park and recreation
purposes and shall be placed in the current budget line item
designated “parks and playgrounds, other expenses.” Woolwich
Township reserves the right to use said funds for proper purposes
anywhere within the Township of Woolwich.
A. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision
shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
B. Underground service connections to the street property line of each
platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense.
C. At the discretion of the Planning Board, the requirement for service
connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be
retained in single ownership and intended to be developed for the same
primary use.
D. All utility facilities, constructed or installed after the effective date of
this chapter, including but not limited to wires, cables, pipes, conduits
and appurtenant equipment, carrying or used in connection with the
furnishing of electric, telephone, telegraph, cable television or similar
service, shall be placed below the surface of the ground, provided that
the following utility facilities shall be permitted above ground:
(1) Electric transmission lines and facilities in excess of 50 kilovolts.
(2) Equipment, such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear,
meter pedestals, telephone pedestals, outdoor lighting poles or
standards, radio antennae and associated equipment, which is,
under accepted utility practices, normally installed above ground.
§ 163-47 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-48
159:551
(3) Meters, service connections and similar equipment normally
attached to the outside wall of the customer's premises.
E. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
F. No dwelling units or any portion thereof shall be located within 25 feet
of any petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas transmission line
that traverses the subdivision.
§ 163-48 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-48
159:552
ARTICLE VI
On-Tract and Off-Tract Improvements
§ 163-49. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
subdivision application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON TRACT — Located on the property is the subject for a subdivision
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
§ 163-50. Responsibility of developer for certain off-site
improvements.
Preliminary approval shall contain a condition that the developer pay his
pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary street
improvements and water, sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements
therefor, located outside the property limits of the subdivision but
necessitated or required by construction or improvements within such
subdivision or development. Before consideration of a final subdivision plat,
such off-tract improvements shall be built and completed by the developer
or their construction shall have been guaranteed in accordance with the
following provisions which shall apply to such off-tract improvements:
A. Off-tract improvements. At the time application for preliminary
approval for a subdivision is made and again upon application for final
approval, the applicant shall provide the Township Committee with an
estimate of the types and costs of such off-tract improvements and the
amount by which properties, including the subdivision, benefit thereby.
B. Such estimate at the time of application for final approval shall include
detailed supporting data which shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to:
(1) The total cost of the improvement.
(2) The estimated value of the benefit to the applicant.
(3) The estimated value of the benefits conferred upon others in terms
of reasonable likelihood of the use.
(4) The time when such benefits are likely to be conferred.
(5) The reasonable, useful life of the off-tract improvements.
(6) The inflation, deflation or all significant changes in the cost of
construction.
§ 163-49 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-50
159:553
C. Such estimate at the time of application for preliminary approval shall
be the applicant's best estimates for each of the six above factors
together with his basis therefor.
D. The Township Committee shall decide whether the off-tract
improvements or any combinations of them are to be constructed by the
municipality as a general improvement or as a local improvement, or
whether construction is to be done by the developer with a formula
providing for partial reimbursement to the developer by other property
owners, where the improvements specially benefit properties other
than the subdivision.
E. As a condition for final approval of any stage of a subdivision, the
applicant shall provide the Township with a cash deposit or a
performance guaranty as provided in § 163-10 of this chapter to insure
payment to the Township in the following amounts:
(1) An amount equal to the difference between the estimated cost of
the improvement and the estimated total amount by which all
property to be served hereby, including the subdivision property,
will be specially benefited by the improvement, if the improvement
is to be constructed by the municipality as a general improvement.
(2) The estimated amount by which the subdivision specially benefits
from the improvement, in addition to the amount required for a
general improvement, if the improvement is to be constructed by
the municipality as a local improvement.
(3) An amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvement, if the
improvement is to be constructed by the applicant.
F. If such off-tract improvements or any combination of them are to be
constructed by the applicant, the applicant shall bear the cost of all
such improvements and shall be reimbursed by such specially benefited
property owners if and when any such off-tract improvements are used
in the development of off-tract parcels. The Township Committee may
assess or lien the pro rata cost of such off tract-improvement upon
other specially benefited property owners at such time as such other
specially benefited owner or owners use the off-tract improvements in
the development of off-tract parcels.
G. Actual cost figures, rather than estimated costs, shall be and for making
such allocations once the improvements are constructed. The cost
figures shall be supplied by the applicant and certified by a New Jersey
certified public accountant, after audit. Approval of planned unit
developments, major subdivision or site development plans involving
the use of such off-tract improvements by other specially benefited
property owners outside this subdivision shall be conditioned upon
payment of the pro rata share of the value as so determined, to the
applicant, in the same manner as above.
§ 163-50 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-50
159:554
ARTICLE VII
Fee Schedule
[Amended 2-15-1982 by Ord. No. 82-2; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-1;
3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6; 4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 93-2]
§ 163-51. Application fees and escrow deposits.
A. Application fees and escrow deposits for subdivisions shall be paid as
required by Chapter 95, Fees, Article I, Application Fees and Escrow
Accounts.
B. Procedure. [Added 9-6-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11]
(1) The application fees and escrow fees recited hereinabove as
minimums must accompany the application. An application shall
not be deemed complete until the application fee and escrow fee
required have been paid. The Planning Board shall exercise its
discretion in establishing the figure required for the escrow fund in
the event that the project will require more time for review than
has been provided for by the figures recited hereinabove or the
project is of a nature that is not expressly included in one of the
aforementioned categories.
(2) Application fees and escrow fees must be submitted in separate
checks payable to "Woolwich Township." The escrow fee shall be
forwarded to the Chief Financial Officer of Woolwich Township for
deposit into a developer's escrow account. The application fee shall
be deposited into the Planning Board account until the end of the
month, at which time the moneys in said account shall be submitted
to the Treasurer of Woolwich Township for deposit into the general
account of Woolwich Township.
(3) The escrow fee shall be retained in order to cover the cost of any
professional services rendered to Woolwich Township, the
Woolwich Township Planning Board or the Woolwich Township
Board of Adjustment for review of applications for development,
review and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements
or other purposes permitted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. All professional charges for review of an
application for development, review and preparation of documents
or inspection of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary,
given the status and progress of the application of construction.
Review fees shall be charged only in connection with an application
for development presently pending before the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment or upon review of compliance with conditions
of approval or review of requests for modification or amendment
made by the applicant. A professional shall not review items which
are subject to approval by any state governmental agency and not
under municipal jurisdiction except to the extent consultation with
a state agency is necessary due to the effect of state approvals in
§ 163-51 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-51
159:555
the subdivision or site plan. If Woolwich Township, the Woolwich
Township Planning Board or the Woolwich Township Board of
Adjustment retains a different professional or consultant in the
place of the professional originally responsible for development,
application review or inspection of improvements, the Township or
the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall be responsible
for all time and expenses of the new professional to become
familiar with the application or the project, and the Township,
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall not bill the applicant
or charge the deposit or the escrow account for any such services.
(4) The Township shall be reimbursed for all payments to independent
consultants in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. If the salary,
staff support and overhead for a municipal professional are
provided by the Township, the charge shall be the maximum
permitted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. For
other professionals, the charge shall be at the same rate as all
other work of the same nature by the professional for the Township
when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants
or developers.
(5) All escrow funds shall be utilized by the appropriate Board to pay
the cost of any professional fees incurred by the Board for review
and/or testimony. The term "professional," as used herein, shall
include the services of a duly licensed engineer, surveyor, planner,
attorney, appraiser or other expert who would provide professional
services to ensure that an application complies with the standards
set forth in Township ordinances and experts whose testimony may
be solicited to give further information to the approving Board in
any area addressed by any of applicant's experts.
(6) The following closeout procedure shall apply to all deposits and
escrow accounts established under the provisions of P.L. 1975, c.
291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), and shall commence after the
appropriate Board has granted final approval and signed the
subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of application review
escrows and deposits, or after the improvements have been
approved as provided in Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53), in the case of improvement inspection escrows and
deposits. The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to
the Chief Financial Officer of the Township, to the approving Board
and to the relevant Township professional that the application or
the improvements, as the case may be, are completed. After receipt
of such notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the Chief
Financial Officer within 30 days and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial officer shall
render a written final accounting to the applicant on the uses to
which the deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of the final bill.
Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including
interest in accordance with Section 1 of P.L. 1985, c. 315 (N.J.S.A.
§ 163-51 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-51
159:556
40:55D-53.1), shall be refunded to the developer along with the
final accounting. To facilitate the release of escrow, an applicant
shall submit a signed escrow release voucher with the development
application.
(7) The Chief Financial Officer shall make all of the payments to
professionals for services rendered to the municipality or
approving Board for review of applications for development, review
and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other
purposes under the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq). Each payment charged to the deposit for review
of applications, review and preparation of documents and
inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from the
professional, which voucher shall identify the personnel
performing the service and, for each date the services performed,
the hours spent to one-fourth-hour increments, the hourly rate and
the expenses incurred. All professionals shall submit vouchers to
the Chief Financial Officer on a monthly basis in accordance with
schedules and procedures established by the Chief Financial
Officer. If the services are provided by a Township employee, the
Township employee shall prepare and submit to the Chief Financial
Officer a statement containing the same information as required on
a voucher on a monthly basis. The professional shall send an
informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the
Chief Financial Officer simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief
Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant a
statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative
balance of the escrow account. This information shall be provided
on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a
monthly basis, if monthly charges exceed $1,000. If an escrow
account or deposit contains insufficient funds to enable the
Township or approving authority to perform required application
reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief Financial Officer
shall provide the applicant with a notice of the insufficient escrow
or deposit balance. In order for work to continue on the
development or the application, the applicant shall, within a
reasonable time period, post a deposit to the account in an amount
to be agreed upon by the Township or approving authority and the
applicant. In the interim, any required health and safety
inspections shall be made and charged back against the
replenishment of funds.
(8) An applicant shall notify, in writing, the governing body, with copies
to the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the
professional, whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by
a professional for service rendered to the Township in reviewing
applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, inspection of improvements or other charges made
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
§ 163-51 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-51
159:557
seq.). The governing body or its designee shall, within a reasonable
time period, attempt to remediate any disputed charges. If the
matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the
applicant may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals
established under Section 9 of P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-127), any charge to an escrow account or a deposit by any
Township professional or consultant or the cost of the installation
of improvements estimated by the Municipal Engineer pursuant to
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). An applicant
or his authorized agent shall submit the appeal in writing to the
County Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant or his
authorized agent shall simultaneously send a copy of the appeal
to the Township, the approving authority and any professional
whose charge is the subject of the appeal. An applicant shall file
an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the informational copy
of the professional's voucher required by Subsection c of Section
13 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2), except that, if the
professional has not supplied the applicant with an informational
copy of the professional's voucher, the applicant shall file his appeal
within 60 days from receipt of the Township statement of activity
against the deposit or escrow account required by Subsection c of
Section 13 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2). An applicant
may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges by a
professional during a period not exceeding six months to
demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or
inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this provision need
not appeal each charge individually.88
88.Editor's Note: Original Section 8.02 containing fees and Section 8.03, Remedies and
Penalties, were deleted 4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 93-2.
§ 163-51 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-51
159:558
ARTICLE VIII
Compliance with Motor Vehicle Code
[Added 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-44]
§ 163-52. Application to make state law applicable to development.
A. All applicants for the development of commercial and private property
shall submit a written request and application to the Township Clerk
with an accompanying legible site plan depicting the roadways, parking
areas and the county or municipal roadways which border the property.
In turn, the Township Clerk shall forward such request to the New
Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles to have New Jersey motor vehicle
statutes made applicable to private property in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:5A-1 et seq.
B. Upon review and approval of the request by the NJDOT, the Township
shall adopt an ordinance to enact such statute on such property.
C. This procedure shall be a requirement of the Woolwich Township Joint
Land Use Board. Documentation of the receipt by the Township Clerk of
the request, application and site plan shall be required prior to deeming
the application complete.
§ 163-52 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-52
159:559
Chapter 168
TAXATION
§ 163-52 WOOLWICH CODE § 163-52
159:560
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizen Tax Exemption
[Adopted 7-3-1961; amended in its entirety 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
§ 168-1. Criteria for exemption.
Every person who is a citizen and resident of the State of New Jersey for
a period of one year immediately preceding October 1 of the pretax year,
of the age of 65 or more years, or, if not 65 or more years of age, is
permanently and totally disabled, as defined in N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40, having
an income not in excess of $10,000 per annum and residing in a dwelling
house owned by him which is a constituent part of his real property shall
be entitled, on proper claim being made and allowed therefor, to exemption
from taxation on such real property to an assessed valuation not exceeding
$250 in the aggregate, but no such exemption shall be in addition to any
other exemption to which said person may be entitled.
§ 168-2. Financial position of town not impaired.
The financial position of the Township of Woolwich will not be impaired by
the exemption so claimed.
§ 168-3. Exemption to reduce taxable valuation of real property.
The exemption claimed and to be allowed shall operate to reduce the
taxable valuation of real property in the Township of Woolwich.
§ 168-4. Applications for exemption.
All applications for exemption under this article may be filed on or before
November 1 of the pretax year. Such applications shall be on forms
prescribed by the Director, Division of Taxation, in the Department of the
Treasury of the State of New Jersey.
§ 168-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 168-4
159:561

ARTICLE II
Real Estate Tax
[Adopted 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 84-2]
§ 168-5. Proof of payment. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
Any applicant for a permit, license, approval or relief used or usable in
connection with a designated parcel of real property located in the
Township of Woolwich shall submit proof with such application that all real
estate taxes assessed against such real property and assessments on the
property have been paid through the quarter in which the application is
filed.
§ 168-6. Issuance of permit or license conditional on payment.
[Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
No permit, license, approval or relief used or usable in connection with
a designated parcel of real property located in the Township of Woolwich
shall be issued by any board, body, officer or employee of the Township of
Woolwich unless all real estate taxes assessed against such real property
and assessments on the property have been paid through the then-current
quarter.
§ 168-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 168-6
159:563

ARTICLE III
Five-Year Tax Exemption
[Adopted 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13]
§ 168-7. Authority.
The Township shall have the authority to enter into agreements ("financial
agreements") with redevelopers, developers and/or other appropriate
entities, for the granting of up to five years of alternative tax treatment,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., and for a longer term, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., concerning certain projects within the Township,
subject to the following conditions.
§ 168-8. Application.
A. Applications for five-year PILOT agreements may be informal but must
be reduced to a financial agreement to be authorized by further
ordinance.
B. Applicants for long-term tax treatment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et
seq., shall provide the Township Committee with an application setting
forth the following:
(1) A general description of the project for which an abatement,
exemption, or payment-in-lieu-of-tax agreement is sought.
(2) A legal description of all real estate comprising:
(a) The project site; and
(b) The proposed tax treatment at such project site.
(3) Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the
project.
(4) A description of the number, classes and types of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project.
(5) A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement and/or
exemption or other tax treatment as part of the applicant's project
and a description of the benefits to the Township likely to be
realized if a financial agreement is granted.
(6) Estimate of the cost of completing such project.
(7) Estimate of the time to complete such project.
(8) A statement showing:
(a) The real property taxes as currently assessed for the project
site; and
§ 168-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 168-8
159:565
(b) Estimated, proposed tax payments that would be made by
applicant for the tax treatment portion of the project site
during the period of the financial agreement, pursuant to law.
(c) Names of current owners of property within:
[1] The entire proposed project site; and
[2] The proposed tax treatment area.
(9) A description of any agreements of sale and lease agreements
between applicant and any other entity, including the proposed
users of the project site, and a history and description of such
users' business.
(10) Such other pertinent information as the governing body may
require.
C. Applicants shall apply for a financial agreement prior to
commencement of construction (allowing, however, for minimal
preparatory site work to be undertaken prior to commencement of
construction if the applicant is under a redevelopment or development
agreement with the Township).
D. Upon receipt of a completed, lawful, and timely application as set forth
above, the Township Committee shall review the application to
determine whether to negotiate and enter into a financial agreement.
Once the Township Committee approves an application, the Township's
counsel shall assist the Township in negotiating a financial agreement,
and the Township shall adopt an authorizing ordinance for the project.
Any agreement so authorized shall provide for the applicant to pay the
Municipality according to the financial agreement and controlling
statutes.
E. No abatement, exemption, payment in lieu of taxes, or other tax
treatment shall be granted except upon written application, filed with
and approved by the Township Committee.
F. No abatement, exemption, payment in lieu of taxes, or other tax
treatment shall be granted, and no financial agreement shall be entered
into, for any property for which property taxes are delinquent or
unpaid, nor for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 168-8 WOOLWICH CODE § 168-8
159:566
Chapter 171
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 182.
§ 171-1. Consent of township required.
No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall maintain the
business of taxicabs for hire with an office, place of business or regular
pickup point in Woolwich Township unless he or it first obtains the consent
of the Woolwich Township Committee pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A.
48:16-1 et seq.
§ 171-2. Term of consent; renewal; fees.
Such consent shall be for a one-year basis and may be renewed. The fee
for the initial issuance shall be $100, and the renewal fee shall be $100 per
year.
§ 171-3. Vehicles to be clearly marked; registration and license
tags.
All vehicles operated as taxicabs shall be clearly marked as such on the
exterior. The vehicle shall be registered and have New Jersey license tags
for omnibus and shall meet all current motor vehicle regulations for such
vehicles.
§ 171-4. Approval from Township Committee.
Each and every driver of the vehicles used in such taxicab business shall
before doing so receive approval from the Woolwich Township Committee.
§ 171-5. Investigation of applicants; grounds for denial; term of
consent.
Said approval shall be granted only after the Woolwich Township Police
have made an investigation, which shall include the driving record and any
criminal record of the applicant. A driver who has ever been convicted of
an indictable offense or firearms offense shall be automatically disqualified;
and a driver who within the previous five years has a conviction for reckless
driving or driving while impaired or under the influence of alcoholic
beverage or controlled dangerous substances shall be automatically
disqualified. Other offenses or mental or physical disabilities may also lead
to a denial of such consent. The consent for individual drivers shall also
be for a one-year period from the date it is initially issued and will be
renewable on the same conditions.
§ 168-8 TAXICABS § 171-6
171:567
§ 171-6. Fee for consent; insurance.89
The fee for the consent to the individual driver shall be $50 per consent per
year. The owner of the taxicab shall provide evidence that he has in effect
an insurance policy meeting the minimum standards of N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 and
those necessary for maintaining a registered vehicle in New Jersey.
§ 171-7. Certificate; filing and posting of duplicates.
All consents issued under this chapter shall be evidenced by a certificate
signed by the Township Clerk. Duplicates shall be filed with the Township
Police Department, and the owner shall keep a duplicate posted in a
conspicuous place within the taxicab.
§ 171-8. Revocation of consents.
The consents granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Woolwich
Township Committee, after notice and hearing, if any of the conditions of
this chapter are violated or cease to be met.
§ 171-9. Consents to be nontransferable.
The consents issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable.
§ 171-10. Violations and penalties.90
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 173
TOPSOIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading plans — See Ch. 109.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Soil removal — See Ch. 253.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 173-1. Definitions.
The words or terms not interpreted or defined by this chapter shall be
used with common or standard utilization. The following words, terms and
phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 171-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 173-1
173:568
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
PROJECT — Any construction for which the State Uniform Construction
Code would require a construction permit.
SITE — Any plot or parcel of land.
TOPSOIL — The original surface of soil, containing organic content as
specified within the body of this chapter.
§ 173-2. Topsoil definition and requirements.
A. Unacceptable topsoil sources from either on site or off site of the
project limits.
(1) Material stripped from the following sources shall not be
considered suitable for use as topsoil:
(a) Soils having less than 4.1 pH value.
(b) Chemically contaminated soils.
(c) Areas from which the original surface has been stripped and/or
covered over such as borrow pits, open mines, demolition sites,
dumps and sanitary landfills.
(d) Wet excavation.
(2) Topsoil furnished from either on site or off site of the project limits
shall have a minimum organic content of not less than 2.75% by
weight. When the organic content is less than 2.75%, it shall be
increased by adding peat conforming to Subsection 909.11 of the
NJDOT section for peat specification, at a rate necessary to attain
this minimum organic content. The organic content of soils will be
determined according to AASHTO T 194, except that the sample is
to be taken from over-dried soil passing a No. 10 sieve. The organic
content of all topsoil used for planting shall conform to the
requirements specified above.
B. Gradation of topsoil sources.
(1) The gradation of the topsoil furnished from sources outside the
limits of the project will be determined using the Bouyoucos
Hydrometer Analysis conforming to AASHTO T 88. The gradation
of the topsoil shall be within the following:
(a) Not more than 20% of the material submitted from any on-site
or off-site sample shall be retained on a No. 10 sieve.
(b) If more than 1/2 of the sand is smaller than 20 mils:
§ 173-1 TOPSOIL § 173-2
173:569
Chapter 175
TOWING
§ 175-1. Township to appoint official towers.
The Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich shall appoint persons
or companies (hereinafter "official towers") which meet the criteria set forth
in this chapter and engaged in the business of offering the services of a
motor vehicle towing or wrecker service and the ability to store said motor
vehicles on site, at the rates contained within this chapter, and under the
terms and conditions as set forth below.
§ 175-2. Issuance of license; application procedure; terms of
licenses.
Percent
Sand (80 mils to 2 mils) 40 to 80
Silt (2 mils to 0.2 mils) 0 to 30
Clay (0.2 mils and smaller) 0 to 30
(c) If more than 1/2 of the sand is larger than 20 mils:
Percent
Sand (80 mils to 2 mils) 40 to 80 or 40 to 75
Silt (2 mils to 0.2 mils) 0 to 30 or 0 to 30
Clay (0.2 mills and smaller) 15 to 30 or 0 to 30
(2) Material outside these ranges is not suitable for use as topsoil.
A. Official towers shall be identified by means of a license that shall be
issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Not less than 75 days prior to the beginning of each three-year term of
official towers licenses, the Township shall advertise within the Official
Newspaper of Woolwich Township for applications for towing licenses
for providing towing services pursuant to this chapter.
C. All applicants shall submit their applications at least 60 days prior to
the commencement date for each three-year period, and the
applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set
forth within this chapter. The award of a license to the successful
applicants shall be subject to compliance with the license requirements
of this chapter.
D. For the purposes of the licenses to be awarded pursuant to this chapter
in the year which it is adopted, the initial term of the license shall be
from the date of issue until December 31, 1998. Licenses issued
§ 173-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 175-2
173:570
§ 175-3. Scope of services.
This chapter is intended to regulate and control the towing and storage
of passenger cars and small trucks, which would include pickup trucks,
vans and those trucks otherwise of such a size and nature that they could
be towed by the required equipment as set forth within this chapter. In
the event that a vehicle to be towed is a large vehicle, such as a tractor
and trailer or concrete delivery truck, which is beyond the capabilities of
the equipment described within this chapter, then the police dispatcher
is authorized to contact any towing company having equipment capable
to transport such a vehicle that is larger than the vehicles to which this
chapter is directed.
§ 175-4. Services to be furnished; subcontractors.
§ 175-5. Official towers list; applications.
thereafter shall be for a three-year term commencing on January 1 of
the year in which it is issued and terminating three years thereafter.
A. Official towers shall furnish adequate and proper wrecking, towing,
storage and emergency repair service to motor vehicles damaged or
disabled within the limits of Woolwich Township when requested to do
so by the Chief of Police or his authorized designee.
B. Any official tower to whom approval to subcontract work has been given
shall be responsible for the services performed by the subcontractor
and shall remain liable for any violation of this chapter by the
subcontractor.
C. Certification that the applicant will be able to provide towing services
anywhere in the Township with a maximum response time of 10
minutes. [Added 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-15]
D. Certification that towing company and storage yard are within a fourmile
radius of the municipal boundary of Woolwich Township. [Added
9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-15]
A. Applications for inclusion on the official towers list shall be made to the
Township Committee of the Township of Woolwich upon a form
prepared by the Township Clerk and approved by the Township
Attorney and shall contain all of the following information:
(1) The name, residence and business address and telephone number
of the owner of the towing company. If the owner is a corporation,
the application shall contain the name, residence and business
address and telephone number of every stockholder owning more
than 10% of the issued stock.
(2) Such information as may be required by the Township Committee
concerning the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
§ 175-2 TOPSOIL § 175-5
173:571
facilities of such applicant, as hereinafter provided, showing that
the applicant meets the minimum standards of performance.
(3) A certificate or certificates of insurance evidencing adequate
insurance coverage as hereinafter provided.
(4) The names and addresses of two business references who have
known the applicant for at least two years.
(5) Certification that the applicant will be able to provide towing
services anywhere in the Township with a maximum response time
of 20 minutes, except when extraordinary circumstances occur.
(6) Certification that the applicant will be available for service 24
hours a day and that he will abide by the fees contained in or
referenced to within this chapter.
(7) A site plan showing the location of the storage area, the number of
cars that can be stored and the total square footage area of the
storage area.
(8) Agreement to abide by the general rules and regulations
established by the Chief of Police in connection with towing
procedures within the Township of Woolwich.
B. The applicant shall submit completed duplicate applications to the
Township Clerk, who shall forward a copy to the Chief of Police for his
review and approval. The review by the Chief of Police shall consist of
the following:
(1) A background check to determine if either the applicant or the
applicant's personnel have been convicted of a criminal offense or
have had their driver's license revoked or suspended within the
past year. Conviction of a criminal offense or suspension of driver's
license within the past year shall be cause for disqualification from
inclusion on the official towers list.
(2) An inspection of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
area proposed to be utilized by the applicant to verify the accuracy
of the information contained in the application and to determine
compliance with applicable laws and regulations and the standards
of performance required by this chapter.
C. The Chief of Police shall conduct his review and render a report to the
Woolwich Township Committee recommending either approval or
denial of the application within 21 days of receipt of the application
from the Township Clerk. The Woolwich Township Committee shall take
action within 14 days of receipt of the report of the Chief of Police. The
applicant or its representative shall be given notice of the date on which
the Township Committee will consider the application and shall be
permitted to appear and be heard at that time.
§ 175-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 175-5
173:572
§ 175-6. Issuance of licenses; display; term; revocation; fee;
transferability.
D. An applicant may be included on the official towers list by the Woolwich
Township Committee by resolution adopted at a regular public meeting
when, from consideration of the application and from such other
information as may be otherwise obtained, it finds that all the following
circumstances exist:
(1) The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made
any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in
the application or in any other document required pursuant to this
chapter.
(2) The applicant has met the standards of this chapter and has
furnished the required hold harmless agreement and certificate(s)
of insurance.
(3) The application has been reviewed and approved by the Chief of
Police.
(4) Neither the applicant nor the applicant's personnel have been
convicted of a criminal offense or had their driver's license revoked
within the past year.
E. Written notice of the approval or denial of the application shall be
provided to the applicant within seven days of the decision of the
Woolwich Township Committee.
F. If the Woolwich Township Committee fails to take action within 60 days
of receipt of a completed application, the application shall be deemed to
have been denied.
A. Upon approval of the application as herein provided and payment of the
required fees, the Township Clerk shall issue the applicant an official
towers license for each tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle to be utilized in
providing services pursuant to this chapter.
B. The licenses, which shall be in a form approved by the Woolwich
Township Committee, shall be displayed on the tow vehicle at all times.
C. The licenses shall be valid for a three-year term as set forth in this
chapter, shall be nontransferable and shall be subject to revocation by
the Woolwich Township Committee for any of the following reasons:
(1) If it is subsequently determined that the applicant knowingly and
with intent to deceive made false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of material fact in the application or in any other
document required pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Violation of any federal or state law or municipal ordinance relating
to the operation of a motor vehicle or the provision of towing
services.
§ 175-5 TOPSOIL § 175-6
173:573
§ 175-7. Standards of performance.
The official tower shall maintain and have available to render services
required by this chapter a minimum of one flatbed vehicle.
(3) Violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Insurance.
(4) Unsatisfactory service provided pursuant to this chapter.
D. The license fee for the license issued under this section shall be $100
per license per vehicle. [Added 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-15]
E. Licenses shall not be transferable from one vehicle to another without
the consent of the Chief of Police. Consent may be granted at the sole
discretion of the Chief, if the license demonstrates that the transferee
vehicle complies with all of the requirements of this chapter.
A. Minimum vehicle requirements.
(1) Vehicle classes:
(a) Flatbed vehicles must be equipped with a winch or
hydraulically operated bed which slides or tilts to
accommodate transporting of vehicles.
(b) All equipment shall comply with all state and federal
regulations.
(2) Each applicant shall submit, along with its application, proof of
ownership or lease of the vehicles which will be utilized to provide
services pursuant to this chapter.
B. Minimum equipment requirements.
(1) Every flatbed vehicle shall be equipped with the following:
(a) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on
the highest practical location of the vehicle.
(b) One snatch block per winch.
(c) Amber safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights for towing
vehicles at night.
(d) Extra chains and cable for pulling or securing a towed vehicle.
(e) At least one heavy-duty broom, a shovel, a crowbar or prybar, a
set of jumper cables, a flashlight and one two-pound or larger
fire extinguisher of dry chemical type.
(2) Every flatbed vehicle shall comply with any and all state, federal
and local laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining to safety,
lighting and towing equipment requirements and shall be subject
to inspection by the Chief of Police or his designee at any time.
§ 175-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 175-7
173:574
(3) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall display the official towers
license and shall have the name of the official tower displayed on
the vehicle in such a manner and of such lettering as conforms to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
C. Minimum personnel requirements. Official towers shall have available
at all times a minimum of two persons to provide the services required
by this chapter. All persons employed by official towers to provide the
services provided by this chapter shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Have a valid driver's license having no restrictions other than a
condition requiring the wearing of eyeglasses.
(2) Be mentally alert and neat in appearance at all times.
(3) Obey all traffic laws and regulations.
D. Minimum storage requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain an inside or outside secured
storage area meeting the following requirements:
(a) The storage area shall be capable of storing at least five
passenger vehicles. The area shall have at least 500 square
feet of storage area to hold and protect police hold vehicles.
(b) The location of the storage area shall be either within the limits
of the Township or at such location outside of the Township so
as to facilitate reasonable towing distances.
(c) Any outer storage area shall be fully enclosed by a sturdy fence
having a minimum height of six feet, with at least one lockable
gate for ingress and egress, and shall be lighted from dusk to
dawn.
(d) The storage area shall be in an area legally zoned for such use.
(e) The storage facility shall be available 24 hours a day, 365 days
a year and shall be open to the public on weekdays during
normal business hours and for four hours on Saturdays. The
applicant is not required to be open on Sundays.
(f) The official tower shall have an employee on duty during all
hours in which the storage facility is open.
(g) The official tower shall not charge a release fee or other charge
for releasing vehicles to their owners after normal business
hours or on weekends.
(2) The applicant shall, with its application, submit proof of ownership
or lease of the storage area.
§ 175-7 TOPSOIL § 175-7
173:575
§ 175-8. Utilization of official towers list.
§ 175-9. Hold harmless agreement.
The applicant shall agree, in writing, to assume the defense of and
indemnity and hold harmless the Township of Woolwich, its elected officials,
boards, commissions, officers, employees and agents, from all suits, actions,
damages or claims to which the Township may be subjected of any kind
and nature whatsoever resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as
a consequence of towing, wrecking, storage and/or emergency services
provided at the request of the Township pursuant to this chapter. Official
towers shall enter into a hold harmless agreement in a form to be prepared
by the Township Attorney prior to being included on the official towers list.
§ 175-10. Insurance.
(3) The official tower shall be responsible for ensuring the proper and
safe storage of all vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter. The
official tower shall be responsible for any damage incurred by such
vehicles while in transit to or while still stored in the storage areas.
A. Official towers shall rotate on the list for one week at a time or for such
a period of time as the Chief of Police determines.
B. The Township shall contact Gloucester County Dispatch to request
wrecking, towing and storage services from each official tower in
rotation. When called, the tower shall advise the dispatcher if a vehicle
is available and of the estimated time of arrival. If no tow vehicle is
available, or if the response time is insufficient under the circumstances
to properly protect the public health, safety or welfare, the next official
tower on the list shall be called for that particular towing event. The
official tower who is at the top of the list, however, shall remain at the
top of the list for any subsequent calls until that tower's rotation period
is concluded. [Amended 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-15]
C. All requests for service must be made by the Chief of Police or his
designee.
D. During adverse weather conditions, heavy traffic conditions or
emergency conditions, official towers shall give priority to requests
from the Township over other requests which may be received by the
official tower.
A. No person shall be included on the official towers list unless and until
such person has provided to the Township of Woolwich a certificate or
certificates of insurance evidencing that there is in effect the following
insurance coverages:
(1) Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limits.
(2) Workers' compensation as required by law.
§ 175-7 WOOLWICH CODE § 175-10
173:576
§ 175-11. Towing and storage fee schedule.
(3) Garage keepers' liability in an amount not less than $60,000 per
location.
(4) Garage liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit.
(5) Sufficient comprehensive general public liability insurance to
protect the Township from any liability, loss or damages arising out
of the activities to be conducted. Such insurance shall be in the
amount of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each
accident.
B. Policies of insurance shall contain endorsements to provide collision
coverage for vehicles in tow.
C. Policies of insurance shall be written by insurance companies
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Insurance
companies shall be acceptable to the Township and shall have at least a
B+ rating by a recognized rating service.
D. The Township of Woolwich shall be named as additional insured on all
policies of insurance provided pursuant to this chapter. All certificates
of insurance shall provide that the policies may not be canceled,
terminated or coverage decreased without 30 days' written notice to
the Township.
E. Policies of insurance required by this chapter shall be maintained in full
force and effect at all times. In the event that any coverage is canceled,
terminated, interrupted or decreased in amount, the tower shall be
removed from the official towers list until such time as the required
coverage is reinstated or replaced.
A. Fees. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-30; 1-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-02; 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-15]
(1) Automobiles, vans, pick-up trucks.
(a) Tow: $140.
(b) Storage per day: $35.
(2) Commercially registered box and straight homes and campers.
(a) Tow: $200 truck, mobile.
(b) Storage: $75 per day.
(3) Tractor-trailer.
(a) Tow: $475 flat fee.
(b) Eighty-five-ton crane: $900/hour (four-hour minimum).
§ 175-10 TOPSOIL § 175-11
173:577
(c) Labor w/eighty-five ton crane: $175/hour (four-hour minimum).
(4) Lot delivery fee applies after fourth day in storage.
(a) Category 1: $25.
(b) Category 2: $50.
(c) Category 3: $50.
(5) Recovery rates for extra heavy-duty commercial vehicle.
(a) Heavy-duty wrecker, 26,001 pounds and up: $400 per hour.
(b) Medium-duty wrecker, 10,001 to 26,000 pounds: $250 per
hour.
(c) Road service truck: $200 per hour.
(d) Forklift: $125 per hour.
(e) Specialized equipment (e.g., sixty-ton crane, light tower airbag
recovery truck): $125 per hour.
(f) Landoll lowboy with tractor: $225 per hour.
(g) Relief trailers.
[1] Fifty-three-foot reefer unit: $500 flat rate.
[2] Forty-eight-foot flatbed: $500 flat rate.
(h) Airbag recovery system: $3,500 flat rate.
(i) Cleanup: $100 per hour.
(6) Recovery rates for extra light-duty 10,000 pounds and under:
(a) Flatbed and/or light-duty wrecker: $100 per hour.
(b) Winching:
[1] Light duty: $100.
[2] Heavy duty: $150.
(c) Cleanup: $45.
(d) Oil-Dri: $15 per bag.
(e) Heavy-duty labor: $75 per hour.
(f) Administration: $45.
(g) Removal from facility by outside contractor: $45.
B. The fees set forth in this section for towing rates are the maximum
charges that shall apply to a private passenger automobile for basic
§ 175-11 WOOLWICH CODE § 175-11
173:578
§ 175-12. Additional regulations.
towing services. There shall be no additional charges other than those
provided herein, including but not limited to flatbedding, waiting time,
cleanup cost and additional labor, when only basic towing services
as defined here are provided. The official towers, however, shall be
allowed to charge for services other than basic towing services, as
defined in this chapter, the sum of $25 per hour for any additional
winching services required over and above the basic towing services
when removing a vehicle from a position beyond the right-of-way or
berm or from being impaled upon any other object within the right-ofway
or berm. In addition, the official towers may charge a flat fee of $30
for any road service for private passenger vehicles which do not need
to be towed.
(1) Other than for commercial vehicles, the towing rates shall be
calculated based on the total distance traveled from the tow
vehicle's base of service to the job site and return by way of the
shortest available route. Fractions shall be rounded up to the
nearest whole mile.
(2) Tow vehicles transporting multiple passenger cars at one time shall
receive the applicable fees for each vehicle transported.
(3) When towing services are required at the scene of an accident, the
day rate shall apply when the time of the accident is between 8:00
a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except New Jersey
state holidays. The night, weekend and holiday rate shall otherwise
apply.91
C. To the extent permitted by law, the Township Committee may revise the
rates set forth in the schedules above by resolution adopted by the
Township Committee.
A. Copies of this chapter and the schedule of fees that may be charged by
official towers shall be made available to the public during normal
business hours, in the Woolwich Township Municipal Building. Copies
shall also be made available at each official tower's place of business.
B. All official towers shall post, in a prominent place at each storage area
visible to the public, a schedule of the fees which may be charged for all
services pursuant to this chapter.
C. The Township reserves the right to make periodic unannounced
inspections of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage areas of
all official towers.
D. The relationship between an official tower and the Township is one of
an independent contractor. Neither party shall be construed in any
91.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), which immediately followed, regarding the rates
for towing services otherwise required, was repealed 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-15.
§ 175-11 TOPSOIL § 175-12
173:579
§ 175-13. Dispute resolution and license revocation.
manner whatsoever to be an employee of the other, nor shall any
employee or agent furnished by any party be construed to be an
employee or agent of the other party. Inclusion on the official towers
list shall not be construed or considered as a joint venture, partnership,
association, contract of employment or profit sharing agreement.
E. The municipality shall not be liable or responsible for compensating the
official towers for any of the services performed under this chapter
unless those services are performed for Township vehicles.
Compensation shall be the responsibility of the owner of the towed
motor vehicle, and the official tower shall proceed directly against the
owner.
F. The official tower shall, at all times, be solely responsible for the
conduct of its employees.
G. Each official tower shall keep and maintain adequate and complete
records showing all vehicles towed, stored and released, all services
rendered and all fees charged and collected. All records shall be
available for inspection by the Township at any time during normal
business hours. Records shall be kept and maintained by the official
tower at one central location and shall be retained for a period of seven
years. Records may be written, printed or computerized as long as the
requirements of this subsection are met.
H. Upon final adoption of this chapter, the Township Clerk is hereby
authorized to provide a certified copy of this chapter to the State of
New Jersey, Department of Law and Public Safety, Division of Consumer
Affairs.
A. In the event that a complaint is received by the Township involving the
improper or unsatisfactory performance of services by an official tower,
excessive charges or damage to a motor vehicle while in custody of the
tower, written notice of the same shall be provided by the Township
Administrator to the official tower involved. The tower shall have the
opportunity to respond, in writing, within five days.
B. Within 14 days of receipt of the tower's response or within 21 days of
receipt of the complaint, if no response is received, the matter shall be
presented by the Township Administrator to the Township Committee.
C. The Township Committee shall consider the matter at a regular public
meeting and may request that the complainant and the tower involved
appear and give testimony regarding the complaint.
D. If, after considering the matter, the Township Committee shall
determine that one of the causes for revocation exists, the tower's
license shall be revoked, and the tower shall surrender the same to the
Township Administrator within one day.
§ 175-12 WOOLWICH CODE § 175-13
173:580
§ 175-14. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 177
TREES
§ 177-1. Intent and purposes.
E. Failure to surrender the license upon revocation shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
F. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or limit the right of any person
to commence or maintain an action for damages or any other relief
directly against an official tower in a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, and each
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same
is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
B. In addition to the fine imposed above, a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of the official
tower's license.
A. Indiscriminate, uncontrolled and excess destruction, removal and
cutting of trees upon lots and tracts of land within Woolwich Township
may cause increased drainage control costs, increased soil erosion and
sedimentation, decreased fertility of the soil, degradation of water
resources, decreased groundwater recharge, increased buildup of
atmospheric carbon dioxide, the establishment of a heat island effect
and increased dust and pollution. The singular or cumulative effect of
any of the foregoing could adversely impact the character of Woolwich
Township, decrease property values, render the land unfit and
unsuitable for its most appropriate use and negatively affect the health,
safety and general welfare of Woolwich's residents. Thus, the Township
governing body desires to regulate and control indiscriminate and
excessive cutting of trees within the Township and to require
appropriate tree replacement. This environmental regulation is enacted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.
B. It is recognized that there is a strong interrelationship between the
integrity of the Township's water resources, development on steep
slopes, tree removal, soil disturbance, storm water management and
the general use of the land resources. Fewer trees throughout the
Township also correlates with increased air pollution as trees are an
important ecological resource. Therefore, the governing body finds that
the appropriate management of these resources is an important health,
safety and general welfare concern. Managing the Township's tree
resources are consistent with the state-approved Community Forestry
§ 175-13 TOPSOIL § 177-1
173:581
Management Plan. The appropriate management guidelines for tree
preservation to be utilized are:
(1) The American National Standard, ANSI A300 (Part 5) -
Management;
(2) Trees and Development: A Technical Guide to Preservation of Trees
During Land Development, Nelda Matheny and James R. Clark; and
(3) Protection and Care of the Urban Forest, NJDEP Division of Parks
and Forestry.
C. Trees are declared to be an important cultural, ecological, scenic and
economic resource. Proper management of this resource will ensure its
maintenance and result in economic returns. A forestry management
program is intended to meet the objectives of preserving, protecting,
enhancing and maintaining trees and providing opportunities for the
continued use of forest resources which are compatible with the
maintenance of the environment. This will be accomplished by ensuring
proper management of forest and trees through the application of
sound management practices. To that end, it shall be unlawful to cut
down, damage, poison or in any other manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any trees covered by this chapter, except in accordance
herewith.
D. The enforcement of this chapter shall be the duty of the Shade Tree
Commission of Woolwich Township and/or its agents, such as the Tree
Specialist, through the regulation, planting, care and control of shade,
ornamental and evergreen trees and shrubs in the streets, highways,
public places of the Township and tree removal on all lands within the
Township.
E. The Township of Woolwich is not responsible for compliance or
enforcement of the Freshwater Protection Act, Flood Hazard Area
Control Act92 and associated transition areas or buffer zones. The
actions of the Tree Specialist in granting or denying an application to
remove or harvest tress shall not be construed as a confirmation of the
presence or absence of freshwater wetlands or transition areas on the
site of the proposed activity, or any portion thereof or a confirmation of
compliance with the FWPA.
F. If there is any question whether the site of the proposed activity is
located in a freshwater wetland, transition area, flood hazard area, or
other areas regulated by NJAC 7:7A and NJAC 7:13 on a site, the
Township of Woolwich strongly recommends that the person proposing
to engage in such activity apply for a letter of interpretation (LOI) line
verification from NJDEP Division of Land Use Regulation (DLURP)
confirming the presence, absence and boundaries of such regulated
areas. Questions regarding compliance should be referred to NJDEP or
92.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 7.13 et seq.
§ 177-1 WOOLWICH CODE § 177-1
173:582
§ 177-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CALIPER: ANSI Z60 FOR NURSERY STOCK — Caliper is a type of diameter
measurement used in the nursery industry. The height measurement shall
be taken from ground level for field grown stock and from the soil line
for container grown stock, which should be at or near the top of the root
flare. Caliper measurement of the trunk shall be taken six inches above the
top of root flare up to and including four-inch caliper size. If the caliper
at six inches above the ground exceeds four inches, the caliper should be
measured at 12 inches above the top of root flare. Seldom are tree trunks
perfectly round. The most accurate measurement will result from the use
of a diameter tape. Caliper measurements taken with manual or electronic
"slot" or "pincer" type caliper tools should be the average of the smallest
and largest measurements.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree measured
4 1/2 feet above the ground level.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, ice, wind and gravity.
EXEMPT AREA — The lot area as provided in this chapter for which tree
replacement shall not be required.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Commonly referred to as floodplains and riparian
zones, are regulated under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rule at
N.J.A.C. 7:13. A flood hazard area includes the floodway and the flood
fringe area. The flood hazard area includes any land, and any space above
that land, which lies below the flood hazard area design flood elevation
(DFE), which is equal to the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
(FEMA) 100-year floodplain in coastal areas and at least one foot higher
than FEMA's floodplain in fluvial (noncoastal) areas. Structures, fill, and
vegetation that are situated on land that lies below the flood hazard area
design flood elevation are described as being "in" or "within" the flood
hazard area.
FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for the management of
timbered or forested lands approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, New Jersey Forest Service, or similar state or
federal agency.
HISTORIC TREE — A tree that has been found to be of notable historic
interest to Woolwich Township because of its age, type, size or historic
association and which has been so designated and that designation has
been officially made and promulgated as part of the official records of
the Township and accompanied by a resolution of the governing body so
designating said tree.
lawyer and/or wetlands consultant. Application requirements for a LOI
can be found at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-16.3.
§ 177-1 TOPSOIL § 177-2
173:583
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
and enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open spaces, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designated to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
SELECTIVE LOGGING — The cutting out of certain trees in a stand as
defined by specific criteria (species, diameter at breast height, or height
and form), that are mature or defective, or of inferior kinds to encourage
the growth of the remaining trees in a forest or wood. Selective logging will
leave some trees standing, which allows for natural regrowth, less impact
on the wildlife, and less ugly patches in the landscape.
SPECIMEN TREE — Any tree in fair or better condition which is so
designated by the Shade Tree Commission based on considerations of
whether the tree is a rare species of specimen thereof: is abnormal in
height, trunk diameter or drip line circumference for a tree of its species;
has foliage of an unusual quality for a tree of its species; occupies a
location which confers special shade tree, erosion control, aesthetic, scenic
enhancement, historic, preservation or cultural values to the community.
For purposes of this definition, "in fair or better condition" shall mean
that a tree has a relatively sound and solid trunk with no evidence of
extensive decay or visual evidence of being hollow and with no major insect
or pathological problem.
STATE RECORD TREE — The largest tree of each species found in New
Jersey as listed on the NJ State Big Tree Register.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 11%, as measured
over a minimum run of 10 feet. Figure 9 of the Woolwich Township
Environmental Resource Inventory demonstrates how slope is calculated.
STREET TREE — A street tree is any tree that is growing in the Township
right-of-way, whether in improved (between the sidewalk and the curb) or
unimproved (no sidewalk and/or curb) right-of-way.
TREE — Any deciduous or coniferous species which has a DBH of five inches
or greater.
TREE ESCROW FUND — A fund established by the governing body for the
administration and promotion of tree and shrubbery resource sustainability
projects and practices.
TREE PLANTING PLAN — A specific plan adopted by Woolwich Township
for the location and placement of trees on public property.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — The permit issued by the Shade Tree
Commission or, its designee, to remove or destroy a tree or trees.
TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN — A specific plan for replacement of removed
trees in accordance with the provision of this chapter.
§ 177-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 177-2
173:584
TREE SPECIALIST — The governing body may appoint a Tree Specialist.
This individual shall be responsible for the inspection of sites for which
applications are filed under this chapter. This individual will be responsible
for the administration and protection requirements of this chapter and
enforcement of the ordinance. This individual shall also have the
responsibility of reviewing an approved forest management plan and
inspecting the forested site for plan compliance if requested by the tax
assessor.
WETLANDS — Are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, vernal pools and similar areas as regulated
by state statutes and regulations.
§ 177-3. Applicability.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply as follows:
A Tree Specialist is any of the following:
A forester who shall have a bachelor's degree in forestry or
arboriculture from a college or university, shall be certified as a
certified tree expert by the State of New Jersey and shall have
a minimum of three years of experience in planting, care and
maintenance of trees.
(1)
A conservation officer who shall be certified as a ceritified tree
expert by the State of New Jersey and shall have a minimum of
three years of experience in planting, care and maintenance of
trees.
(2)
In the absence of the above, in-house personnel, specifically the
Director of Community Development in conjunction with the
Woolwich Township Zoning Officer.
(3)
A.
The Tree specialist retained from outside of Township administrative
personnel shall be paid from the Tree Escrow Fund, which is
established herein, and shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule
established by contract with the municipality.
B.
A. A tree removal permit shall be obtained under the facts and
circumstances set forth herein.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, remove, top, injure, or harvest
any trees or forest products within areas defined and regulated as
wetlands under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act (FWPA).93 It
shall further be unlawful for any person to cut, remove, top, injure, or
harvest any trees or forest products within areas defined and regulated
93.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 177-2 TOPSOIL § 177-3
173:585
§ 177-4. Exemptions to required permit or replacement.
as a wetland transition area under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection
Act (FWPA) without an approved Forestry Management Plan that is
reviewed and approved by the State Forester and on file with the Tree
Specialist before the activities are undertaken.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, remove, top, injure, or harvest
any trees or forest products within areas regulated under the Flood
Hazard Areas Control Act94 without an approved Forestry Management
Plan that is reviewed and approved by the State Forester and on file
with the Tree Specialist before the activities are undertaken.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, remove, top, injure, or harvest
any trees or forest products within any slope equal to or greater than
11%, as illustrated, defined in this chapter and calculated in the
Woolwich Township Environmental Resource Inventory (see Map 6
Steep Slopes).
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to removed trees
which are state record, specimen, or historic trees. Such trees shall be
maintained in a living condition and it shall be unlawful for any person
to remove such tree without an approved tree removal permit. No
specimen or historic tree shall be removed unless the applicant has
obtained the approval of the Tree Specialist.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, remove, top, injure, or harvest
any trees or forest products within protected vegetative buffers,
conservation or wetland transition areas identified within a deed of
easement restriction, approved final subdivision plat or site plan, which
has been recorded.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, remove, top, injure, or harvest
street trees as identified in an approved final subdivision plat or site
plan, which has been recorded, unless a tree removal permit is issued
by the Tree Specialist, in which case replanting may be a condition of
removal and that a greater than 1:1 replacement may be required.
A. The following shall be exempt from the tree removal permit and
replacement requirements of this chapter:
(1) Any tree of less than five inches diameter breast height (DBH),
provided it is not a street tree or located within a regulated area as
set forth in § 177-3, unless a tree removal permit is issued by the
Tree Specialist.
(2) Any tree or trees planted and grown for commercial purposes on
property used as a commercial nursery, tree farm, garden center,
Christmas tree plantations or tree orchards.
94.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 7.13 et seq.
§ 177-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 177-4
173:586
§ 177-5. Tree removal permits; general.
(3) Any tree growing in a utility right-of-way or fire trail, or for the
purpose of establishing a survey line.
(4) Any tree that is removed by the owner of an existing residential
property that is two or less acres in size and is not a street tree or
located within an area regulated as set forth under § 177-3, unless
a waiver is obtained from the Tree Specialist.
(5) Any tree that is removed by the owner of the property for personal
use as firewood on the property by the owner and provided is not
within an area regulated as set forth under § 177-3, unless a waiver
is obtained from the Tree Specialist.
(6) Tree removals necessitated by weather emergencies such as
hurricanes, fire, windstorms, ice storm, flood, freezing
temperatures or other disaster.
(7) Dead or diseased trees, which are a hazard to persons or property.
B. Exempt areas.
(1) For all new residential development as part of a minor subdivision
with proposed lot area equal to or less than 43,560 square feet, up
to 50% of the lot area shall be exempt area. For new residential
development as part of a minor subdivision with a proposed area of
43,560 square feet or greater, up to 25,000 square feet or 30% of
the lot area shall be exempt area. For all new residential
development as part of a major subdivision, up to 30% of each lot
shall be exempt area. The exempt area shall be calculated as a
contiguous area from a fixed point within the footprint of the
existing or proposed primary residential structure on the property.
The exempt area should be calculated to minimize any adverse
environmental impacts and is not within a regulated area as set
forth under § 177-3.
(2) In all commercial and nonresidential developments, 50% of the lot
area may be exempt area. The exempt area should be calculated to
minimize any adverse environmental impacts and comply with all
relevant state and federal environmental regulations or regulated
areas as set forth under § 177-3.
(3) Utility line clearance operations provided that a plan is filed with
and approved by the Township Forester.
A. Any person required to obtain a tree removal permit shall file a written
application with the Tree Specialist and pay a $25 fee. No permit shall
be issued until an application has been approved by the Tree Specialist,
within 21 days of submission of said application and payment of fees.
§ 177-4 TOPSOIL § 177-5
173:587
§ 177-6. Tree preservation and removal plan.
B. Selective logging or other sustainable commercial harvesting practices
are permitted on properties that are farmland assessed, provided the
applicant has obtained an approved tree removal permit and such
activities are governed by an approved Forestry Management Plan filed
with the Tree Specialist if proposed in a regulated area as set forth
under § 177-3. Under no circumstances shall a permit be granted that
authorizes a person to cut, remove, top, injure, or harvest any trees or
forest products within any slope equal to or greater than 11% within
200 feet (measured horizontally from the stream bank), or wetland area
as defined under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act (FWPA).95
C. Where an application, as required by this chapter, has been submitted
in connection with the construction of a building or other improvement,
no building permit shall be issued until a save tree or replacement plan
for the lot or parcel, if necessary, has been reviewed and approved by
the Tree Specialist, and until the filing of a written report of an on-site
inspection by the Tree Specialist.
D. If the tree removal permit is for a single family residence as part of a
minor subdivision, the plan shall consist of a tree location sketch
containing the minimum amount of pertinent information to enable the
determination of compliance by the Tree Specialist.
E. Inspections: After the application is complete and reviewed, the Tree
Specialist shall inspect the trees and property which are the subject of
the permit application within 21 days of the receipt of an
administratively complete application.
F. Permit approval or denial: The Tree Specialist shall approve or deny the
tree removal permit within 10 business days after completion of the
inspection. The Tree Specialist shall notify the applicant in writing of
the factual basis and criteria for any denial. The final decision of the
Tree Specialist may be appealed to the governing body by filing written
notice within 10 days of the final decision. The governing body shall
hold a public hearing and issue its decision within 60 days after notice
of appeal is filed, unless the applicant requests, and the governing body
consents to an extension of time.
A. Tree preservation and removal plans shall contain the following
minimum information. The Tree Specialist reserves the right to request
additional information as may reasonably be required.
B. Applications that require Joint Land Use Board approval shall have tree
preservation and removal plans as part of the submittal to the Joint
Land Use Board, and said plans shall be provided to the Tree Specialist
for review and approval. Tree preservation and removal plans shall
contain the following:
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 177-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 177-6
173:588
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the property from which the
trees are to be removed.
(3) The street address (if assigned) and lot and block of the property.
(4) The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, including the
location of all existing and proposed easements.
(5) If the tree removal permit is for a single-family residence, the plan
shall consist of a tree location sketch containing the minimum
amount of pertinent information to enable the determination of
compliance with the regulations in this chapter. The plan for any
other property shall include a survey prepared by a licensed land
surveyor that contains tree locations. The survey shall contain, at a
scale of no less than one inch equals 50 feet, the following
information:
(a) The existing and proposed tree preservation limits.
(b) The proposed limit of the clearing (exempt area under
ordinance) and all individual trees to be retained outside the
exempt area identified by some approved method as
determined by the Tree Specialist such as flagging, prior to the
field inspection. For any clearing greater than or equal to three
acres, a representative 5% of the wooded areas proposed to be
cleared shall be inventoried. The representative 5% shall be
determined by agreement between the Tree Specialist and the
applicant. Where less than three acres is proposed to be
cleared, all trees that are greater than the six-inch caliper to be
removed shall be inventoried, but not more than 50 trees in the
three acres.
(c) The installation and limits of a temporary existing tree
protection fence along the limits of the proposed tree removal.
(d) Locations of all forest types shall be identified by common and
botanical names of dominant tree species.
(e) All state record, specimen and historic trees to be removed. All
reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve such trees,
including, but not limited to, if feasible, relocation of
infrastructure, roadways and buildings. Removal of such trees
shall require specific approval of the governing body with
consideration of the Tree Specialist's recommendations. The
governing body shall grant permission, especially where
infrastructure, roadways, or buildings are contemplated, for
the removal at double the rate of the tree compensation as
provided elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 177-6 TOPSOIL § 177-6
173:589
§ 177-7. Term of permit.
Any and all permits approved by the Tree Specialist shall be declared null
and void if the tree removal is not completed within a reasonable time,
not to exceed 12 months after permit issuance, subject to Joint Land Use
Board's conditions of approval. In no case will the permit be valid for more
than 12 months, except that a tree removal permit issued in conjunction
with a development approved under the MLUL shall extend for the period of
protection granted to the development approval under the MLUL. Permits
not used within this period will require a new application and the payment
of new fees.
§ 177-8. Criteria for issuance of permits.
(f) A proposed tree replacement plan in accordance with this
chapter. A tree replacement plan shall be considered the
proposed landscaping plan required for all subdivision and site
plan approvals.
(g) A North arrow.
(h) The location of existing and proposed structures and
improvements, if any.
A. Upon completion of the Tree Specialist's field inspection report and
review of any requested recommendations, the Tree Specialist shall
approve of a permit if:
(1) The tree preservation and removal plan is compliant;
(2) The tree replacement plan is approved; and
(3) None of the conditions set forth below in Subsection B exists.
(4) A permit may also be issued if at least one of the criteria as follows
has been satisfied:
(a) The tree is located in an area where a structure or
improvements will be placed according with the approval of
Joint Land Use Board and the tree cannot be relocated on the
site because of age, type or size of the tree;
(b) The tree is dead, diseased, injured, in danger of falling, is too
close to existing or proposed structures, interferes with
existing utility service, creates unsafe vision of clearance or
conflicts with other ordinances or regulations;
(c) The trees to be removed is for the purpose of making the land
available for farming or other agricultural activity. If the
property is not farmed as prescribed on the tree removal
permit within three years of the tree removal or is developed
for any other use before the expiration of five years of clearing,
§ 177-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 177-8
173:590
§ 177-8.1. Fees.
the reforestation replacement obligation will be enforced
according to the new use of the property;
(d) The trees to be removed are in furtherance of a forestry
management plan or soil conservation plan, or to serve some
other purpose which is consistent with the purposes of this
chapter.
(e) The trees slated for removal are all within the exempt area.
B. The Tree Specialist may deny a permit if the plan is inconsistent with
the Code and the removal will contribute to:
(1) Extra runoff of surface water onto adjacent properties;
(2) Erosion;
(3) Silting; and/or
(4) If the tree removal causes:
(a) Soil instability.
(b) Drainage or sewerage problems.
(c) Dangerous or hazardous conditions.
(d) Clearing within any slope equal to or greater than 11% within
200 feet (measured horizontally from the stream bank).
(e) Clear-cutting within sensitive natural areas and forested
watershed lands.
C. Applicants claiming exemption must still comply with all relevant state
and federal environmental regulations.
A. Application.
(1) The applicant, at time of filing the application with the Tree
Specialist, shall pay the application fee of $25 for each new or
existing lot. Applicants wishing to obtain a permit to commercially
harvest and selectively log an area equal to or greater than 0.5
(21,780 square feet) acres in size shall pay an application fee of
$50.
B. Tree Escrow Fund. A Tree Escrow Fund shall be established and
maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of Woolwich Township to
receive and disburse replacement tree contributions. Appropriations
from the Tree Fund shall be authorized by the governing body with
consideration of Tree Specialist's recommendations. The primary
purpose of said fund is to provide for the replacement of trees and
shrubs on public and municipal owned property for which the Township
§ 177-8 TOPSOIL § 177-8.1
173:591
§ 177-9. Replacement trees.
of Woolwich is responsible. The fund will also cover administrative
costs to implement the provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to site inspections, processing of permits and supervision of tree
replacements. Administrative costs imposed in accordance with this
chapter shall not exceed 30% of the fund, as determined on an annual
basis.
A. Any tree removed pursuant to this chapter, unless exempt shall be
replaced based on the following:
Number of
Trees to Be
Removed
Size/
Diameter
(Inches)
Number of
Replacement
Trees
Size of
Replacement
Trees
(Inches)
Or Dollar
Amount
1 Greater than
6 up to 10
1 2 - 2 1/2 $200
2 Greater than
6 up to 10
1 3 1/2 - 4 $400
1 Greater than
10 up to 16
2 2 - 2 1/2 $480
1 Greater than
16 up to 23
2 3 $840
1 Greater than
23 up to 30
4 3 1/2 - 4 $1,680
1 Greater than
30
5 3 1/2 - 4 $2,100
(1) In cases where the tree cost requirement criteria is combined with
partial replacement, the value of proposed shade, ornamental,
evergreen and shrub material shall be deducted from the
calculated amount for the true cost replacement value. The value of
the proposed landscape material shall be calculated based upon
average local material costs for planting.
B. The applicant will receive a one-for-one replacement tree credit should
stands of 10 or more trees greater than six inches in diameter be
preserved within the limit of the disturbance line (exempt area).
C. All replacement trees shall be planted on site in accordance with the
foregoing. However, if one or more of the following conditions exist,
some or all of the replacement trees may be planted off site:
(1) The site in question cannot physically accommodate the total
number of replacement trees, and the applicant contributes an
amount equal to the calculated monetary value of non-replaced
trees to the Tree Escrow Fund; or
§ 177-8.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 177-9
173:592
§ 177-10. Existing tree protection during construction.
(2) The Tree Specialist and applicant agree in writing that the
applicant shall make payment to the Tree Escrow Fund based upon
the chart provided; or
(3) The Tree Specialist and applicant agree in writing that the
applicant shall plant replacement trees off-site on municipally
owned property pursuant to the municipal tree planting plan. This
option shall require Township Committee approval.
A. Barriers.
(1) Prior to construction and any tree removals, suitable tree
protective barriers shall be erected and this protection, where
required, shall remain until such time as the protection is
authorized to be removed by the Tree Specialist or after issuance of
a final certificate of occupancy. In addition, during construction no
attachments or wires shall be attached to any of said trees so
protected. Where some grading must take place within the drip line
of trees, or 15 feet from the trunk diameter, whichever is less, in
the protection zone (outside the exempt area), appropriate
measures shall be taken to minimize impact to the trees. Any trees
seriously damaged during construction must be professionally
treated by a New Jersey-certified tree expert or replaced if the
damage is beyond treatment.
(2) A detail of the existing tree self-supported protective barrier shall
be provided on all applications. The protective barrier shall be a
minimum of four feet high.
(3) The self-supported protective barrier shall be placed, as
determined by the Tree Specialist, at the drip line of any tree along
the limit of clearing and around the entire drip line for trees to
remain undisturbed within the limit of clearing (exempt area).
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person in the construction of any
structure or other improvement to place solvents, material,
construction machinery or temporary soil deposits within the drip
line.
B. Street right-of-way and utility easements (exempt area) may be
delineated by placing stakes a minimum of 50 feet apart and tying
ribbon, plastic tape, rope, etc., from stake to stake along the outside
perimeters of such areas to be cleared.
C. Large property areas separate from construction and land-clearing
areas into which no equipment will venture may also be delineated as
set forth above as determined by the Tree Specialist following a field
evaluation.
§ 177-9 TOPSOIL § 177-11
173:593
§ 177-11. Tree replacement.
Any tree removed in connection with an application that requires Joint
Land Use Board approval, construction of a building or other improvement
shall be replaced as provided under other provisions of this chapter, unless
said tree is located in an exempt area or is dead or fatally diseased as
determined by the Tree Specialist or certified tree expert. Tree replacement
shall be in accordance with either Subsection A, B, C or D below or a
combination of Subsections A, B, C and D.
A. Standard replacement. For each tree six inches in DBH or greater that
is removed, the applicant shall prepare a replanting plan for other areas
of the property. The replacement plan or landscape plan shall generally
reflect a one-to-one tree replacement for each tree six inches or greater
to be removed. All proposed replacement trees shall be in accordance
with selections from Trees For New Jersey Streets, published by the
New Jersey Shade Tree Federation, and Street Tree Factsheets, a
publication of the Municipal Tree Restoration Program, and submitted
for review and approval prior to the issuance of a tree removal permit.
Please see table in § 177-9.
B. Tree area replacement/reforestation: For each square foot of tree area
to be removed, the applicant shall prepare a reforestation scheme on
other treeless open space areas of the property to compensate for the
tree removals. The reforestation plan shall be based on a twenty-footby-
twenty-foot grid. Of this number of trees, 10% shall be balled and
burlapped, two-inch to two-and-one-half-inch caliper, 20% shall be
balled and burlapped, one-and-three-quarter-inch to two-inch caliper,
30% shall be bare root one-and-one-quarter- to one-and-one-half-inch
caliper, and 40% shall be bare root six-foot- to eight-foot-tall whips. A
mixture of trees, indigenous to the area and site, shall be utilized.
Proposed trees shall be planted in natural groves and may be spaced
five feet to 20 feet on center. The ground shall be seeded with a grass
mixture approved by the Shade Tree Commission. The reforestation
formula shall follow the guidelines as set forth in the New Jersey No Net
Loss Reforestation Act.96
C. Credits. The permit applicant will receive a one-to-one replacement
tree credit:
(1) For stands of 10 or more trees within a DBH of six inches or greater
preserved within the limit of the disturbance line (exempt area); or
(2) Forested areas of one acre or greater, which are left natural and
conveyed to the Township with a deed restriction, will remain
forested and undeveloped. This conveyance excludes all previous
dedicated easements.
96.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:11-14.1 et seq.
§ 177-11 WOOLWICH CODE § 177-12
173:594
§ 177-12. Emergencies.
In case of emergencies such as hurricanes, fire, windstorm, ice storm, flood,
freezing temperatures or other disaster, trees which are a hazard to persons
or property, the requirements of the regulations set forth in this chapter
shall not apply.
§ 177-13. Stop-work orders.
§ 177-14. Enforcement.
The Tree Specialist shall oversee all tree removals pursuant to an issued
tree removal permit. The Tree Specialist shall conduct adequate inspections
of all sites for which a tree removal permit has been issued. Upon the
ascertainment of a violation of this chapter, the Tree Specialist or his/her
assignee shall pursue enforcement.
§ 177-15. Applicability to tree removal construction companies;
permit required.
All provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person removing trees
on behalf of any other person, including all tree removal construction
companies or persons in the business of removing trees or construction.
It shall be unlawful for any person or company to remove or cause to be
removed any tree or undertake any work for which a permit is required
pursuant to this chapter unless a valid permit therefore is in effect and
is displayed. Such removal or work shall constitute a violation of this
section and shall subject the person or company violating this section to all
penalties provided herein.
§ 177-16. Display of permit; carrying of plan or authorization; right
of entry.
A. The Tree Specialist is hereby authorized to issue stop-work orders to
the holder of the tree removal permit and the Tree Specialist is
authorized to recommend the issuance of stop-work orders in the event
that there is:
(1) A failure to comply with the approved plan such as a site plan,
forest management plan or soil conservation plan;
(2) Noncompliance with the tree removal permit granted pursuant to
this chapter; or
(3) Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the Shade Tree
Commission, upon recommendation of the Tree Specialist, has
determined that the resumption of work will not violate the plans,
permit or the provisions of this chapter.
§ 177-12 TOPSOIL § 177-16
173:595
§ 177-17. Duties of the Tree Specialist.
The Tree Specialist shall perform the duties set forth in this chapter and
shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter as
directed by the Shade Tree Commission. In this regard the Tree Specialist
is authorized and shall perform any necessary inspections and is further
authorized and shall issue violation notices and shall sign complaints and
provide testimony in the Municipal Court for violations of this chapter.
§ 177-18. Violations and penalties.
A. The applicant shall prominently display on the site the tree removal
permit issued. Such permit shall be displayed continuously while trees
are being removed or replaced or work done as authorized on the
permit and for 10 days thereafter. In addition, the person or persons
cutting or removing trees, if other than the applicant, shall carry with
him/her authorization from the owner or applicant authorizing such
person to cut or remove trees. In the event that the trees are being cut
or removed in accordance with a forest management plan or a soil
conservation plan, a copy of the plan shall be in the possession of the
person cutting or removing such trees.
B. As a condition for the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall agree
in writing to the entry onto his/her premises by the Tree Specialist and
all law enforcement officers as necessary to effectuate the provisions of
this chapter, and such entries shall be deemed lawful. Failure to allow
such entry shall be unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and shall constitute failure to display the permit as required
herein. It shall be unlawful and considered a violation of this chapter for
any person to engage in the business of plant cutting, trimming,
removal, spraying or otherwise treating trees, shrubs or vines within
the Township and without the applicable certification or license for the
designated work. All contractors offering tree care services for hire
within Woolwich Township shall register annually with the Tree
Specialist, provide a current certificate of insurance showing evidence
of employer liability and workers compensation coverage for the work
to be performed, and shall comply with applicable OSHA regulations
and Z-133, New Jersey Board of Tree Experts Pruning Standards for
Shade Trees.
A. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other legal
entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction of such violation be punished by a fine of up to $5,000 for
each offense, in addition to payment of the corresponding fees for
replacement. Each illegally removed tree shall be considered a
separate violation. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
and each day the same is violated shall be defined and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense. In addition, the court may order
restitution in the form of payment of the value of the tree illegally
removed.
§ 177-16 WOOLWICH CODE § 177-18
173:596
Chapter 182
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles with spikes or disks — See Ch. 138,
§ 138-18.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 171.
Towing — See Ch. 175.
B. In addition to other remedies, the Shade Tree Commission, Tree
Specialist or other authorized official may institute any appropriate
legal action to prevent a continuing violation of the terms of this
chapter. If such action is taken in Superior Court, the Township shall be
entitled to an award of attorney's fees and costs in addition to any and
all other available relief.
§ 177-18 TOPSOIL § 177-18
173:597

ARTICLE I
Through Traffic Roads
[Adopted 12-21-1953]
§ 182-1. Designation of through traffic roads. [Amended 5-17-1999
by Ord. No. 99-17]
§ 182-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided in New Jersey Statutes, every
person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
A. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
through streets as defined by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation:
Name of Street Limits
Back Creek Road South Harrison Township limit to
CR 551
Cloverdale Road CR 605 to Oliphants Mill Road
Harrisonville-Pedricktown Road South Harrison Township limit
west to intersection with CR 605
Hendrickson Mill Road State Highway Route 322 to
intersection with Warrington Mill
Road
Moravian Church Road From CR 620 to intersection with
Rainey Road
Oliphants Mill Road CR 605 to CR 620
Pancoast Road [Added
10-21-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Between Kings Highway (CR 551)
and State Highway Route 322
Russell Mill Road CR 614 to CR 668; Harrisonville-
Pedricktown Road to CR 605
Warrington Mill Road East Greenwich Township limit to
intersection with CR 653
B. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right-hand side of each
intersecting street on the above-mentioned through streets except
where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
§ 182-1 TOPSOIL § 182-2
173:599

ARTICLE II
Parking
[Adopted 8-19-1968]
§ 182-3. Prohibited parking on certain streets.
No vehicle shall be parked on the following streets or portion thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Swedesboro - Paulsboro Road Both Entire length
Woodbury - Swedesboro Road
(a.k.a. Kings Highway)
Both Entire length
§ 182-3.1. Storage and/or parking of recreational vehicles,
commercial vehicles, boats and certain commercial/industrial
vehicles and equipment. [Added 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20]
§ 182-4. Prohibited parking at certain intersections.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time on the Woodbury Swedesboro
Road, also known as Kings Highway, and the Swedesboro-Paulsboro Road,
said intersection located in the Township of Woolwich, Gloucester County,
New Jersey.
§ 182-5. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statutes, every
person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a penalty of
A. No residential zone shall be permitted to have parked or stored on any
public street or right-of-way any recreational vehicles, commercial
vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds, motor homes, travel trailers,
campers, boats, trailers, jet skis, snowmobiles or such construction,
contractor, tractor-trailer unit, either singly or in combination, school
buses, commercial or industrial equipment and material such as, but
not limited to, bulldozers, graders, dump trucks, rollers, tree and stump
chippers and grinders, lawn movers and fertilizer spreaders, tillers,
roofing and other building materials and equipment.
B. The outdoor storage of an unoccupied recreational vehicle, motor
home, travel trailer, camper or boat in parking lots of townhouse,
apartment or other multifamily developments is prohibited unless the
vehicles are either parked in a garage or parked in a designated
parking area (i.e., pursuant to either Planning Board or Zoning Board
approval) where the space being used is in addition to the off-street
parking spaces required for the dwelling units.
(1) Any such vehicle stored in accordance with this section shall not be
occupied and shall not be provided with utility connections other
than for the maintenance of such vehicle.
§ 182-3 TOPSOIL § 182-5
173:601
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 182-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-5
173:602
ARTICLE III
Speed Limits
[Adopted 2-21-1977 by Ord. No. 77-7]
§ 182-6. Limits established.
Speed limits are hereby established upon the following streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Back Creek Road [Added
10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-25;
amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-13]
35 Between Route 551 and the
Harrison Township corporate
line
Garwin Road [Added 11-9-1998
by Ord. No. 98-27; amended
10-20-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-14]
40 Entire length
Mill Road [Added 5-4-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-06]
35 Between Swedesboro-
Paulsboro Road (Logan
Township line) and the
Woolwich Township-East
Greenwich line
Moravian Church Road [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-27;
amended 10-20-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-14]
30 Entire length
Oldmans Creek Road [Added
10-20-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-14]
35 Between Russell Mill Road
and Woodstown Road
Oldmans Creek Road [Added
10-20-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-14]
40 Between South Harrison
Boundary and Russell Mill
Road
Oliphants Mill Road [Added
10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-25]
35 Entire length
Paulsboro-Swedesboro Road (Co.
Rd. 1)
Zone 1 40 From Kings Highway (Co. Rt.
551) to Route U.S. 322
Zone 2 50 To the Woolwich-Logan
Township line
§ 182-6 TOPSOIL § 182-6
173:603
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Rainey Road [Added 11-9-1998
by Ord. No. 98-27; amended
1-18-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-02; 3-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-09; amended
10-20-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-14]
Zone 1 35 Between Moravian Church
Road and Inverness Drive
Zone 2 45 From Inverness Drive to CR
551
Russell Mill Road [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-27;
amended 10-20-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-14]
Zone 1 35 Between CR 694 and
Harrisonville Road
Zone 2 35 From Woodstown Road to
Oliphants Mill Road
Zone 3 45 Remainder
Swedesboro Avenue [Added
10-20-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-14]
40 Between Asbury Station and
Mill Roads
Township Line Road [Added
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 98-31;
amended 10-20-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-14]
Zone 1 45 Between Oldmans Creek
Road and 250 feet west of
Edward Drive
Zone 2 40 Between 250 feet west of
Edward Drive and High Hill
Road
Zone 3 35 Between Center Square and
High Hill Roads
Viereck Road [Added
10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-25]
Zone 1 25 Paulsboro-Swedesboro Road
(CR 653) and 1,450 feet west
of Belfiore Drive
§ 182-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-6
173:604
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Zone 2 30 Between 1,450 feet west of
Belfiore Drive and Oak Grove
Road (CR 671)
§ 182-7. Regulatory and warning signs. [Amended 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-27]
Regulatory and warning signs, conforming to the current Manual on Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways, shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits.
§ 182-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statutes, every
person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 182-6 TOPSOIL § 182-8
173:605

ARTICLE IV
No-Passing Zones
[Adopted 5-4-1992]
§ 182-9. Designated no-passing zones.
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as no-passing zones:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Location or
Sketch Drawing
No.
Back Creek Road ___ ___
Back Creek Road and Woodland
Avenue [Added 3-18-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-1]
___ ___
Cloverdale Road [Added
4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
___ No. NPZ-1840-B
Colony Place [Added 12-7-1998
by Ord. No. 98-30]
Both Entire length, from
Oliphants Mill
Road to Cloverdale
Road, a distance of
approximately
3,800 feet
High Street ___ ___
Homan Road (Township Line Road)
[Added 5-17-1999 by Ord. No.
99-15]
___ No. UTSC-102-A
Kelly Road/Hendrickson Mill Road
[Added 11-8-1999 by Ord. No.
99-21]
Both From Kings
Highway (CR 551)
to Warrington Mill
Road, a distance of
approximately
9,400 feet
Moravian Church Road-Rainey
Road [Added 5-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-13]
___ No. UTSC-100-A
Ogden Road [Added 6-1-1998 by
Ord. No 98-19]
Both From Kings
Highway (CR 620)
to 70 feet east of
the center of
Woodstown Road
(CR 605)
Oliphants Mill Road [Added
8-3-1998 by Ord. No. R-98-23]
Both Entire length
§ 182-9 TOPSOIL § 182-9
173:607
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Location or
Sketch Drawing
No.
Rainey Road [Added 5-17-1999
by Ord. No. 99-14]
Both Entire length, from
CR 602 to CR 620,
a distance of 5,800
feet
Russell Mill Road [Added
4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
___ No. NPZ-1840-B
Stone Meeting House Road
[Added 5-3-1999 by Ord. No.
99-12]
___ No. NPZ-1838A
Viereck Road [Added 6-1-1998
by Ord. No. 98-18]
Both Between
Swedesboro-
Bridgeport Road
(CR 671) and
Swedesboro-
Paulsboro Road
(CR 653)
§ 182-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statutes, every
person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 182-9 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-10
173:608
ARTICLE V
No Stopping or Standing
[Adopted 7-1-1996 by Ord. No. 96-7]
§ 182-11. Designation of no stopping or standing streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Garwin Road [Added 2-20-2001
by Ord. No. 01-2]
East From the intersection of US
Highway Route 322 traveling
north until the end of the
property owned by the
Kingsway Regional High
School District at the
boundary of Block 18, Lot 3
on the Woolwich Township
Tax Map
Paulsboro Road (CR 653)
[Amended 8-19-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-9]
North From Paulsboro Road for a
distance of 380 feet to a
point intersected by the
division line between Lot
5.01 of Block 9
Paulsboro Road (CR 653)
[Amended 8-19-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-9]
South From a distance of 380 feet
along Lot No. 5 of Block 7 on
the Official Tax Map of the
Township of Woolwich
US Route 322 [Added 8-3-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-11]
Both Between Paulsboro-
Swedesboro Road (CR653)
and 1,155 feet easterly
therefrom, (RR tracks)
(approx. mileposts 6.24 to
6.47) (All hours)
§ 182-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STOPPING or STANDING — Any cessation of movement of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic
control sign or signal.
§ 182-11 TOPSOIL § 182-13
173:609
§ 182-13. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statutes, every
person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 182-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-13
173:610
ARTICLE VI
Stop Intersections
[Adopted 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. R-97-24]
§ 182-14. Designation of stop intersections.
The following streets shall be designated as stop intersections, and stop
signs shall be installed as provided herein:
Name of Street
Amherst Court: stop sign at Concord Court
Amhurst and Concorde: stop sign at Amhurst [Added 5-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-16]
Amhurst and Heritage: stop sign at Heritage [Added 5-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-16]
Ashburn Way and Alyson Place: stop sign at Alyson Place [Added
7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-28]
Ashburn Way and Ethan Terrace: stop sign at Ethan Terrace [Added
7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-28]
Asbury Station Road a.k.a. Repaupo Road a.k.a. Country Road 684
eastbound from Warrington Mill Road: stop sign at Kings Highway
Back Creek Road westbound from Russell Mill Road: stop sign at Kings
Highway
Belfiore Drive and Grace Court: stop sign at Grace Court [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
Belfiore Drive eastbound from Viereck Road: stop sign at Paulsboro Road
Belfiore Drive westbound from Paulsboro Road: stop sign at Viereck Road
Benito and Casella Way: stop sign at Benito [Added 5-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-16]
Casandra Lane southbound: stop sign at Back Creek Road
Center Square Road eastbound from Auburn Road: stop sign at Kings
Highway (County Road 551)
Center Square Road eastbound from Township line: stop sign at Auburn
Road (County Road 551)
Center Square Road westbound from Kings Highway: stop sign at Auburn
Road
Cloverdale southbound from Woodstown Road: stop sign at Oliphants Mill
Road
Colony Place: stop sign at Cloverdale Road
County Road 538 westbound from Russell Mill Road: stop sign at
Monroeville Road
Dartmouth Drive westbound: stop sign at Berkley
§ 182-14 TOPSOIL § 182-14
173:611
Name of Street
Davidson Road eastbound from Swedesboro Harrisonville Road: stop sign
at Russell Mill Road
Davidson Road westbound from Russell Mill Road: stop sign at Woodstown
Road and Swedesboro Harrisonville Road
Fairway Drive southbound: stop sign at Harrisonville Pedricktown Road
Franklin Street: stop sign at Monroeville Road
Gentry Road northbound: stop sign at Harrisonville Pedricktown Road
Glen Echo Road eastbound from Kings Highway: stop sign at County Road
538
Gloucester Court westbound: stop sign at Berkley
Harrisonville Pedricktown Road eastbound from Auburn Road: stop sign at
Kings Highway
Harrisonville Pedricktown Road eastbound from Kings Highway: stop sign
at Woodstown Road (County Road 605)
Harrisonville Pedricktown Road westbound from Kings Highway: stop sign
at Auburn Road
Harrisonville Pedricktown Road westbound from Woodstown Road: stop
sign at Kings Highway
Heatherton Road southbound: stop sign at Harrisonville Pedricktown
Road
Hendrickson Mill Road northbound from State Highway Rt. 322: stop sign
at Warrington Mill Road
Hendrickson Mill Road southbound from Warrington Mill Road: stop sign
at State Highway Rt. 322
Heritage Drive: stop sign at Amherst Court
Heritage Drive: stop sign at Auburn Road
High Street southbound: stop sign at County Road 538
Homestead Court northbound: stop sign at Oliphants Mill Road
Independence Court eastbound: stop sign at Kings Highway
Independence Court westbound: stop sign at Kings Highway
Jockey Hollow northbound: stop sign at Harrisonville Pedricktown Road
Kelly Road northbound from Kings Highway: stop sign at State Highway
Rt. 322
Kelly Road southbound from State Highway Rt. 322: stop sign at Kings
Highway
Kings Court: stop sign at Asbury Station Road
Kings Highway northbound from Rainey Road: stop sign at intersection
with Center Square and Woodstown Road.
Kirschling Drive northbound: stop sign at Back Creek Road
§ 182-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-14
173:612
Name of Street
Kirschling Drive southbound: stop sign at Back Creek Road
Liberty Court northbound: stop sign at Pedricktown Harrisonville Road
Licciardello Drive northbound: stop sign at Back Creek Road
Locke Avenue northbound from Auburn Road: stop sign at State Highway
Rt. 322
Moravian Church Road eastbound from Rainey Road: stop sign at Kings
Highway
Nocentino and Licciardello Drive: stop signs at all four corners [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16; amended 5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
Nocentino Drive at intersection with Licciardello
Nocentino Drive northbound: stop sign at Back Creek Road
Nocentino Drive southbound: stop sign at Licciardello Drive
North Patricia and Kirschling Drive: stop sign at North Patricia [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
Norwood Lane and Briarwood: stop sign at Norwood Lane [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
Norwood Lane and Westwood: stop sign at Norwood Lane [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
Oak Grove Road a.k.a. Swedesboro Bridgeport Road a.k.a. County Road
671 southbound from Stone Meeting House Road: stop sign at State
Highway Rt. 322
Oldmans Creek Road eastbound from Township line: stop sign at Auburn
Road
Oliphants Mill Road at Kings Highway
Oliphants Mill Road eastbound from Kings Highway: stop sign at
Woodstown Road
Oliphants Mill Road westbound from Woodstown Road: stop sign at Kings
Highway
Overlook and Olympia: stop sign at Overlook [Added 5-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-16]
Pancoast Road eastbound from Kings Highway: stop sign at State
Highway Rt. 322
Pancoast Road westbound from State Highway Rt. 322: stop sign at Kings
Highway
Patricia Drive northbound: stop sign at Back Creek Road
Patricia Drive southbound: stop sign at Back Creek Road
Porches Mill Road westbound from Leone Farm: stop sign at Auburn Road
Rainey Road northbound from Harrisonville-Pedricktown Road: stop sign
at Kings Highway
§ 182-14 TOPSOIL § 182-14
173:613
Name of Street
Rainey Road northbound from Moravian Church Road: stop sign at
Harrisonville Pedricktown Road
Rainey Road southbound from Kings Highway: stop sign at Kings Highway
Regal Court northbound: stop sign at Back Creek Road
Russell Mill Road northbound from County Road 538: stop sign at Back
Creek Road
Russell Mill Road northbound from Harrisonville Pedricktown Road: stop
sign at Swedesboro Harrisonville Road
Russell Mill Road northbound from Swedesboro Harrisonville Road: stop
sign at Swedesboro Monroeville Road
Russell Mill Road northbound from Swedesboro Monroeville Road: stop
sign at County Road 538
Russell Mill Road northbound from Woodstown Road: stop sign at
Harrisonville Pedricktown Road
Russell Mill Road southbound from Back Creek Road: stop sign at County
Road 538
Russell Mill Road southbound from Harrisonville Pedricktown Road: stop
sign at Woodstown Road
Russell Mill Road southbound from Swedesboro Franklinville Road: stop
sign at Swedesboro Monroeville Road
Russell Mill Road southbound from Swedesboro Harrisonville Road: stop
sign at Harrisonville Pedricktown Road
Russell Mill Road southbound from Swedesboro Monroeville Road: stop
sign at Swedesboro Harrisonville Road
South Patricia and Kirschling Drive: stop sign at South Patricia [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
Spring Hill Drive (Horseshoe Drive): two stop signs both at Hendrickson
Mill Road
Stone Meeting House Road northbound from Oak Grove Road: stop sign
at Paulsboro Road
Stone Meeting House Road northbound from State Highway Rt. 322: stop
sign at Oldmans Creek Road
Stone Meeting House Road southbound from Paulsboro Road: stop sign at
Oak Grove Road
Stone Meeting House Road southbound from Warrington Mill Road: stop
sign at Paulsboro Road
Swedesboro Avenue eastbound from Asbury Station Road: stop sign at
Warrington Mill Road
Swedesboro Avenue eastbound from Tomlin Station (District 17): stop sign
at Asbury Station Road
§ 182-14 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-14
173:614
Name of Street
Swedesboro Avenue westbound from Warrington Mill Road: stop sign at
Asbury Station Road
Swedesboro Harrisonville Road westbound from Russell Mill Road: stop
sign at Davidson Road
Thomas Court and Gentry Drive: stop sign at Thomas Court [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
Township line northbound from Oldmans Creek (County Road 602): stop
sign at Center Square Road (County Road 620); stop sign at High Hill
Road (County Road 662)
Viereck Road and Belfiore Drive: stop sign at Belfiore Drive [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
Viereck Road eastbound from Oak Grove Road: stop sign at Paulsboro
Road
Viereck Road westbound from Paulsboro Road: stop sign at Oak Grove
Road
Warrington Mill Road northbound from Swedesboro Avenue: stop sign at
Asbury Station Road
Warrington Mill Road southbound from Tomlin Station District 17: stop
sign at Asbury Station Road
Westwood Drive: stop sign at Russell Mill Road
§ 182-15. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided in New Jersey Statutes, every
person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 182-14 TOPSOIL § 182-15
173:615

ARTICLE VII
No-Parking Zones
[Adopted 8-17-1998 by Ord. No. 98-25]
§ 182-16. Designation of no parking zones.
No person shall stop or park a vehicle along any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
A. Berkeley Drive from the intersection of Route 322 and Berkeley Drive,
in both directions of Berkeley Drive, located within the Commodore 295
Business Park within the Township of Woolwich.
B. CR 620 Center Square Road, from the intersection of Township Line
Road to the intersection of Auburn Road, both sides traveling east and
west, within the Township of Woolwich. [Added 6-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-14]
C. CR 605 Woodstown Road, along the frontage of municipal property
known as Block 34, Lot 2, within the Township of Woolwich. [Added
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-20]
D. CR 538 Franklinville Road, along the frontage of CR 538 adjacent to the
development known as Hidden Meadows from the side of Lot 9.01 and
rear of Lots 9.20 and 9.22 on the plan of the final subdivision. [Added
6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
E. Both sides of CR 605, where it abuts the subdivision currently known as
the "Railroad Parcel." [Added 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-15]
F. Across the subdivision frontage of Scotts Glen on CR 538 and CR 694.
[Added 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
G. Both sides of Harrisonville Road (CR 668) from Woodstown Road to the
border of South Harrison Township. [Added 1-18-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-01]
H. Both sides of CR 206 (Auburn Road) where it abuts the existing Block 1,
Lot 14.01, which will become part of the subdivision currently known as
"The Reserve at Creek Run." [Added 3-21-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-10]
I. Both sides of CR 602 (Pedricktown-Harrisonville Road) where it abuts
the existing Block 1, Lots 11, 11.01, 12.03, 12.04, 12.05, 12.07 and
12.08, which are lots that are adjacent to the intersection of CR 602 and
the proposed Meadowlark Drive. [Added 3-21-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-10]
J. Entire length of High Hill Road (CR 662) in both directions, from the
intersection of Auburn Road (CR 551) to the eastern municipal
boundary with the Township of Logan. [Added 9-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-32; amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-36]
§ 182-16 TOPSOIL § 182-16
173:617
K. Center Square Road (CR 620) in both directions, from the intersection
of Auburn Road (CR 551) to the end at the intersection of Kings
Highway. [Added 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-15]
L. Auburn Road (CR 551) in both directions, from the municipal boundary
of the Borough of Swedesboro to the boundary of the County of Salem.
[Added 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-15]
M. The western portion of Locke Avenue (CR 671) from its intersection
with U.S. Route 322 to the municipal boundary of the Borough of
Swedesboro. [Added 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-16]
N. Along the south side of Stone Meeting House Road (CR 669) beginning
at a point approximately 1,200 feet west of Oak Grove Road extending a
distance of 992.64 feet in a westerly direction. [Added 9-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-22]
O. Oldmans Creek Road (CR 602) in both directions, from the border with
Harrison Township to the border with Logan Township. [Added
2-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-02]
P. Kings Highway (CR 620) in both directions, from its intersection with
Center Square Road and Woodstown Road to Rainey Road. [Added
4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08]
Q. Franklinville Road (CR 538) in both directions, from its intersection
with Franklin Street and Glen Echo Avenue to the municipal boundary
with the Township of South Harrison. [Added 4-2-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-09]
R. Frederick Boulevard. [Added 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-30]
(1) Along the east side of Fredrick Boulevard from Center Square Road
(CR 620) continuous to 25 feet north of the exit driveway of the
Governor Charles Stratton School.
(2) Along the west side of Fredrick Boulevard within 25 feet of the
nearest crosswalk.
S. Oak Grove Road (CR 671) in both directions, from the intersection of
US Route 322 to the municipal boundary line of the Township of Logan.
[Added 7-21-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-14]
T. Westbrook Drive: [Added 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
(1) Along the frontage of Block 2.11, Lots 1-5.
(2) Along the frontage of Block 2.11, Lots 18-24.
(3) Along the frontage of Block 2.11, Lots 37-62.
(4) Along the frontage of Block 2.11, Lots 69-77.
U. Keswick Drive: [Added 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
§ 182-16 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-16
173:618
§ 182-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NO PARKING — Any cessation of movement of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or
signal.
§ 182-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided in New Jersey Statutes, every
person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
(1) Along the frontage of Block 2.13, Lots 20-25.
(2) Along the frontage of Block 2.12, Lot 6.
V. Wayne Drive: [Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
(1) Along each side of the full length of Wayne Drive, Monday through
Friday, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. from September 1 through June
30.
§ 182-16 TOPSOIL § 182-18
173:619

ARTICLE VIII
Street Name Changes and Designations
[Adopted 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 00-11]
§ 182-19. Names of certain streets established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1k, the names of certain streets are hereby
established within the Township of Woolwich as follows:
A. The street named or commonly known as Cloverdale Road shall
henceforth be named Russell Mill Road.
B. The street named or commonly known as Hendrickson Mill Road shall
henceforth be named Garwin Road.
C. The street named or commonly known as Kelly Road shall henceforth be
named Garwin Road.
D. The street named or commonly known as Swedesboro-Paulsboro Road
(CR 653) shall henceforth be named Paulsboro Road.
E. The street named or commonly known as Harrisonville-Pedricktown
Road shall henceforth be named Oldmans Creek Road.
F. The street named or commonly known as Moravian Church Road
(portion of roadway lying and situated between Kings Highway and the
New Jersey Turnpike) shall continue to be called Moravian Church
Road.
G. The street named or commonly known as Porches Mill Road (from
Auburn Road to the New Jersey Turnpike) shall henceforth be named
Leone Road.
H. The street named or currently known as Sharptown Road (CR 551) shall
henceforth be named Kings Highway.
I. The entire stretch of roadway known as Stone Meeting House Road that
is situated between U.S. Highway Route 322 and Paulsboro Road and
crossing over Paulsboro Road to the intersection of Mill Road shall
henceforth continue to be named Stone Meeting House Road.
J. The street named or commonly known as Vanderbuilt Mill Road shall
henceforth be named Rainey Road.
K. The street named or commonly known as Old Swedesboro-Paulsboro
Avenue shall henceforth be named Swedesboro Avenue.
L. The street named or commonly known as Harrisonville-Swedesboro
Road (CR 668) shall henceforth be known as Harrisonville Road.
M. The street named or commonly known as Swedesboro-Monroeville
Road (CR 694) shall henceforth be named Monroeville Road.
§ 182-19 TOPSOIL § 182-19
173:621
§ 182-20. Continuation of former names.
The former street names prior to the enaction of this article shall continue
to be effective as to the Zoning Map, the Tax Map and the tax records of the
Township until such time as those documents are revised.
N. The street named or commonly known as Swedesboro-Franklinville
Road (CR 538) shall henceforth be named Franklinville Road.
O. The street named or commonly known as Swedesboro-Bridgeport Road
shall henceforth be named Route 322.
P. The street named or commonly known as Township Line Road/aka/
Homan Road located between Oldmans Creek Road and High Hill Road
shall henceforth be named Township Line Road in its entire length.
Q. The street named or commonly referred to as Mill Court shall
henceforth be known as Hendrickson Court.
R. The streets named or commonly known as Warrington Mill and
Hendrickson Mill Roads from the Logan Township line crossing over
Paulsboro Road and continuing to the East Greenwich Township line
shall henceforth be named Mill Road.
§ 182-19 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-20
173:622
ARTICLE IX
Construction and Maintenance Operations
[Adopted 9-17-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1397]
§ 182-21. Preconstruction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, wishing
to conduct within, under or above the roadway, to contact the Chief of
Police of the Woolwich Township Police Department in order to arrange a
preconstruction meeting to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic
during such period of construction work. Any person, contractor or utility
who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work or whose
plan is not approved by the Chief of Police is in violation of this article.
§ 182-22. Hazardous conditions; emergency contacts.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of any
emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the
start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be reached,
or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from
the Police Department to correct the hazardous condition, the Township
may respond to correct such hazardous conditions. The reasonable fees for
such emergency service by the Township shall be charged to the person,
contractor or utility responsible for such conditions.
§ 182-23. Hours of road work.
Generally there shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility
work on any roadway in the Township before 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.
This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 7:00 a.m. or after
5:00 p.m. by the Chief of the Woolwich Township Police Department, if
reasonable conditions apply and after thoroughly reviewing such request.
If it is determined by the officer in charge that the construction or
maintenance operations prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. would
substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall
then be permitted only between 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
§ 182-24. Road closings and detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Woolwich Police Department.
97.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the adoption of the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) except as hereby supplemented and amended,
as it controls and regulates whenever construction, maintenance operations or utility
work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Failure to comply with the provisions of MUTCD
while performing such work is a violation of this ordinance.
§ 182-21 TOPSOIL § 182-25
173:623
§ 182-25. Traffic directors. [Amended 11-20-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Woolwich Police Department that same is
necessary to provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic. All
traffic directors shall be certified police officers.
§ 182-26. Stop work; removal of materials.
The Woolwich Police Department shall have the authority to stop work,
including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within
the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other related
work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violations of this article.
§ 182-27. Site preparation.
It is expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or equipment are to be
placed in the roadway or sidewalk area until all construction signs, lights,
devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 182-28. Payment for services rendered by traffic directors.98
[Amended 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-34; 11-20-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
A. Payment for all traffic directors (certified police officers) working all
construction, highway or other details directing the appropriate
movement of traffic flow shall be coordinated by the Chief of Police or
his designee. The payment shall be the appropriate hourly rate
designated by the Police Department with an additional 15% added to
the subtotal for all administrative duties which are required. Hourly
rates and vehicle use maintenance fees are listed on the standardized
request for services agreement.
B. Escrow accounts:
(1) Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer in the Woolwich Township Police Department
shall estimate the number of hours such law enforcement services
are required, which estimate shall be reviewed by the Chief of
Police or his designee, and if the estimate is approved in writing by
the Chief of Police or his designee, an escrow account with the
Township Treasurer shall be established by depositing an amount
sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and administrative
fees set forth in the agreement of services form.
(2) The Chief of Police or his designee shall not honor any request for
services from any person or entity unless all fees and compensation
98.Editor's Note: See also Chapter 36, Police Department, Art. IV, Off-Duty Employment.
§ 182-25 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-28
173:624
§ 182-29. Indemnification; hold harmless.
Any person, contractor or utility company shall be responsible to indemnify
and hold harmless the Township of Woolwich, its officers and employees for
any claims or actions brought as a result of the use of traffic directors by
said party, including the attorney fees.
§ 182-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person, contractor or utility found to be in violation of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, for the first offense pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 at the discretion of the court. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day on which each violation occurs or continues to
occur.
required in the manner prescribed above have been deposited with
the Township Treasurer.
(3) In the event the funds in the escrow account shall become
depleted, services for off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease
and requests for further or future services shall not be performed
or assigned until additional funds have been deposited in the
escrow account in the manner prescribed above.
(4) The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
§ 182-28 TOPSOIL § 182-30
173:625

ARTICLE X
One-Way Streets
[Adopted 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-37]
§ 182-31. Restrictions.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated below:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Prohibited
Bradford Lane South Entire length Eastern side
§ 182-31 TOPSOIL § 182-31
173:627

ARTICLE XI
Turn Prohibitions
[Adopted 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
§ 182-32. U-turns prohibited.
No vehicle shall make a U-turn on Fredrick Boulevard.
§ 182-33. Prohibited turns. [Added 10-15-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-39]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
Intersection Turn Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Tavistock Drive and
Center Square Road
(CR 620)
Left From stop at Tavistock
Drive west onto Center
Square Road
§ 182-32 TOPSOIL § 182-33
173:629

ARTICLE XII
Mid-Block Crosswalks
[Adopted 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
§ 182-34. Locations designated.
The following location is hereby established as a mid-block crosswalk:
Name of Street Location
Fredrick Boulevard Beginning at a point 338 feet north
of the northerly curbline of Ashburn
Way and extending to a point six feet
northerly therefrom
§ 182-34 TOPSOIL § 182-34
173:631

ARTICLE XIII
Engine Compression Brakes
[Adopted 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 182-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKE — Any device that utilizes air compression
and/or rapid release of compressed air in the cylinders of engines to slow
or retard vehicle speed. Examples include, but are not limited to, Jacobs
Engine Brake®, also known as "Jake Brake®" engine retarder, Pacbrake®
engine brake; TecBrake® engine brake; D-Celerator® diesel exhaust brake;
and similar devices that meet the definition.
PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE — Any vehicle operated by the Woolwich
Township Fire Department or the Woolwich Township Police Department,
or any other emergency vehicle operated by a state, county and/or local
agency.
§ 182-36. Prohibited activities. [Amended 10-17-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-16]
Use of engine compression brakes is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
the operator of a motor vehicle to engage, or allow to be engaged, operate
or use an engine compression brake, or any similar mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the deceleration of any vehicle which results in the
emission of excessive and loud noise from the vehicle, while the vehicle is
operated on any public roadway within the municipal limits of the Township
of Woolwich, County of Gloucester, State of New Jersey.
§ 182-37. Signage.
The Township shall, with the assistance of the requesting land owner, install
signage at the intersection of US Route 322 and Kings Highway (CR 555)
advising truck traffic that the use of engine compression brakes ("Jake
Brakes") is prohibited.
§ 182-38. Severability.
If any part or parts of this article are for any reason held to be invalid, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
article.
§ 182-39. Repealer.
All Ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 182-35 TOPSOIL § 182-40
173:633
§ 182-40. Exclusions.
This article shall not apply to operators of any of the following:
§ 182-41. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay
a fine not exceeding $1,250, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days for each offense.
A. A public safety vehicle; or
B. A vehicle involved in an emergency wherein the operator of said vehicle
reasonably believes that use of the engine compression braking is
necessary to avoid or mitigate a collision or accident.
§ 182-40 WOOLWICH CODE § 182-41
173:634
Chapter 184
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 135.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 138.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 182.
§ 184-1. Purpose.
The Township finds that the operation of motorized recreational vehicles
has previously been conducted in a manner so as to disturb the peace,
quiet and tranquility of others and/or in a careless, reckless or negligent
manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of others or
the property of others. This chapter proposes to regulate their use.
§ 184-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases used herein.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — A motor-operated vehicle, designed to
travel over any terrain, of a type possessing between three rubber tires
and six rubber tires, but shall not include golf carts.
MOTORCYCLE — Includes motorcycles, motor bikes, bicycles with a
motor attached and all motor-operated vehicles of the bicycle- or
tricycle-type.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and all real property which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity, including conservation areas,
utility easements and drainage easements.
SNOWMOBILE — Any motor-operated vehicle, designed primarily to
travel over ice or snow, of a type which uses sled-type runners, skis, an
endless belt tread, cleats or any combination of these or other similar
means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but does
not include any farm tractor, highway or other construction equipment,
or any military vehicle.
§ 182-41 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL § 184-3
184:635
§ 184-3. Operation and use restrictions.
No person shall operate any recreational motorized vehicles, including but
not limited to snowmobiles; two-wheel vehicles known as "minibikes," trail
bikes; motor scooters; three- or four-wheel motor vehicles known as "allterrain
vehicles" (ATVs) and four-wheel motor vehicles known as "go-carts,"
under the following circumstances:
A. On the private property of another without the express, written
permission of the owner or occupant of the property, within 100 feet
from adjoining property owner(s) and within 100 feet of a public street
or right-of-way. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-35]
B. On any public grounds or property, including playgrounds and
recreational areas or lands owned by the Township, excluding streets,
the use of which is expressly provided for by the New Jersey statutes.
C. In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
annoy other persons or to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet
of the Township. Further, no person shall operate a recreational motor
vehicle before the hour of 9:00 a.m. and after the hour of 8:00 p.m.
prevailing time or sunset, whichever shall first occur. Further, no
person shall cause dust to be created which disturbs the peace and
repose of neighbors, causes property damage to neighboring homes
and creates traffic hazards to passing motorists. [Amended 9-4-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-35]
D. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety or property of any person, including the
operator of the vehicle.
E. No person operating a motor-propelled vehicle shall carry any
passenger or passengers therein or thereon unless said vehicle is
specifically equipped for the purpose of carrying one or more
passengers, and no person operating a motor-propelled vehicle shall
carry more passengers therein or thereon than such vehicle is
specifically equipped to carry.
F. (Reserved)
G. Protective helmets. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or to
permit to be operated, or to ride as a passenger on, any motorcycle or
all-terrain vehicle without wearing a protective helmet approved by the
Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Law and
Public Safety of the State of New Jersey. Any such helmet shall be of a
type acceptable for use in conjunction with motorcycles as provided in
N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.7 through N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.10.
H. Headlights, taillights, brakes and mufflers. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or permit to be operated a motorcycle or all-terrain
vehicle that is not equipped with working headlights, taillights, brakes
§ 184-3 WOOLWICH CODE § 184-3
184:636
§ 184-4. Violation by minors.
Any person under the age of 18 years who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to the adjudication and disposition
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:4-42 et seq.99 Further, any parent, guardian or any
person having the care, custody and control of any child under the age of
18 years, who shall knowingly permit such child to operate a recreational
motor vehicle, shall be in violation of this chapter.
§ 184-5. Compliance with state statutes.
Any motor vehicle, as defined under § 184-2, operated within the Township
shall comply with all relevant provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:3C-1 et seq.,
including, but not limited to, the registration provisions contained in
N.J.S.A. 39:3C-3 and the unlawful act regulations contained in N.J.S.A.
39:3C-19.
§ 184-6. Impoundment.
and proper mufflers as supplied by the motor manufacturer for the
particular model without modifications.
I. Pursuit of wildlife. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
permit to be operated a motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle at any time and
in any manner intended or reasonably to be expected to harass, drive or
pursue any wildlife.
J. Lighted headlights and taillights. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or permit to be operated a motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle
without lighted headlights and lighted taillights.
K. Railroads. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be
operated a motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle upon railroad or right-ofway
of an operating railroad, except railroad personnel in the
performance of their duties.
L. Rules and regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to
this chapter.
A. Any police officer enforcing this chapter may impound any motor-driven
vehicle operated on public or private property if the vehicle cannot be
legally driven upon the public roadways of this state.
B. In cases involving persons under the age of 17 years old, the vehicle
may be returned to the operator's parent or legal guardian upon
payment of all costs and fees associated with the impoundment, which
may include, but not be limited to, storage fees. In the case of an
unregistered vehicle, the vehicle shall be released from impoundment
99.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:4-42 through 2A:4-67 were repealed by L. 1982, c. 77, § 33,
effective 12-31-1983. See now N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-21 et seq.
§ 184-3 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL § 184-6
184:637
§ 184-7. Exclusions.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent acceptable agricultural management
practices as set forth in the Township's Right to Farm Ordinance.100
§ 184-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Chapter 11, Article I, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 192
WEDDING AND CIVIL UNION CEREMONIES
§ 192-1. Authorization to solemnize marriages and civil unions;
fees. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
upon proof that the vehicle has been properly registered and insured
under the New Jersey statutes and upon payment of all fees and costs
incurred in the impoundment, including, but not limited to, storage
fees. In the case of the vehicle being unable to be registered and
insured in this state and if the person(s) is under the age of 18 years
old, then the vehicle may be returned to his/her parent guardian.
C. In the event that the impounded vehicle is unable to be driven legally
upon the roadways of this state (i.e., all-terrain vehicles, dirt bikes and
such), the vehicle must be removed from impound by either towing or
carting.
A. Officiating at weddings.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 37:1-13, any current Mayor or former Mayor
not currently serving on the municipal governing body or the
Deputy Mayor, when authorized by the Mayor, is authorized to
perform marriages and civil unions.
(2) Public officials who are authorized to perform marriages are
authorized to perform civil unions.
(3) Public officials described above may choose whether or not to
exercise this authority.
(4) In matters of preference, the applicants may select from among
those authorized to perform ceremonies. Otherwise, the Mayor
shall first be consulted. If unavailable, the Mayor shall give
authorization to the Deputy Mayor to perform marriage and civil
union ceremonies. If the Mayor and Deputy Mayor are unavailable,
any former Mayor of the municipality, who is not a current member
of Township Committee, may be consulted.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning, § 203-18.
§ 184-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 192-1
184:638
§ 192-2. Reimbursement of Mayor's expenses in connection with
performance of ceremonies.
B. Fees.
(1) Persons seeking to be married or joined in civil union by a public
official as described above shall pay to the Township of Woolwich a
fee in the amount of $100, to be deposited into the separate
recreation trust fund of the Township established pursuant to
Resolution R-2007-83.
(2) In addition, public officials performing wedding and civil union
ceremonies have the right, but not the obligation, to charge a fee of
$50 plus mileage for their services, which fee may be presented in
cash or check payable to the officiant.
A. Establishment of policy. There is hereby established by and within the
Township of Woolwich a chapter setting forth policies and procedures
concerning the payment of and/or reimbursements of expenses
incurred by the Mayor in connection with the performance of wedding
and civil union ceremonies.
B. Prior approval required. The Mayor of the Township of Woolwich shall
not be reimbursed for any expense or expenditure in connection with
performing a wedding or civil union ceremony unless such expenditures
have been approved by the governing body before the wedding or civil
union ceremony takes place.
C. Eligible persons. The Township shall reimburse only proper and
reasonable expenses incurred directly by and for the Mayor. Under no
circumstances shall the Township reimburse expenses or expenditures
on behalf of or as a result of any spouse, child, guest or other persons.
D. Limitation on expenses. The Township shall be obligated to reimburse
only those expenses which are reasonable in nature, as determined by
the governing body, and related to the purpose of officiating at the
wedding or civil union ceremony.
E. Car allowance. The Township shall reimburse for automobile-related
expenses where the Mayor uses his or her own automobile in order to
attend the wedding or civil union ceremony and only in such
circumstances where the use of a personal automobile is reasonable
and appropriate. Said reimbursement shall be limited to automobile
expenses based on and calculated as to the miles to and from the
ceremony at such rate per mile as allowable by the Internal Revenue
Service regulations.
F. Other expenses. The Township may reimburse other expenses or
expenditures based upon whether the same are reasonable in nature
and related to and necessary for the Mayor's attendance at the wedding
or civil union ceremony.
§ 192-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL § 192-2
184:639
Chapter 198
YOUTH SPORTS
G. Procedure for approvals. Before incurring any expenses or
expenditures in connection with officiating at a wedding or civil union
ceremony, the Mayor shall first submit and have approved a proper
requisition form, as determined by the Chief Financial Officer, setting
forth maximum estimates of all expenditures and expenses to be
reimbursed by the Township. The amounts set forth in the requisition
form shall be the maximum amounts which the Township is obligated to
reimburse.
§ 192-2 WOOLWICH CODE § 192-2
198:640
ARTICLE I
Code of Conduct
[Adopted 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 198-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE OF CONDUCT — A written specification of the behavior of parents,
guardians, coaches and officials prepared by each sports team which must
at a minimum incorporate the terms of the within article and must be
consented to in writing by the parents and legal guardians of the minor
participants of each youth sports team.
YOUTH SPORTS EVENT — Any competition, practice or instructional event
involving one or more youth sports teams.
YOUTH SPORTS TEAM — Any sports organization pursuant to a nonprofit
or similar charter that is affiliated with or received monetary or other
support or service from the Township or regularly utilizes any facilities
owned, operated or maintained by the Township, or which sports
organizations participants in sporting competitions involving minors.
§ 198-2. Compliance with code of conduct required.
Every sports team shall be required to follow the code of conduct as set
forth in this article.
§ 198-3. Availability.
The code of conduct will be made available to all parents and guardians of
each child participating in a sports team.
§ 198-4. Prohibited activities.
A. Any parent, guest, spectator, coach or official at any youth sports event
who initiates a fight, scuffle, or any type of physical abuse or threats of
abuse towards any player, coach, official, parent, or spectator, shall be
banned from attendance at all youth sports events with the Township of
Woolwich for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date of the
incident.
B. Any parent, guest, coach, or official at any youth sporting event who
enters the field of play, court or rink during any youth sporting event for
the purpose of physically or verbally abusing or confronting coaches,
players or officials shall be banned from attendance at all youth sports
events within the Township of Woolwich for a period not exceeding 12
months from the date of the incident.
C. Any parent, guest, spectator, coach or official at any youth sports event
who verbally abuses officials, players or spectators including the use of
§ 198-1 YOUTH SPORTS § 198-4
198:641
§ 198-5. Anger management or equivalent counseling.
Any person banned for 12 months from youth sports events for a violation
of this code of conduct and prior to being allowed to resume attendance at
any youth sports event shall be required to complete an anger management
or equivalent counseling program consisting of no less than 12 hours of
instruction and shall provide proof of satisfactory completion in the Code of
Conduct Committee. Any banning for less than 12 months may include up
to 12 hours of anger management.
§ 198-6. Controlling authority.
Any parent, official, coach or spectator in any youth sporting event shall be
subject to the authority of all field officials including umpires and referees
and elected league officials of the youth sport team or teams sponsoring
the youth sports event, and in the absence of such persons at a youth
sports team’s practice or instructional event, to the authority of the ranking
youth sports team coach on the premises. Such authority shall include the
authorization to direct any person or persons involved in any incident in
violation of this article or the applicable sports team’s code of conduct.
§ 198-7. Violation procedures and hearings.
obscene or profane language or gestures, racial, ethnic, or sexual
slurs may be banned from all youth sports events for a period not
exceeding 12 months from the date of the incident and shall be subject
to such discipline as provided for by the applicable sports team’s code
of conduct.
D. Any parent, guest, spectator, or official at any youth sports event who
throws or causes to be deposited any object on the field of play, court or
rink during any youth sports event may be banned from attendance at
all youth sports events for a period of 12 months from the date of the
incident and shall be subject to such discipline as provided for by the
applicable sports team’s code of conduct.
A. Upon a determination by a majority vote of the highest ranking officials
and the governing board of a youth sports teams that a parent, guest,
spectator, coach, or official at any youth sports event sponsored by such
youth sports team has violated a provision of this article or the code of
conduct of the youth sports team, such official shall forward to such
violator a notice via regular and certified mail indicating the date and
location and nature of the violation and period of banning or other
action to be taken in response to such violation.
B. Any person receiving such a notice who wished to contest same shall
appeal to the Township of Woolwich Code of Conduct Committee within
seven calendar days of the mailing of said notice by forwarding a copy
of said notice with a written request for appeal specifically setting forth
the basis of such persons contest of the notice of violation via personal
delivery or certified mail to the Chairperson of the Code of Conduct
§ 198-4 WOOLWICH CODE § 198-7
198:642
Committee at the address specified in the notice, or if no such address,
then to the Code of Conduct Committee c/o Township of Woolwich, 121
Woodstown Road, Woolwich, New Jersey 08085.
C. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Code of Conduct Committee shall
convene within 10 days and provide an opportunity for said person and
any interested person to appear and be heard with respect to the
occurrence of any violation and the action taken by the youth sports
team.
D. The Code of Conduct Committee shall be authorized to hear testimony
under oath, review affidavits and such other and further information or
documentation relevant to the violation and upon a majority vote of the
members of the Committee present at such hearing, may sustain,
overturn, or modify the youth sports team’s notice of violation and the
period of banning or other action taken in response to such violation
consistent with this article or the applicable youth sports team’s bylaws
or code of conduct.
E. All notices of violation and bannings shall remain in effect until
overturned or modified by the Code of Conduct Committee.
F. In the event any notice of violation is not appealed with 10 days of such
notice, said notice of violation and the action taken by the youth sports
team official including banning from youth sports events shall become
final.
§ 198-7 YOUTH SPORTS § 198-7
198:643

ARTICLE II
Code of Conduct Committee
[Adopted 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-19]
§ 198-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
YOUTH SPORTS TEAM — As used herein, shall refer to any sports
organization organized pursuant to a nonprofit or similar charter which is
affiliated with or received monetary or other support from the Township
of Woolwich or the Township of Woolwich Park and Recreation Committee
or regularly utilizes any facilities owned, operated, or maintained by the
Township of Woolwich, or which sports organization participates in sporting
competitions involving minors.
§ 198-9. Composition.
The Code of Conduct Committee shall be made up of the President of each
youth sports team who is duly elected pursuant to the bylaws or rules and
regulations governing each respective youth sports team and the Chairman
of the Township of Woolwich Park and Recreation Committee.
§ 198-10. President.
§ 198-11. Enforcement.
The code of conduct shall be charged with enforcing the provisions of the
ordinance establishing a youth sports code of conduct No. 2003-18.
A. Each youth sports team shall annually advise in writing the Township
Clerk of Woolwich of the name, address and telephone number of its
duly elected President who shall serve on the Code of Conduct
Committee commensurate with his/her term of office with the youth
sports teams.
B. Each youth sports team shall notify the Township Clerk in witting
promptly upon any change of the identity of the youth sports team’s
President.
C. Any youth sports team President serving on the Code of Conduct
Committee may designate an active member of such youth sports team
to appear and act as his/her designee with full voting powers at any
meeting of the Code of Conduct Committee.
D. In the event the same person is the President of more than one youth
sports team, said person shall serve on the Code of Conduct Committee
as a representative of only one youth sports team and shall designate an
active member of such other youth sports teams to appear and act at a
Code of Conduct Committee Meeting with full voting powers.
§ 198-8 YOUTH SPORTS § 198-12
198:645
§ 198-12. Meetings.
The Code of Conduct Committee shall meet in January of each year to
elect a Chairman, Secretary and such other officers as the Code of Conduct
Committee shall deem appropriate, and may meet as often as is necessary
to conduct its business and for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of
the ordinance establishing a youth sports code of conduct No. 2003-18.
§ 198-13. Rules and procedures.
The Code of Conduct Committee may establish rules and procedures as it
deems appropriate for the conduct of its business and in default thereof
shall operate pursuant to Roberts Rules of Order to the extent they are not
in conflict with the within ordinance or the ordinance establishing a youth
sports code of conduct No. 2003-18.
§ 198-12 WOOLWICH CODE § 198-13
198:646
Chapter 203
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 23.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 103.
Site plan review — See Ch. 149.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
§ 198-13 YOUTH SPORTS § 198-13
198:647

Part 1
Zoning Regulations
ARTICLE I
Purposes; Scope; Interpretation; Title
§ 203-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the nature and extent of the uses
of land and of buildings and structures thereon for the purposes set forth in
the Municipal Land Use Law101 and to exercise the power to zone granted
to municipalities of the State of New Jersey.
§ 203-2. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land and
every building or portion of a building erected, altered with respect to
height and area, added to or relocated, and every use within a building or
use accessory thereto, in the Township of Woolwich, shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 203-3. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose
greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute, other
ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 203-4. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Woolwich Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1992."
101. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 203-1 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-4
198:649

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 203-5. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purpose of this chapter any words used in the present tense
include the future. The singular number includes the plural and the
plural the singular; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word
"building" includes the word "structure"; the word "zone" includes the
word "district"; the word "occupied" includes the word "designed" and
the phrase "intended to be occupied"; the word "use" includes the
words "arranged," "designed" and the phrase "intended to be used";
and the word "shall" is always mandatory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property or a cessation of
the use of the property for a period of one year by the owner with the
intention neither of transferring rights to the property to another owner
nor of resuming the use of the property.
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A subordinate use or building the
purpose of which is customarily incidental to that of the main use or
building and on the same lot. No accessory use shall form the basis for
a claim of right to a principal or main use.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Clerk of Woolwich Township,
unless a different municipal official or officials are designated by
ordinance or statute.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or situations creating, imposing,
aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe or unsatisfactory
conditions on a subdivided property, property subject to development
or off-tract property, such as but not limited to improper circulation
and drainage rights-of-way; inadequate drainage facilities, insufficient
street widths; unsuitable street grades; unsuitable street locations to
accommodate prospective traffic or coordinate and compose a
convenient system; locating lots in a manner not adaptable for the
intended purposes without danger to health or peril from flood, fire,
erosion or other menace; providing for lots of insufficient size and
neither providing nor making future allowance for access to the interior
portion of the lot or for other facilities required by this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL LABOR — Farm workers who are not related to the
landowner or the landowner's spouse and who are employed on a farm
to perform tasks necessary to enhance the economic productivity of
the agricultural operation.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20;
amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
AGRICULTURAL TDR EASEMENT — An interest in land that is less
than fee simple title that enables the owner to develop the land for
any agricultural purpose as determined by the provisions of Article VI
§ 203-5 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-5
198:651
of this Chapter.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20; amended
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
AGRICULTURAL USE — The use of the premises for common
agricultural and ordinary farm site activities and farmland uses and
all other activities and improvements as specifically permitted by the
New Jersey Right to Farm Act. (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.) and activities
which shall deem the property eligible to receive farmland assessment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq., including, but not limited to,
production for sale of plants and animals useful to man, harvesting,
production, storage, grading (of produce), packaging, processing and
the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants, dairy animals and
dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef
cattle, sheep, llamas, horses, ponies, mules and goats, including the
breeding, boarding, raising, rehabilitating, training and grazing of any
or all such animals and other related commodities and the use and
application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and
management, fertilization, weed, disease and pest control, disposal
of farm waste, irrigation, drainage and water management; fish and
wildlife management.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20;
amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09; 8-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-13]
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or a structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities or an
enlargement, whether by extension of a side or by increasing in height
or by moves from one location or position to another.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
AREA, BUILDING — See "floor area."
ASSEMBLY, LIGHT — Flexible space suitable for final assembly of
finished products for distribution. No manufacturing shall be associated
with this use.[Added 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely
below grade.
BOARD — A County Agriculture Development Board (CADB) or a
subregional agricultural retention board.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
BOARD OF JURISDICTION — The Joint Land Use Board of the
Township of Woolwich, depending on the application and the
appropriate jurisdictional requirements of the same.[Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-09]
BREWERY — An industrial use where liquor is manufactured, bottled,
and stored, along with tasting rooms, retail sales not to exceed 2,000
square feet in customer service area, and other functions ancillary to
the use. Also, winery and distillery.[Added 8-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-13]
§ 203-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-5
198:652
BREWPUB — A restaurant that prepares handcrafted beer as an
accessory use intended for consumption on the premises. Production
capacity shall be limited to not more than 5,000 barrels per year. Such
accessory use may occupy up to 30% of the gross floor area of the
restaurant.[Added 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
BUILDING — Any structure or extension thereof or addition thereto
having a roof supported by columns, posts, piers or walls and intended
for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process,
equipment, goods or materials of any kind of nature.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building
to the highest point of the ceiling of the top story in the case of a flat
roof, to the deckline of a flat roof, to the deckline of a mansard roof and
to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip or
gambrel roof.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal
plane at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the
exterior surface of the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered
section of a building, the vertical plane will coincide with the most
projected surface. All yard requirements are measured to the building
line.
BUILDING SEPARATION — The distance between two buildings
measured from the face of the outer walls. Minor architectural features,
such as chimneys, roofs, overhangs, decks and window bays shall not
be considered the face of a building, provided that such features do not
extend more than six feet into the minimum building separation area
(measured from the face of the foundation wall).
BY-RIGHT CREDITS — The number of credits assigned to a lot, parcel
or area of land in the receiving area, as determined by the provisions
of Article VI of this chapter, which may be used to develop said lot,
parcel or area of land within an approved subdivision without the use
of TDR credits from the sending zone.[Added 8-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-09]
CARTWAY — That area of a street within which vehicles are permitted,
including travel lanes and parking areas but not including shoulders,
curbs, sidewalks or swales.
COMMITTEE — The State Agriculture Development Committee (SADC)
established pursuant to Section 4 of the Right to Farm Act (N.J.S.A.
4:1C-4).[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20; amended
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to
a site designated as a development and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
Common open space may contain such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
§ 203-5 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-5
198:653
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of
such use as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITIES — A facility containing two or more
dwelling units and rooming units limited in occupancy and occupied by
persons 60 years and older, their spouses or surviving spouses, except
for rooms or units occupied by resident staff personnel, providing
indoor, conveniently located, shared food preparation services and
major dining areas and common recreation, social and service facilities
for the exclusive use of all residents.
CONSERVATION TDR EASEMENT — An interest in land that is less
than fee simple title that enables the owner to develop the land for
any conservation purposes as determined by the provisions of Article VI
of this chapter.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20; amended
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL — Uses and facilities designed to serve
everyday needs of residents in its immediate vicinity.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items and other goods
commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of
less than 5,000 square feet.
COUNTY BOARD — A County Agriculture Development Board (CADB)
or a subregional agricultural retention board.[Added 10-27-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
CURB LEVEL — The average level of the curb in front of the lot.
DAY-CARE CENTER/NURSERY SCHOOL/CHILD-CARE CENTER — A
building or structure where care, protection and supervision are
provided on a regular schedule at least twice a week to four or more
children between two and five years of age and which is licensed or
approved to operate as a child-care center.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of
land to be developed.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure,
or of any mining excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use
of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
for which permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The rights permitted to a lot, parcel, or
area of land under a zoning ordinance respecting permissible use, area,
density, bulk or height of improvements. Development rights may be
calculated and allocated in accordance with such factors as area, floor
area, floor area ratios, density, height limitations, or any other criteria
§ 203-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-5
198:654
that will effectively quantify a value for the development right in a
reasonable and uniform manner that will carry out the objectives of the
Township's Voluntary TDR Program.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
DUPLEX — See "two-family dwelling."
DWELLING — A building having one or more rooms providing living
facilities for one family, including equipment for cooking or provisions
for the same; provided, however, that trailers or camp cars as defined
herein shall not be or be considered as buildings within the scope of
this chapter. Dwellings may include but not be limited to the following
types:
FACADE — The total wall surface, including door and window area, of
a building's principal face. In the case of corner buildings which front
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS — A dwelling which is
designed for and occupied by not more than one family and
surrounded by open space or yards and which is not attached to
any other dwelling by any means.
(1)
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A freestanding building on one lot or
within a lot held in common ownership serving two families, with
private entrances to each dwelling.
(2)
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLINGS — Dwellings on
adjacent lots or within a lot held in common ownership with one
common party wall or dwellings with two party walls within which
walled open courtyards or patios are provided for each dwelling.
(3)
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A single-family
dwelling in a row of at least three such dwellings in which each
dwelling has its own front and rear access to the dwelling and is
separated from any other dwelling by one or more fire-resistant
walls.
(4)
MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS — Three or more dwellings located
within a single building, such as an apartment house dwelling, with
an entrance to each dwelling not more than three stories above
ground level.
(5)
ZERO LOT LINE DWELLING — A single-family detached dwelling
unit with one of its sides directly on a lot line and with its remaining
three sides fronting on yard areas.
(6)
TRIPLEX — A dwelling unit containing three dwellings, each of
which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall.
(7)
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the
owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation or another
person or entity.
(8)
§ 203-5 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-5
198:655
on more than one street, only one face shall be used to calculate the
facade area.
FAMILY — A single individual, doing his own cooking, and living upon
the premises as a separate housekeeping unit, or a collective body of
persons doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises
as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon
birth, marriage or other domestic bond.
FARMHOUSE — Dwelling on farm property qualifying for farm land
assessment and housing the owner or operator of said farm.
FARMLAND PRESERVATION PROGRAM — Any voluntary program, the
duration of which is at least eight years, authorized by law enacted
subsequent to the effective date of the Farmland Preservation Bond
Act 1981, P.L. 1981, C.276, which has its principal purpose the long
term preservation of significant masses of reasonably contiguous
agricultural land within agricultural development areas adopted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-11 et seq., P.L. 1983, C.32 and the
maintenance and support of increased agricultural production as the
first priority use of that land.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
FARMSTEAD — The principal residence of a farmer's household and the
accessory uses of a farm.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20;
amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Land, and the space above that land, which
lies below the flood hazard area design flood elevation. Structures, fill
and vegetation that are situated on land that lies below the flood hazard
area design flood elevation are described as being "in" or "within" the
flood hazard area. The inner portion of the flood hazard area is called
the floodway and the outer portion of the flood hazard area is called the
flood fringe. Figures A and B at N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.3 illustrate these areas
as well as the riparian zone along a typical water. The flood hazard area
on a particular site is determined using the methods set forth at N.J.A.C.
7:13-3. There are two types of flood hazard areas:[Added 8-18-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-08]
Tidal flood hazard area, in which the flood hazard area design flood
elevation is governed by tidal flooding from the Atlantic Ocean.
Flooding in a tidal flood hazard area may be contributed to or
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but the depth
of flooding generated by the tidal rise and fall of the Atlantic Ocean
is greater than flooding from any fluvial sources; and
(1)
Fluvial flood hazard area, in which the flood hazard area design
flood elevation is governed by stormwater runoff. Flooding in a
fluvial flood hazard area may be contributed to or influenced by
elevated water levels generated by the tidal rise and fall of the
(2)
§ 203-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-5
198:656
FLOODPLAIN — The area adjoining any natural stream and including
any water or drainage course or body or water subject to periodic
flooding or overflow based on the one-hundred-year flood.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
one-hundred-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot at any point.
FLOOR AREA (also referred to as "gross floor area") — The gross
horizontal area of the floor, or the sum of the gross horizontal area
of several floors, of an enclosed building measured from the exterior
face of exterior walls or from the center line of a wall separating two
buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for
motor vehicles or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less
than six feet. The gross floor area of retail stores, service shops and
banks shall be equal to the gross leasable area less any areas devoted
exclusively to staff facilities or storage of inventory.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or
structures compared to the total area of the site.
FRESHWATER WETLAND or WETLAND — An area that is inundated
or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation;
provided, however, that the Department, in designating a wetland,
shall use the three-parameter approach (that is, hydrology, soils and
vegetation) enumerated in the 1989 Federal Manual as defined in this
section. These include tidally influenced wetlands which have not been
included on a promulgated map pursuant to the Wetlands Act of 1970,
N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq.[Added 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or space used as an accessory to the
main building which provides the storage of motor vehicles or other
personal property and in which no occupation, business or service for
profit is carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC OR COMMERCIAL — A building or space, other
than a private garage, for the storage of motor vehicles exclusively
or for the storage of motor vehicles at which filling station service,
sales of accessories or repairs, other than body or collision repairs and
appointing and refinishing, are permitted. This term does not include
motor vehicle showrooms for new or used motor vehicles.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
development of a planned development as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.2.
Atlantic Ocean, but the depth of flooding generated by stormwater
runoff is greater than flooding from the Atlantic Ocean.
§ 203-5 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-5
198:657
GOLF COURSE — An area of land devoted to the game of golf and
its associated uses adhering to the following minimum criteria:[Added
12-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-39]
GRANTOR — Any and all persons who lawfully succeed to the rights
and responsibilities of the grantor, including but not limited to his/
her heirs, executors, administrators, personal or legal representatives,
successors and assigns.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20;
amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
GROSS LAND AREA — An area of land which is determined by the
property lines bounding the tract of land proposed for development
within any given zone and which is always expressed in terms of square
feet or acres. Any portion of a tract included in an existing public or
private right-of-way shall not be included in calculating gross land area.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful
employment which:
Must meet standards of a regulation golf course as defined below:
REGULATION GOLF COURSE — - An eighteen-hole golf course
that includes a variety of par-three, par-four and par-five holes
and is of traditional length and par; and eighteen-hole facility
at least 5,200 yards in length and at least par 66.
(a)
(1)
Minimum 100 acres devoted to the golf course playing area to
include tees, fairways, greens and hazard area and, if provided,
fairways of driving range.
(2)
(3) May have motorized carts and carts storage.
May have clubhouse with pro shop, locker rooms, snack bar,
administrative offices, kitchen and dining facilities with a maximum
capacity of 100 persons and banquet facilities with a maximum
capacity of 300 persons. The pro shop is limited to a maximum of
1,000 square feet.
(4)
(5) May have driving range ancillary to the primary golf course use.
May have grounds maintenance building and equipment storage
with pump and fuel house.
(6)
Uses that are customary for the maintenance and day-to-day
operation of a golf course are permitted.
(7)
Swimming pool and tennis courts, provided such facilities are
ancillary to the golf course.
(8)
Uses that are expressly prohibited include, but are not limited to,
miniature golf, arcades, pitch and putt and any motorized vehicle
not associated with the care and day-to-day operation of the golf
course.
(9)
§ 203-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-5
198:658
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A home occupation consisting of the
office of a practitioner of a recognized profession.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a
daily rate to the general public and providing additional services, such
as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT — Warehousing, wholesaling, shipping and
receiving, manufacturing, assembly, processing, research, laboratory
testing service, professional and governmental offices, public and
quasipublic uses and other operations which do not include the
production of petroleum into fuel, oil or other products or chemical
processing and storage. Light industrial uses shall not produce any
corrosive, toxic, noxious fumes, glare, electromagnetic disturbances,
radiation, smoke, cinders, odors, dust or waste, undue noise or
vibration, or other objectionable features so as to be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or general welfare, provided however that existing
activities not in violation of city, state or federal law are exempt.[Added
8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
INTENSIVE FOWL OR LIVESTOCK FARM — Any farm meeting any one
of the following standards:
JUNKYARD — Any area or structure used or intended to be used for the
conducting and operating of the business of selling, buying, storing or
trading in used or discarded metal, glass, paper, cordage or any used or
disabled fixtures, vehicles or equipment of any kind.
Is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit
as a residence.
(1)
Is carried on solely within the main dwelling and does not alter or
change the exterior character or appearances of the dwelling.
(2)
(3) Is located in a residential district.
Is created and operated as a sole proprietorship, except that should
the owner/operator be substantially physically handicapped, a
nonresident may be employed to assist the owner/operator in his/
her work to the extent required to compensate for the aforesaid
handicap condition.
(4)
(1) It has over 200 head of adult large animals.
(2) It has over 50 head of small animals.
(3) It has more than one adult large animal per acre.
(4) It has over two small animals per acre.
(5) It has over 10 head of fowl per acre.
(6) It has over 20 head of pig, hog or swine.
§ 203-5 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-5
198:659
LANDOWNER — The record owner of the land, duly authorized
contract purchaser of the land or record owner of the development
easement acquired pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-34.[Added 10-27-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
LANDSCAPE AREA — An area of land restricted to landscape items
which may also include such elements as natural features, earth berms,
sculpture, signs, lighting, accessways, bikeways and pedestrian
walkways, but not including motor vehicle parking, extending along the
entire lot line where they are required. The width of a landscape area
shall be measured at right angles to the lot line.
LETTER OF INTERPRETATION (LOI) — Document issued by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) under N.J.A.C.
7:7A-3, indicating the presence or absence of wetlands, state open
waters, and/or transition areas; verifying or delineating the boundaries
of freshwater wetlands, state open waters, and/or transition areas; or
assigning a wetland resource value classification.[Added 8-18-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-08]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth used for the loading or
unloading of commercial vehicles.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat
or otherwise, as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the
lot lines bounding that area and is always expressed in terms of square
feet or acres. Any portion of a lot included in a public or private rightof-
way shall not be included in calculating lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting on two or more
intersecting streets when the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135º. Each corner lot shall have two front yards, a minimum of
one side yard and one rear yard.
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of a lot covered by building area
and, in the case of nonresidential districts or uses, impervious surfaces,
such as concrete or asphalt.
LOT DEPTH — A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot
line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to
the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
MANUFACTURING — The treatment or processing of raw materials
and the production of articles of finished products from raw or prepared
materials by giving them new forms or qualities.
§ 203-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-5
198:660
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT — An activity which involves the
fabrication, reshaping, reworking, assembly or combining of products
from previously prepared materials and which does not involve the
synthesis of chemical or chemical products or the processing of any raw
materials. Limited manufacturing includes light industrial operations,
such as electronic, machine parts and small component assembly, as
opposed to heavy industrial operations, such as automobile assembly,
milling or forge activities.
MASTER PLAN — The Master Plan for the Township of Woolwich as
adopted by the Woolwich Township Planning Board.
MINI-WAREHOUSE — A structure or group of structures for the dead
storage of customers' goods and wares where individual stalls or
lockers are rented out to different tenants for storage and where one or
more stalls or lockers have less than 500 square feet of floor area.
MUNICIPALLY APPROVED FARMLAND PRESERVATION PROGRAM —
Hereinafter referred to as "municipally approved program," means any
voluntary program the duration of which is at least eight years,
authorized by law enacted subsequent to the effective date of the
Farmland Preservation Bond Act of 1981, P.L. 1981 C.276, which has as
its principal purpose the long term preservation of significant masses
reasonably contiguous agricultural land within agricultural
development areas adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-11 et seq., P.L.
1983, C.32, and the maintenance and support of the increased
agricultural production as the first priority use of that land. Any
municipally approved program shall be established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:1C-21.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20; amended
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a
zoning ordinance, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING HOME — An extended or intermediate care facility licensed
or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to
individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity,
are unable to care for themselves.
§ 203-5 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-5
198:661
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of
a development application, or within a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — An interior or exterior storage area
for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle and that
is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE — A temporary storage area for a motor
vehicle which is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same
lot with a principal or accessory building. Open space includes the
following types:
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area
of water, or a combination of land and water, within the site
designated for a planned unit development or a cluster
development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment
of residents and owners of the planned unit development or cluster
development. Common open space excludes land areas within the
rights-of-way of streets to be located within a planned unit
development unless exclusively designed for access to open space.
A legally constituted organization of the property owners with
authority to place liens on property shall be formed for the
maintenance of the common areas and facilities, or this common
open space may be deeded to the Township if accepted by the
Township for use by all residents of the Township.
(1)
USABLE OPEN SPACE — Consists of either common or public open
space which is either landscaped or developed and maintained
for recreational purposes, readily available, or improved for such
recreational purpose, and excludes that portion of the area
consisting of officially designated wetlands, streets, drives and
space utilized for off-street parking or loading purposes. Where
usable open space is required in this chapter, it shall be designated
on plans submitted as required.
(2)
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education,
state or county agency or other public body for educational,
recreational or conservation uses.
(3)
REQUIRED OPEN SPACE — That type and percentage of common,
usable or public open space that must be provided in particular
(4)
§ 203-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-5
198:662
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A planned unit development, planned
unit residential development or residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development as those terms are
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6 of the Municipal Land Use Law, but only to
the extent not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according
to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any
other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by
ordinance.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of Woolwich Township.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR USE — A building or buildings in which is
conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is
situated or the open land of which such use is made or upon which such
activity is carried out.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession as hereinafter indicated. When conducted on a residential
property, a professional office shall be conducted by a member or
members of the residential family entirely within a residential property,
shall be conducted by a member of the residential family entirely within
a residential building and shall include only the offices of doctors,
ministers, architects, engineers, lawyers and such similar professional
occupations which may be so designated by the Board of Adjustment
upon finding by such Board that such occupation is truly professional
in character by virtue of the need for similar training and experience
as a condition for the practice thereof and that the practice of such
occupation shall in no way adversely affect the safe and comfortable
enjoyment of property rights in any zone in which it is located to a
greater extent than for the professional activities listed herein. The
issuance of a state or local license for regulation of any gainful
occupation need not be deemed indicative of professional standing.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas; other public open space; and scenic and historic
sites, including necessary infrastructure improvements.[Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-09]
PUBLIC WATER AND PUBLIC SEWERAGE — Centralized municipal
or municipally operated water and sewerage system or a water and
sewerage system franchised or approved by the Township in
accordance with the Township sewer and water plan. "With sewer and
water" as used in this chapter means that public water and public
sewerage shall be provided in order for the use to be permitted in the
zone district.
zoning districts, in cluster developments or in planned unit
developments, according to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 203-5 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-5
198:663
RECEIVING ZONE, AREA OR DISTRICT — One or more designated
districts or areas of land to which development rights generated from
one or more sending zones or districts may be transferred and in
which increased development is permitted to occur by reason of the
transfer, adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55 D-1 et seq., within which
development may be increased, and which is otherwise consistent with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-145.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
RECREATION FACILITY — Any enterprise which provides recreational
activity including, but not limited to, indoor and outdoor recreational
courts, fields and facilities, racquet clubs, health facilities, bowling
alleys, skating rinks, water slides, miniature golf courses, arcades, and
billiard halls, but not movie theaters.[Added 8-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-13]
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in which
are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESEARCH CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre
of residential land area, including streets, easements and open space
portions of a development.
RESTAURANT — A business establishment whose principal business is
the selling of unpackaged food to the customer in a ready-to-consume
state, in individual servings or in nondisposable containers, and where
the customer consumes these foods while seated at tables or counters
located within the building.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment which may have a
drive-in and/or a walk-up window that offers quick food service, which
is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and
held for service, or prepared, fried or grilled quickly or heated in a
device such as a microwave oven. Orders are not generally taken at the
customer's table and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers.
RIPARIAN ZONE — Land and vegetation within and adjacent to a
regulated water as described at N.J.A.C. 7:13-4.1 and illustrated at
N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.3.[Added 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
SENDING ZONE, AREA OR DISTRICT — One or more designated
districts or areas of land in which development rights are designated
for use in one or more receiving areas and an area or areas designated
in the Township Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance within which
development may be restricted, adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., and which is otherwise consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
§ 203-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-5
198:664
40:55D-144.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20; amended
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
SERVICE STATION — Any premises where gasoline and other
petroleum products are sold and/or light maintenance activities, such
as engine tune-ups, lubrication and minor repairs, are conducted.
Service stations shall not include premises where heavy automobile
maintenance activities, such as engine overhauls, automobile painting
and body fender work, are conducted.
SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance between the
building line and the related front, side or rear property line.
SHOPPING CENTER — A grouping of retail business and service uses
on a single site which is planned, constructed and managed as a total
entity with customer and employee parking provided on site, provisions
for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic
considerations and protection from the elements.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, visible from the street or public rightof-
way, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or
projected images.
SIGN, AWNING CANOPY or MARQUEE — A sign painted, stamped,
perforated, stitched or otherwise applied on the valance of an awning.
SIGN AREA — That area defined by the frame or edge of a sign.
Where no frame or edge exists, the area shall be defined by a projected
enclosed four-sided (straight sides) geometric shape which most closely
outlines said sign. Where a sign has more than one side, sign area
shall be construed to include the total area used for advertisement or
identification.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported by one or more upright
poles, columns or braces placed in or on the ground and not attached
to any building or structures.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — Any structure or part thereof or device
attached thereto or painted or represented thereon, which displays any
letter, symbol, trademark, word or similar device used to identify the
product made or the activity being pursued by any individual, business,
service, commercial or industrial enterprise, which is displayed upon
the lot or premises occupied by such an enterprise for the purpose of
apprising the public of the location of such enterprise or the type of
activity in which it is managed.
SIGN, OFFICIAL — Any sign, symbol or device erected and maintained
by a federal, state, county or local governmental agency for the purpose
of informing or guiding the public or for the protection and promotion
of health, safety, convenience and general welfare.
§ 203-5 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-5
198:665
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor above it, or if there is no floor
above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. A
basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is over six feet above
the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining the exterior
walls of such story or if it is used for business or dwelling purposes.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or
which is approved by official action as provided for by the Municipal
Land Use Law,102 or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded
in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment
of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board the power to review
plats; and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — That line determining the limit of the road, street or
highway rights of the public, either existing or contemplated.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land. The term "structure" shall include
but not be limited to individual subsurface sewage disposal systems
and their components. However, individual subsurface sewage disposal
systems meeting the requirements of Chapter 9A of Title 7 of the
New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.S.A. 7:9A-1.1 et seq.) will not
be considered structures when located in a front yard between the
building setback line and the street line. However, wherever located,
all mounded septic tanks, mounded disposal field installations and
mounded soil replacement disposal field installations shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 7:9A-10.5 and N.J.S.A. 7:9A-10.6, except that
the top surface shall not exceed a height of four feet above the
surrounding finished grade. The term "structure" shall also include a
container box, trailer or truck body, movable or otherwise, in excess
of 800 cubic feet in volume that is placed or parked on a lot, except
that a trailer or truck body on a truck that has current motor vehicle
registration and tags shall not be considered a structure unless it
remains on the same spot for more than 150 consecutive days.[Added
3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2]
STRUCTURE, ADVERTISING — Any rigid or semirigid materials with
or without advertisement displayed thereon situated upon or attached
to real property (outdoors primarily) or principally for the purpose
of furnishing a background or base or support upon which an
advertisement may be posted or displayed. That portion of any
structure, regardless of its primary or principal use, which is used
for the display of an advertisement shall be considered an advertising
structure and shall be subject to the control exercised in this chapter.
102. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 203-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-5
198:666
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, permanently
constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below
the level of the surrounding land or an aboveground pool, having a
depth of more than 30 inches, designed, used and maintained for
swimming and bathing.
TDR CREDIT — The development right that can be utilized in a
receiving zone to achieve the bonus density. The number of TDR credits
is determined based on the transfer ratio and the number of
transferable development rights being conveyed from the sending zone
to the receiving zone.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20;
amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
TOWNHOUSES — One or a group of two or more dwelling units divided
from each other by vertical walls and each having separate front and
rear or front and side entrances from the outside.
TRACT — An area, parcel, site, piece of land or property which is the
subject of a development application.
TRAILER or CAMP CAR — Any unit designed for use for living or
sleeping purposes which is equipped originally with wheels or similar
devices used for the purpose of transporting said unit from place to
place whether by motive power or other means, and originally
constructed, fabricated or built without permanent foundation other
than wheels, jacks or skirtings. The substitution of any other permanent
foundation for such wheels, jacks or skirtings shall not remove such
trailer or camp car from this definition.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR) — The process by
which development rights from one or more sending areas are affixed
to one or more receiving properties consistent with the program set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-137 et seq.[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
TRANSITION AREA — An area of upland adjacent to a freshwater
wetland which minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland or serves as
an integral component of the wetlands ecosystem.[Added 8-18-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-08]
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use of land or structures, as distinguished
from a secondary or accessory use.
YARD — The area that lies between the principal or accessory building
or buildings and the nearest lot line. A yard shall be unoccupied by
structures and buildings from the ground upward, except as may be
specifically provided in this chapter. Improvements below grade are
permitted, provided that there is no visual evidence of such
improvements.
§ 203-5 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-5
198:667
YARD, FRONT — A yard on the same lot with the principal building,
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line
and the front line of a building projected to the side lines of that lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of any
building. The depth of a rear yard shall be measured at right angles to
the rear line of the lot or if the lot is not rectangular, then in the general
direction of its side building lines.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest
line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard,
or in the absence of either of such yards, to the street or rear lot line
as the case may be. The width of a side yard shall be measured at right
angles to the side line of the lot.
ZONING BOARD — The Zoning Board of Adjustment of Woolwich
Township.
ZONING OFFICER or ZONING ADMINISTRATION OFFICER — The
official appointed by the Township Committee pursuant to Article X
hereof, and responsible for the administration of this chapter as
hereinafter set forth.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer:
Which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure
or building; and
(1)
Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies
with the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or variance
therefrom duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
(2)
C. Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in P.L. 1975, c.
291, as amended,103 such term is intended to have the meaning set forth
in the definition of such term found in such statute, unless a contrary
intention is clearly expressed in the context of this chapter.
103. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 203-5 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-5
198:668
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 203-6. Area regulations.
The regulations set forth in Article V as to minimum lot size, required yard
size, percentage of lot coverage and maximum building height are hereby
established as minimum regulations.
§ 203-7. Floor area.
The minimum gross floor area in square feet for all buildings is and shall be
established by the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code now in effect or
hereafter duly adopted in Woolwich Township.104
§ 203-8. Construction requirements.
All dwelling units or other buildings shall be built or constructed in
conformity with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code in effect at the
time of such construction or erection.
§ 203-9. Principal building frontage.
Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a public
street improved pursuant to the minimum street improvement standards
contained in Chapter 149, Site Plan Review, and Chapter 163, Subdivision
of Land, except as is otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 203-10. Corner lots.
On all corner lots the depth of all yards abutting on a street shall not be
less than the minimum front yard depth required on an adjacent interior
lot fronting on such street. No corner lot setback shall in any case be less
than 20 feet, except that the provisions of this section shall not apply so
as to reduce the buildable width less than 50% of any lot less than 100
feet in width. Corner lots having frontages of greater than 150 feet on both
intersecting streets shall observe the same requirements for front yards on
both streets as apply to adjoining interior lots fronting such streets.
§ 203-11. Yards and open space on adjoining lots.
No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purposes
of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other
open space on another lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open
space for a building on any other lot.
§ 203-12. Front yard areas; minimum lot frontage.
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction, Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 203-6 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-12
198:669
§ 203-13. Vision obstruction; clear-sight easements.
§ 203-14. Height exceptions.
§ 203-15. Nonconforming structures and uses.
A. Where a building lot has frontage upon a street which on the Master
Plan or Official Map of the Township of Woolwich is contemplated for
right-of-way widening, the required front yard area and setback
distance shall be measured from such proposed right-of-way line.
B. All yard areas facing on a public street shall be considered as front
yards and shall conform to the minimum front yard requirements of the
particular zone.
C. Lot frontage shall be the same as lot width, except that lot frontage can
be reduced to no less than 2/3 of the minimum required lot width as set
forth in this chapter, provided lot width is observed at the front lot line.
[Amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
A. At the intersection of two or more streets within any zone, no hedge,
fence, brush or wall higher than 2.5 feet and within 10 feet of the rightof-
way, nor any obstruction to vision, other than a post or tree not
exceeding one square foot in cross section area, shall be permitted
within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines at
points which are 25 feet distant from the point of intersection,
measured along said street lines. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6]
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event any intersecting street is
maintained by the State of New Jersey or by Gloucester County, the
applicable regulations of the state and/or county agency having
jurisdiction shall supersede the requirements of this section. Clearsight
easements, in accordance with Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land,
and Chapter 149, Site Plan Review, shall be required at street and
driveway intersections for all new development, except for the driveway
of a single-family residence.
A. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires,
belfries or cupolas, not used for human occupancy; or to bridges,
chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads and similar
features and necessary mechanical appurtenances, usually carried
above the roof level. Such features shall be erected only to such height
as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to prevent the erection
above the building height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for
ornamentation extending above such height limit not more than five
feet.
§ 203-12 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-15
198:670
§ 203-16. Nonconforming lots in a recorded subdivision.
§ 203-17. Prohibited uses.
A. Continuance. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the lawful
use of land or buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this
chapter may be continuous, and any such structure may be restored in
the event of partial destruction, although such use or building does not
conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in
which such land or building is located.
B. Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use or structure ceases operations
for a continuous period of more than one year, then this shall be
deemed to be an intent to abandon such use, and any subsequent use
shall conform to the regulations of this chapter. If abandonment occurs
involuntarily, the owner may request that the discontinuance be
continued beyond the one-year period, provided that application for
extension is made within the initial one-year period.
C. Extension. A nonconforming use or a nonconforming building or a
portion of a nonconforming building may be extended only when
authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Added 3-21-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-2]
A. Notwithstanding the minimum lot area requirements established by
this chapter, a single-family dwelling may be constructed on a lot within
a recorded subdivision approved by the Planning Board of the Township
of Woolwich pursuant to a subdivision review ordinance adopted under
a state enabling act prior to the effective date of this chapter, provided
that said lot meets the lot area requirements of the ordinance in effect
at the time of said subdivision approval, and further provided that the
subdivision approval has not lapsed, either by way of statute, ordinance
or action of the Township. The words "recorded subdivisions" in this
section shall mean recorded by deed or plat in the Gloucester County
Clerk's Office. [Amended 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2]
B. Any parcel of land with an area or width less than that prescribed for a
lot in the zone in which such lot is located, which parcel was under one
ownership on November 30, 1992, when the owner thereof owns no
adjoining land, may be used as a lot for any purpose permitted in the
zone other than multiple dwellings, provided that all other regulations
prescribed for the zone by this chapter are complied with. [Added
3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2]
A. Extractive industries shall not be permitted to operate in any of the
zones established in this chapter. Such industries include mining or
alterations in the earth surface for the purpose of extracting minerals
or soils of any type for use or sale off site. The ordinance now in effect
concerning the removal of soil is not repealed by this chapter, but is still
in full force and effect.
§ 203-15 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-17
198:671
§ 203-18. Right to farm. [Amended 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2;
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6; 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-07]
B. Trailers or camp cars shall not be permitted to be parked, installed,
used or occupied for living purposes in any of the zones established in
this chapter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the
owner of any trailer from storing not more than one trailer on premises
owned by him if the said trailer is not used for living purposes.
C. The use of a lot in any zone primarily for the storage of bulk oil or
gasoline above the ground is prohibited.
D. The business of selling defunct motor vehicles or parts or used lumber
or building material or the storage thereof is prohibited.
E. No building may be erected, altered or used, and no lot or premises may
be used, for any trade, industry or business that is noxious or offensive
by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, illumination or noise, or
that constitutes a public nuisance or hazard whether by fire, explosion
or otherwise.
A. As used in this section, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
COMMERCIAL FARM —
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — A parcel or parcels of land, whether
contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or
horticultural buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural
or horticultural products, and operated as a single enterprise.
FARM MARKET — A facility used for the wholesale or retail marketing
of the agricultural output of a commercial farm, and products that
contribute to farm income, except that if a farm market is used for
retail marketing, at least 51% of the annual gross sales of the retail
farm market shall be generated from sales of agricultural output of the
commercial farm, or at least 51% of the sales area shall be devoted to
the sale of the agricultural output of the commercial farm, and except
that if a retail farm market is located on land less than five acres
in area, the land on which the farm market is located shall produce
annually agricultural or horticultural products worth at least $2,500.
A farm management unit of no less than five acres producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more
annually and satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential
property taxation pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of
1964, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.; or
(1)
A farm management unit less than five acres, producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $50,000 or more
annually and otherwise satisfying the eligibility criteria for
differential property taxation pursuant to the Farmland Assessment
Act of 1964, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.
(2)
§ 203-17 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-18
198:672
PICK-YOUR-OWN OPERATION — A direct marketing alternative
wherein retail or wholesale customers are invited onto a commercial
farm in order to harvest agricultural, floricultural or horticultural
products.
B. The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist in the Township of
Woolwich and is hereby declared a permitted use in all zones of the
Township of Woolwich. This right to farm includes, but not by way of
limitation:
(1) Production of agricultural and horticultural crops, trees, apiary and
forest products, livestock, poultry and other commodities as
described in the Standard Industrial Classification for agriculture,
forestry, fishing and trapping.
(2) Housing and employment of necessary farm laborers.
(3) Erection of essential agricultural buildings, including those
dedicated to the processing and packaging of the output of the
commercial farm and ancillary to agricultural and horticultural
production.
(4) The grazing of animals and use of range for fowl.
(5) Construction of fences.
(6) The operation and transportation of large, slow moving equipment
over roads within the Township of Woolwich.
(7) Control of pests, including but not limited to insects and weeds,
predators and diseases of plants and animals.
(8) Conduction of agricultural related educational and farm based
recreational activities, provided that the activities are related to
marketing the agricultural or horticultural output of the
commercial farm and permission of the farm owner and lessee is
obtained.
(9) Use of any and all equipment, including, but not limited to,
irrigation pumps and equipment, aerial and ground seeding and
spraying, tractors, harvest aides and bird control devices.
(10) Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the
commercial farm.
(11) The operation of a farm market with attendant signage, including
the construction of building and parking areas in conformance with
Woolwich Township standards.
(12) The operation of a pick-your-own operation with attendant signage.
(13) Replenishment of soil nutrients and improvement of soil filth.
§ 203-18 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-18
198:673
(14) Clearing of woodlands using open burning and other techniques,
installation and maintenance of vegetative and terrain alterations
and other physical facilities for water and soil conservation and
surface water control in wetland areas.
(15) On-site disposal of organic agricultural wastes.
(16) The application of manure and chemical fertilizers, insecticides
and herbicides.
(17) Installation of wells, ponds and other water resources for
agricultural purposes such as irrigation, sanitation and marketing
preparation.
C. Commercial farm operators may engage in any other agricultural
activity as determined by the State Agriculture Development
Committee and adopted by rule or regulation pursuant to the provisions
of the Administrative Procedure Act, P.L. 1968, c. 410 (N.J.S.A. 52:
14B-1 et seq.).
D. Commercial farm operators are strongly advised to adhere to generally
accepted agricultural management practices that have been:
(1) Promulgated as rules by the State Agriculture Development
Committee;
(2) Recommended as site-specific agricultural management practices
by the County Agriculture Development Board;
(3) Approved by the local Soil Conservation District in the form of a
farm conservation plan that is prepared in conformance with the
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) Field Office Technical Guide (FOTG),
revised April 20, 1998, as amended and supplemented; or
(4) Recommended by the Rutgers Agricultural Experimental Station.
E. The foregoing activities must be in conformance with applicable federal
and state law.
F. The foregoing practices and activities may occur on holidays, weekdays
and weekends by day or night and shall include the attendant or
incidental noise, odors, dust and fumes associated with these practices.
G. It is hereby determined that whatever nuisance may be caused to
others by these foregoing uses and activities is more than offset by the
benefits of farming to the neighborhood community and society in
general.
H. Any person aggrieved by the operation of a commercial farm shall file a
complaint with the applicable county agriculture board, or the State
Agriculture Development Committee in counties where no county board
exists, prior to filing an action in court.
§ 203-18 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-18
198:674
I. To help parties resolve conflicts involving the operation of commercial
farms, the State Agriculture Development Committee has also
established an Agricultural Mediation Program. Mediation is a
voluntary process in which a trained, impartial mediator helps
disputing parties examine their mutual problems, identify and consider
options and determine if they can agree on a solution. A mediator has
no decision-making authority. Successful mediation is based on the
voluntary cooperation and participation of all the parties.
J. An additional purpose of this section is to promote a good neighbor
policy by advising purchasers and users of property adjacent to or near
commercial farms of accepted activities or practices associated with
those neighboring farms. It is intended that, through mandatory
disclosures, purchasers and users will better understand the impacts of
living near agricultural operations and be prepared to accept attendant
conditions as the natural result of living in or near land actively devoted
to commercial agriculture or in an agricultural development area,
meaning an area identified by a county agriculture development board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-18 and certified by the State
Agriculture Development Committee. [Added 8-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-13]
The disclosure required by this section is set forth herein and shall be
made a part of the following disclosure form:
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
This disclosure statement concerns the real property situated in the
[Township, Borough, City] of [ ] described as Block _____, Lot _____.
This statement is a disclosure of the conditions of the above described
property in compliance with Ordinance No. _____ of the [Township,
Borough, City] of [ ]. It is not a warranty of any kind by the seller(s)
or any agent(s) representing any principal(s) in this transaction, and is
not a substitute for any inspections or warranties the principal(s) may
wish to obtain.
Seller's Information
The seller discloses the following information with the knowledge that
even though this is not a warranty, prospective buyers may rely on this
information in deciding whether and on what terms to purchase the
subject property. Seller hereby authorizes any agent(s) representing
any principal(s) in this transaction to provide a copy of this statement
to any person or entity in connection with any actual or anticipated
sale of the property. The following are representations made by the
seller(s) as required by the Township of Woolwich and are not the
representation of the agents, if any. This information is a disclosure
and is not intended to be part of any contract between the buyer and
seller.
§ 203-18 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-18
198:675
§ 203-19. Lot development.
The Township of Woolwich permits the operation of generally accepted
agricultural management practices within the municipality. If the
property you are purchasing is located near land actively devoted
to commercial agriculture or in an agricultural development area,
meaning an area identified by a county agriculture development board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-18 and certified by the State
Agriculture Development Committee, you may be affected by these
agricultural activities or practices. The effect of these activities or
practices may include, but are not limited to: noise, odors, fumes, dust,
smoke, insects, operation of machinery (including aircraft) during any
24 hour period, storage and disposal of manure and compost, and the
application by spraying or otherwise of fertilizers, soil amendments,
herbicides and pesticides. One or more of the effects described may
occur as the result of any agricultural operation which is in
conformance with existing Federal and State laws and regulations
and accepted customs and standards. If you live near an agricultural
area, you should strive to be sensitive to the needs of commercial
farm operators, as their presence is a necessary aspect of an area
with a strong rural character and a strong agricultural sector. The
State Agriculture Development Committee has established a formal
complaint process to assist in the resolution of any disputes which
might arise between residents of the Township of Woolwich regarding
the operations of commercial farms.
Seller certifies that the information herein is true and correct to the
best of seller's knowledge as of the date signed by the seller.
Seller Date
Seller Date
Buyer(s) and seller(s) may wish to obtain professional advice and/or
inspections of the property and to provide for appropriate provisions
in a contract between buyer and seller(s) with respect to any advice/
inspections/defects.
I/We acknowledge receipt of a copy of this statement.
Seller _ Date Buyer Date
Seller Date Buyer Date
Agent representing seller By Date
A. No lot shall have erected upon it more than one detached single-family
dwelling.
B. No lot area shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions
of the open spaces shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
C. Any lot proposed for development must contain developable land equal
in area to at least 25% of the minimum lot size for the zoning district in
which the lot is located.
§ 203-18 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-19
198:676
§ 203-20. Compliance required.
No lot hereafter may be used and no structure, building or part thereof
hereafter may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, extended,
converted, altered, maintained or used except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 203-21. Restoration of unsafe structures.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe or lawful condition any part of any building declared unsafe or unlawful
by the Zoning Officer or other duly authorized Township officials.
§ 203-22. Outdoor selling or storage.
Commercial uses in the business zones may display goods for sales
purposes or store goods for sale on the premises outside of the principal
structure in which such use is carried on, provided that such outdoor selling
or storage areas shall not encroach upon any of the required yard areas
or the required off-street parking areas for the zone in which located, and
further provided that the area set aside for such outdoor selling or storage
areas shall not exceed an area equal to the gross area of the ground floor
of the principal building. In calculation of the percentage area, the area
of such outdoor selling or storage areas shall be included in the same
manner as the area of the principal building. The area to be used for any
such outdoor selling or storage areas shall be appropriately set forth at the
time of application for a zoning permit. Any subsequent establishment or
relocation of such areas shall be subject to the issuance of a supplementary
zoning permit.
§ 203-23. Construction vehicles, trailers and storage containers.
[Amended 3-21-1994 by Ord. No 94-2]
No motor vehicle truck bodies, trailer bodies or storage containers shall be
placed on any lot or lots in any zone for any purpose whatsoever, except
during the period of construction of a permitted principal building on the
same lot or lots, except as provided in § 203-17.
D. All residential lots shall have a minimum twenty-five-foot yard, or the
minimum required in the particular residential district, whichever is
less, from New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP) regulated wetlands, state open waters, and/or transition areas
as established by a letter of interpretation (LOI) or as modified through
a freshwater wetlands general or individual permit, or freshwater
wetlands transition area waiver issued by the NJDEP under N.J.A.C.
7:7A-3 and/or NJDEP regulated flood hazard areas and/or riparian
zones as established by a flood hazard verification or as modified by a
flood hazard area permit-by-rule, general permit or individual permit
issued by the NJDEP under N.J.A.C. 7:13-1.3. [Added 8-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-08]
§ 203-19 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-24
198:677
§ 203-24. Public utility installations.
Public utility distribution lines, conduits, mains, sewer and water pump
stations (not larger than 400 square feet), but not including equipment
material storage yards and maintenance facilities, tank, towers or other
structures, shall be permitted uses in all zoning districts subject to
applicable state and federal regulations.
§ 203-25. Applicability to Township.
Regardless of whether the Township of Woolwich or any duly constituted
board, agency or department thereof is acting in or pursuant to the
performance of a governmental function carrying out a legislative mandate
or in the exercise of its private right as a corporate body, any municipally
owned, operated or controlled building, structure, facility or use, either
existing or proposed, shall be permitted in any class of zone, it being
the intention that whatever the Township may be authorized to do shall
constitute a function of government and that whenever the Township shall
act pursuant to granted authority, it acts as government and not as a private
entrepreneur.
§ 203-26. Performance standards.
Uses shall comply with performance standards set forth in Chapter 149,
Site Plan Review, and Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-27. Access.
No land shall hereafter be subdivided unless direct access is provided to
every lot through an open space on the same lot. Such open space shall be
not less than 25 feet in width and shall extend from the lot to a public street
or private street, road or way. Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land, is still in
full force and effect and is not repealed by this chapter. The Planning Board
shall have the right to indicate when and where an access road shall be left
open by the owners or adjoining owners.
§ 203-28. Front yard exceptions.
The front yard of a proposed building may be decreased in depth to the
average alignment of existing buildings within 100 feet on each side of the
proposed building, and within the same block, if such alignment of existing
buildings is less than the front yard requirements for the district.
§ 203-29. Subdivision and site plans.
A. The requirements of this chapter and other ordinances governing the
development of land notwithstanding, uses permitted or as may be
permitted by this chapter, where applicable, shall also be subject to the
requirements and standards contained in Chapter 149, Site Plan
Review, and Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-24 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-29
198:678
§ 203-30. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses listed in this chapter shall be permitted, provided that
the special requirements for each such use have been addressed to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board and that the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67 have been met.
§ 203-31. Issuance of permits for buildings or structures. [Added
3-21-1994 by Ord. No 94-2]
In order to preserve the integrity of the Official Map, no permit shall be
issued for any building or structure in the bed of any street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 as shown on the Official Map, or shown on a plat filed pursuant
to the Municipal Land Use Law before adoption of the Official Map, except
as provided in N.J.S.A.40:55D-34.
§ 203-32. Conduct of activities. [Added 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 93-4]
All commercial and industrial activities which may be permitted by this
chapter shall only be permitted, provided that such activities are conducted
within an enclosed building, except as permitted by § 203-22.
§ 203-32.1. Wind and solar energy systems. [Added 6-7-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-11; amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12]
Standards for site improvements are as follows:
B. The standards and regulations in this chapter are intended to be the
minimum provisions necessary to achieve the purposes and objectives
of this chapter. In the event of a conflict between any provisions, the
stricter provision shall apply.
A. Applicable in all zones.
(1) Solar energy collection panels shall be accessory uses to the
permitted principal and other accessory uses on a lot and shall not
involve the production of power for off-premises consumption, nor
shall such a use constitute a principal use on any lot. This
prohibition shall not be interpreted to preclude the occasional sale
of excess power from solar energy collection panels back to the
public electric utility provider. For solar energy systems intended
for uses other than the aforementioned ones stated, or for any
commercial projects, site plan approval and a use variance is
required.
(2) Installation of rooftop (building-mounted) or freestanding (groundmounted)
solar energy collection panels shall require a zoning
permit from the Zoning Officer and a building permit and/or
electrical permit from the Construction Code Office prior to said
installation. The Zoning Officer shall require a plan of survey
§ 203-29 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-32.1
198:679
depicting the location, setbacks, size, buffer, and other related
appropriate information for accessory structures. In addition, any
interconnection to the public utility grid must be inspected by the
appropriate public utility.
(3) All solar energy collection panel installations must be performed by
a qualified solar installer; examples of qualified installers include,
but are not limited to: employees working for a federally licensed or
state-licensed company or utility within the solar energy industry,
professional electricians, or electrical engineers. Installation must
comply with the National Electric Code as adopted by the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs. All electric/utility lines or
wires shall be buried underground and the panel structures must
be securely affixed to the earth. There may be a need for structural
engineering information and data for rooftop or ground-mounted
arrays from a licensed New Jersey engineer on a case-by-case basis
depending on unique attributes of system or site.
(4) All visible parts of the solar energy collection panels, including the
frames, hardware, pipes and support structures, shall be
nonreflective black surfaces.
(5) All solar energy collection panels shall not be used for the
displaying of any signage or advertising, except for reasonable
identification of the manufacturer/operator of the system or
appropriate "warning" signs. In no case shall any identification be
visible from a property line, nor should any signage be visible from
any public road.
B. Residential requirements.
(1) Roofline. Installation of solar energy collection panels shall be
permitted on the roofs of single-family residential units so long as
said units are within 10° of flush with the roofline of the residence.
Said installation shall not extend beyond the front or side rooflines.
Said panels should be architecturally compatible with color scheme
of roof to the extent possible. No site plan shall be required for said
installations and a zoning permit is required prior to the
installation of the panels on a roof. In no event shall the placement
of the solar panels result in a larger total height, including building
and panels, than what is permitted in the zoning district in which
they are located for the principal building.
(2) Ground.
(a) Installation of solar energy collection panels on a lot for
residential purposes shall be prohibited in the front yard.
Installation in the rear yard and side yards of said lots shall be
located on properties of one acre or greater.
(b) All ground-mounted solar energy collection panels shall be
completely screened from view at ground level from adjacent
§ 203-32.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-32.1
198:680
properties and streets with year-round vegetative screen,
buildings and/or solid fencing. No site plan shall be required
unless the Zoning Officer finds that the installation does not
meet the standards herein.
(c) All ground arrays shall be set back a distance of 25 feet from
all property lines in a residential zoning district. Any deviation
from this twenty-five-foot requirement can only be given by the
Township's Joint Land Use Board based upon the unique
physical characteristics of the parcel.
(d) Ground arrays shall be located so that any glare is directed
away from an adjoining property.
(e) The total surface area of all ground-mounted solar energy
collection panels on the lot shall not exceed 800 square feet on
each lot.
(f) Ground arrays shall not exceed a height of 10 feet.
C. Nonresidential requirements.
(1) Roofline. Installation of solar energy collection panels shall be
permitted on the roofs of nonresidential structures. Where said
solar energy collection panels, support structures, frames,
hardware and piping are visible to residential properties,
appropriate screening materials shall be installed on the roof in an
architectural design compatible with the building. Said panels
should be architecturally compatible with color scheme of roof to
the extent possible. Said solar energy collection system shall not
extend beyond the roofline of the structure. In no event shall the
placement of the solar panels result in a total height, including
building and panels, than what is permitted in the zoning district in
which they are located for the principal building.
(2) Ground. Installation of solar energy collection panels on
nonresidential lots shall be permitted in the side and rear yards of
said lots; provided, however, that if said solar energy collection
panels are visible to residential lots or zones, the lot owner shall
provide appropriate effective natural buffering material that will
completely block the view of said panels from abutting residential
zone or properties. Ground arrays shall be located so that any glare
is directed away from an adjoining property. All ground-mounted
solar energy collection panels shall be screened from view at
ground level from adjacent properties and streets with year-round
vegetative screen, buildings and/or solid fencing. No site plan shall
be required unless the Zoning Officer finds that the installation
does not meet the standards herein. Installation of ground array
solar energy collection panels shall be subject to the issuance of a
zoning permit. The Zoning Officer shall make a finding as to
whether or not the ground installation meets the standards
contained herein. All ground arrays shall be set back in
§ 203-32.1 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-32.1
198:681
conformance with the bulk standards for accessory structures in
commercial districts as provided elsewhere in the zoning code. The
total surface area of all ground-mounted solar energy collection
panels on the lot shall not exceed 1,200 square feet on each lot.
Ground arrays shall not exceed a height of 10 feet.
D. Agricultural requirements. Nothing in this section shall be taken to
supercede the New Jersey Statutes specifically pertaining to
Agriculture and biomass, solar, and wind energy (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-32.4).
(1) Roofline. Installation of solar energy collection systems on
agricultural structures, including but not limited to barns and
sheds, shall be permitted on the rooflines of single-family
residential units in the same manner as contained in Subsection B
hereinbefore.
(2) Ground.
(a) Installation of solar energy collection systems shall be
permitted in a manner consistent with single-family residential
units on agricultural lots as indicated in Subsection B above
and in accordance with standards promulgated by the state on
agricultural land.
(b) Installation of solar energy collection systems on agricultural
lots other than on farm structures shall be permitted. The lot
owner shall provide appropriate effective natural buffering
material that will completely block the view of said panels from
abutting residential zone or properties. Ground arrays shall be
located so that any glare is directed away from an adjoining
property. All ground-mounted solar energy collection panels
shall be screened from view at ground level from adjacent
properties and streets with year-round vegetative screen,
buildings and/or solid fencing. No site plan shall be required
unless the Zoning Officer finds that the installation does not
meet the standards herein. All such installations shall be
subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.
E. Additional regulations and requirements.
(1) If, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, the installation of the solar
energy collection systems does not satisfy the provisions of this
section, he shall refer said application for a minor site plan
application before the appropriate board of the Township of
Woolwich.
(2) Wind energy systems shall not be used for displaying any
advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the system. In no case shall any
identification be visible from a property line.
§ 203-32.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-32.1
198:682
(3) The design of wind energy systems shall, to the extent reasonably
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping
that will blend the facility into the natural setting and existing
environment.
(4) All applications for a wind or solar energy system shall conform to
the provisions of Ordinance 2009-17 as codified with respect to
tree removal.105 Any trees to be removed in excess of that
permitted under the exemptions of the tree removal and protection
ordinance shall be accompanied by a plan demonstrating the need
to remove the trees and replacement of the trees in accordance
with the provisions of said ordinance. An applicant shall locate a
wind or solar energy system so that tree removal is not required to
the extent practical.
(5) The installation of a wind energy system shall conform to the
National Electric Code as adopted by the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs.
(6) The installation of a wind energy system is subject to all Atlantic
City Electric Company requirements for interconnection.
(7) Wind energy systems shall conform to the height restrictions
provided in the zoning code and any deviation with regard to a
height taller than what is expressly permitted in the zoning code
requires the owner/operator to make application for relief to the
Township's Joint Land Use Board.
F. Abandonment.
(1) A small wind energy system or solar energy system that is out of
service for a continuous twelve-month period will be deemed to
have been abandoned and decommissioned.
(2) The Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment to the
owner. The notice shall be sent via regular and certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner of record.
(3) Any abandoned system shall be removed at the owner's sole
expense within six months after the owner receives the notice of
abandonment from the municipality. If the system is not removed
within six months of receipt of notice from the Township notifying
the owner of such abandonment, the Township may remove the
system as set forth below.
(4) When an owner of a wind or solar energy system has been notified
to remove same and has not done so six months after receiving said
notice, then the Township may remove such system and place a lien
upon the property for the cost of the removal, including expenses,
costs, and reasonable attorneys' fees. If removed by the owner, a
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 177, Art. I, Tree Removal.
§ 203-32.1 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-32.1
198:683
§ 203-33. Floodplain management. [Added 3-21-1994 by Ord. No.
94-2]
The following controls shall apply to all portions of the Township and
shall regulate encroachment in floodplains and surface water areas in the
Township:
demolition permit shall be obtained and the facility shall be
removed. Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned, restored and
revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation at
the time of abandonment.
A. Purpose and policy. It is hereby found that various streams and
waterways in the Township of Woolwich related to the Delaware River
tributaries are subject to recurring flooding, that such flooding
damages and endangers life and public and private property and
facilities, that this condition is aggravated by developments and
encroachments in the floodplain and that the most appropriate method
of alleviating such condition is through regulation of such
developments and encroachments on floodplains and surface water
areas. It is further acknowledged that surface water areas, including
streams, ponds, lakes and wetlands, associated recreation or
immediately adjacent land areas, constitute sources of groundwater
recharge, stormwater storage, fish and wildlife habitat and aesthetic
value to the community as a whole. It is therefore determined that the
special and paramount public interest in the floodplains and surface
water areas justifies the regulation of property located therein as
provided in this chapter, which is in the exercise of the police power of
the municipality, for the protection of the persons and property of its
inhabitants and for the preservation of the public health, safety and
general welfare.
B. Definitions. As used herein, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a stream or waterway which convey
the normal flow of the stream or waterway that occurs most of the time.
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a flood, expressed
as a design discharge in cubic feet per second, which is developed from
hydrologic criteria, represents a major flood with a one-percent chance
in any given year of occurrence, reflects both flood experience and flood
potential, and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway and the
floodplain and of the water surface elevations thereof.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining the channel which
is required to accommodate flows from storms having a one-percent
chance of occurrence in any given year and have been or may be
hereafter covered by floodwater of the stream or creek. This area is
indicated on the current FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as filed in
the Township.
§ 203-32.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-33
198:684
FLOODWAY — The channel and portions of the adjacent floodplain
that carry the greater part of the flood flow at greater depths and
velocities than do the other parts of the floodplain, that constitute
the minimum area required for the passage of flood flows without
aggravating flood conditions upstream and downstream and that are
necessary to preserve the natural regimen of the stream for the
reasonable passage of the floodway design flood.
SURFACE WATER AREAS — The surface area of any stream, pond, lake
or wetland, whether natural or created by a man-made impoundment,
and including for the terms of this chapter the area of adjacent land
within 50 feet of the edge of such stream, pond, lake or wetland.
C. Applicability. The regulations shall govern encroachments and
developments in the floodway and floodplain area:
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no building or
structure shall be erected or constructed, either above or below
ground level, within any floodway or floodplain in the Township of
Woolwich. Nothing herein contained, however, shall be construed
to prohibit the use of any floodplain for farming, grazing, plant
nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, livestock and poultry
raising, forestry, wild crop harvesting, open recreation uses, such
as parks, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, boat landings,
bathing beaches, picnic areas, hunting, fishing or the like, provided
that any such use is permitted in the district in which the premises
are located, their activities do not conflict with riparian rights of
other property owners and that they are permitted by the state of
federal agency with jurisdiction.
(2) No building or structure shall be moved or externally altered or
added to or enlarged in the floodplain outside the floodway, except
as permitted by the state or federal agency with jurisdiction.
(3) Areas to be regulated under this section shall be indicated
generally on the current FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Maps
prepared for the Township indicating the stream corridors, surface
water bodies and flood lines to be protected. If the proposed
building site is located in a questionable area, then the applicant's
engineer must certify that said site is not subject to flooding upon
evidence submitted by the applicant. Every application for a zoning
permit shall state the use to be made of any area subject to
floodplain controls. Structures or uses or both which meet the
requirements of this chapter as to use and bulk and the flood area
regulations of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (or its successor agency) shall be permitted. The
Township may grant such permits or approvals subject to
compliance with the statutes of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or its successor agency.
§ 203-33 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-33
198:685
(4) In cases of doubt or uncertainty as to the exact limit of the
floodplain or floodway in a proposed parcel or development, the
applicant shall retain a New Jersey licensed engineer and shall
obtain the written consent of the landowner to determine the
precise location of a floodway or floodplain limit by close
inspection, field survey or from such other appropriate information
as is available to him, notifying the landowner, the Building
Inspector and the Planning Board of the results thereof.
(5) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no building or
structure shall be erected or constructed either above or below
ground level, within 50 feet from the bank of any stream or from
the edge of any wetland, pond or lake in the Township of Woolwich.
Neither shall any facility for the subsurface disposal of effluent be
permitted within the fifty-foot distance described above. Nothing
herein contained, however, shall be construed to prohibit the
construction and maintenance of bridges or dams or other
structures for the impoundment or retention of water in any such
stream, wetland, pond or lake or of dug ponds or reservoirs,
provided that all applicable requirements and approvals of any
public authority having jurisdiction over such matters are met and
obtained.
(6) The setback requirement set forth in Subsection C of this section
may be waived in planned developments (Article VI of this chapter)
and cluster developments (§ 203-73 of this chapter), for man-made
lakes or impoundments that are designed in such a way that
buildings, plazas or promenades are constructed integrally with the
water's edge. The intent of this provision is to encourage the
creation of water bodies as community design amenities. The
appropriateness of such design shall be considered in the final plan
review stage of a planned unit development or in the site plan
review of a cluster development, whichever is applicable.
(7) No land area within the fifty-foot distance described above shall be
disturbed by any person, partnership, corporation, municipal
corporation or other public agency within this municipality, unless
the applicant has submitted to the Municipal Engineer a plan to
provide for soil erosion and sediment control for such land areas in
accordance with the provisions set forth in the New Jersey Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, P.L. 1975, c. 251, as
amended.106
D. Data required for land disturbance permit. The applicant shall submit a
separate soil erosion and sediment control plan for each noncontiguous
site. The applicant shall file an application and plan with the Gloucester
County Soil Conservation District in the selection of appropriate
erosion and sediment control measures and the development of the
plan. Such plan shall contain:
106. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39.
§ 203-33 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-33
198:686
(1) Location and description of existing natural and man-made
features on and surrounding the site, including general topography
and soil characteristics and a copy of the soil conservation district
soil survey (where available).
(2) Location and description of proposed changes to the site.
(3) Measures for soil erosion and sediment control which meet or
exceed Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, adopted
by the State Soil Conservation Committee. Standards shall be on
file at the offices of the local soil conservation district and the
Township Clerk.
(4) A schedule of the sequence of installation of planned erosion and
sediment control measures as related to the progress of the
project, including anticipated starting and completion dates.
(5) All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted for
approval.
E. Review and approval. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall be
reviewed by the Gloucester County Soil Conservation District and
approved when in conformance with this chapter, the New Jersey Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act (P.L. 1975, c. 251), as amended, and
the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control as adopted by the
State Soil Conservation Committee.
§ 203-33 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-33
198:687

ARTICLE IV
Establishment of Districts
[Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-24]
§ 203-34. District designations. [Amended 10-27-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-21; 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10; 8-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-13]
For the purpose of lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from
fire, panic and other dangers; protecting health, morals and the general
welfare; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding
of land and buildings; avoiding undue concentration of population, with
reasonable consideration to the character of the district and its peculiar
suitability for particular uses and with the objective of conserving the value
of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout
the municipality, the Township of Woolwich is hereby divided into 13
districts which shall be designated as follows:
5A Five Acre District (§ 203-39)
R-1 Residential District (§ 203-40)
R-2 Residential District (§ 203-41)
R-3 Residential District (§ 203-42)
CON Conservation (§ 203-43)
PAC Planned Adult Community District (§ 203-44)
PUD Planned Unit Development District (§ 203-45)
FOC Flexible Office Commercial District (§ 203-46)
I-C Cemetery District (§ 203-47)
LIO Light Industrial/Office District (§ 203-48)
Woolwich Kings Landing Regional Center Districts identified as RR
(Residential Receiving; Article XVII), CC (Corridor Commercial; Article
XVIII), NC (Neighborhood Commercial; Article XXVII), RR-BD (Residential
Receiving - Base Density; Article XXIV), MU (Mixed Use; Article XXIII),
BBR (Big Box Retail; Article XXV), and RHO (Regional Hotel Office; Article
XXVI)
Woolwich Regional Center Overlay (Article XIX)
AR-1 Auburn Village District (Article XX)
§ 203-35. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of districts shall be as shown on the map attached to and
made a part of this chapter, which map shall be known as the “Zoning
Map of Woolwich Township,” dated the effective date of this section, or as
may be subsequently revised. Said map and all notations, references and
data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter
and shall be as much a part of this chapter as if all were fully described
herein.107
§ 203-34 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-36
198:689
§ 203-36. Zone boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any of said boundaries as shown on said map,
the following rules shall apply:
§ 203-37. Boundary tolerances.
§ 203-38. Effect of establishment of districts.
Following the effective date of this chapter:
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of the
streets, railroads, rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as
they exist on plats of record at the time of the passage of this chapter,
unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on
the Zoning Map. Any dimensions shall be in feet and measured
horizontally and, when measured from a street, shall be measured from
the street right-of-way line even if the center line of that street is used
for the location of a zoning district line.
B. Where such boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow lot lines and where they do not scale more than 10
feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In unsubdivided land and where a district boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions
shown on the map, shall be determined by the Zoning Officer by
application of a scale thereto.
A. The exact location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be
determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. The zoning standards, controls and designations apply to every
structure, lot and use within each district, and the district lines extend
vertically in both directions from ground level.
C. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by subsections above, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries.
D. Whenever any street or public way is vacated by official action, the
zoning districts adjoining the side of such public way shall be
automatically extended to include the right-of-way thus vacated which
shall thenceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended district or
districts.
A. Any use not permitted by this chapter shall be deemed to be prohibited.
107. Editor’s Note: The Zoning Map is available in the Township offices.
§ 203-36 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-38
198:690
B. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than
those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of
this chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute,
other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this
chapter, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation
shall be controlling.
§ 203-38 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-38
198:691

ARTICLE V
District Regulations
[Amended 4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 93-3; 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 93-5;
9-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-7; 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2; 10-2-1995
by Ord. No. 95-11; 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6; 2-7-2000 by Ord. No.
00-2; 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07; 12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-24]
§ 203-39. 5A Five Acre Residential District. [Amended 8-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-13]
The intent in establishing the Five Acre District is to recognize and maintain
the unique character of this area by encouraging residents to adhere to the
special conditions which existed in the area that was subdivided in 1983 and
known as "Five Acres and Independence."
A. Use regulations.
(1) Principal uses. In the 5A District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Farmhouses and farm buildings.
(c) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence,
community residences for the terminally ill and community
residences for persons with head injuries shall be subject to
the same standards and requirements for single-family
detached residences in this district, provided that they
conform to the definitions found in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2.
(d) Public and nonprofit playgrounds, athletic fields, swimming
pools, conservation areas, parks and public purpose uses.
(e) Temporary buildings, temporary construction offices and
temporary storage of materials, provided that such use is
located on the lot where construction is taking place or on a lot
adjacent to or part of the development site and that such
temporary use is to be terminated within 30 days of issuance of
a final certificate of occupancy for the total project or when
work is abandoned.
(f) Building structures and uses owned and operated by the
Township.
(g) Agriculture and horticulture, including farm markets located
on and operated in conjunction with farm property qualifying
for farmland assessment.
§ 203-39 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-39
198:693
(h) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above
permitted principal uses.
(2) Conditional uses. In the 5A District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(a) Home occupations as an accessory to a residential use subject
to the requirements of § 203-61.
(b) The keeping of horses or ponies, subject to the special
requirements of § 203-62.
(c) Intensive fowl or livestock farms, subject to the special
requirements of § 203-67.
(d) Breweries, distilleries, and wineries subject to the criteria
governing such uses as contained in § 203-77.
B. Bulk and area regulations.
(1) Minimum lot size: five acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum yards.
(a) Front yard: 75 feet.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 5%.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage: 15%.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) Maximum gross density: 0.2 dwelling units/acre.
C. Special requirements.
(1) No parking of any vehicle shall be permitted upon any roads or
streets within the district.
(2) No junk cars or abandoned vehicles shall be stored or permitted
upon any lot, road or street.
(3) Removal of topsoil from any lot is prohibited.
(4) For all lots fronting on Kings Highway, access shall be via
established access roads as shown on the filed plans. Direct access
to Kings Highway shall not be permitted unless approved by the
Gloucester County Planning Department.
§ 203-39 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-39
198:694
§ 203-40. R-1 Residential District. [Amended 8-1-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-25; 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-19; 10-5-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-19; 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-18]
(5) Accessory buildings, including storage sheds, greenhouses, and
other outbuildings, shall be subject to the following regulations,
which shall supersede the requirements of § 203-59A in this
district.
(a) The gross floor area of any building shall not exceed 2% of the
lot area, and the total size of all accessory buildings shall not
exceed 4% of the lot area.
(b) No accessory building shall be located within 15 feet of any
side or rear property line.
(c) No accessory building shall be permitted between the building
line and the street line.
(d) The height of an accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet or
the height of the principal building, whichever is less.
A. Intent.
(1) The intent of the R-1 Residential District is to provide appropriate
regulations for the preservation of agriculture, natural resources,
scenic vistas and the rural landscape of Woolwich Township, along
with the development of single-family detached dwellings and other
permitted uses in portions of the Township characterized as rural,
regardless of the presence or absence of public sewer or water
service. The Township is offering two development options in the
R-1 District. Option 1 is strongly encouraged as the means to best
maintain the rural character while preserving open space and
natural resources in the R-1 District. In conformance with the
MLUL, the purposes of Options 1 and 2 are as follows:
(a) To conserve farmland and open space, including those areas
containing active farmland, unique and sensitive natural
features such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, floodplains
and wetlands, by setting them aside from development;
(b) To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the
design of services and infrastructure, including the
opportunity to reduce length of roads, utility runs, and the
amount of paving required for residential development;
(c) To reduce erosion and sedimentation by the retention of
existing vegetation, and minimization of development on steep
slopes;
(d) To provide for a diversity of lot sizes and housing choices to
accommodate a variety of age and income groups and
§ 203-39 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-40
198:695
residential preferences, so that the community's population
diversity will be maintained;
(e) To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety
of irreplaceable and environmentally sensitive resource lands
as set forth in the Township's Open Space Plan, including
provisions for reasonable incentives to create a greenway
system for the benefit of present and future residents;
(f) To implement adopted land use, transportation, and
community policies, as identified in the Township's Master
Plan;
(g) To protect areas of the Township with productive agricultural
soils for continued or future agricultural use by conserving
blocks of land large enough to allow for efficient farm
operations;
(h) To create neighborhoods with direct visual access to open
space, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space,
and with a strong neighborhood identity;
(i) To provide for the conservation and maintenance of open space
within the Township to achieve the above-mentioned purposes
and for active and/or passive recreational use by residents;
(j) To provide options for landowners in order to minimize impacts
on farming and environmental resources (sensitive lands such
as wetlands, floodplains, and steep slopes) and disturbance of
natural or cultural features such as mature woodlands,
hedgerows and tree lines, critical wildlife habitats, historic
buildings, and fieldstone walls;
(k) To provide standards reflecting the varying circumstances and
interests of individual landowners, and the individual
characteristics of their properties; and
(l) To conserve scenic views and elements of the Township's rural
character, and to minimize perceived density, by minimizing
views of new development from existing roads.
(2) In order to achieve these purposes, this section provides for
flexibility in designing new residential subdivisions in the R-1
Residential District by allowing one form of conservation zoning
based upon the maximum number of DUs (dwelling units) as
determined by a conventional zoning "by-right" development.
(a) Option 1: neutral density and basic conservation, providing for
residential uses at the density permitted by the underlying R-1
Zoning District. Greenway lands shall comprise at least half
the tract.
§ 203-40 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-40
198:696
(b) Option 2: conventional lotting. In addition to the above option
for subdivision, Option 2, conventional lotting, at a minimum
lot size of two acres, is permitted.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Principal uses. In the R-1 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses; all principal and accessory uses permitted in the 5A
District.
(2) Conditional uses. In the R-1 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(a) Home occupations as part of a continued existing residential
use may occur, subject to the criteria governing such home
occupations as contained in § 203-60.
(b) Breweries, distilleries, and wineries subject to the criteria
governing such uses as contained in § 203-76.3.
(c) Public and private elementary, middle and high schools subject
to the requirements of the minimum lot sizes as established by
the New Jersey State Department of Education for school
facilities, and subject further to the following:
[1] Location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design shall be compatible with the neighborhood in which
it is to be located.
[2] No building or part thereof or any parking or loading area
shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any street line or lot
line.
(d) Water storage tank or tower, water reservoir, water or sewer
pumping station and water or sewage treatment plant, 400
square feet or greater in size, subject to the following special
requirements:
[1] Project shall be designed to be structurally compatible and
in keeping with the architectural character of the
neighborhood in which it is to be located.
[2] Project shall be in keeping with the Master Plan or Utility
Master Plan of the Township.
[3] Project shall conform with yard setbacks for the district in
which it is to be located.
[4] Adequate landscaping in conformance with standards
established in §§ 203-68 and 203-69.
§ 203-40 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-40
198:697
(e) Substation, electric and gas facilities, and all other public
utilities, 400 square feet or greater in size, subject to the
following requirements:
[1] All those requirements of Subsection B(2)(c) of this
section.
[2] No storage of materials and trucks and no repair facilities
or housing of repair crews, except within completely
enclosed buildings.
(f) Transmission lines, transmitting and receiving antennas or
aerials, subject to the following special requirements:
[1] None shall exceed 55 feet in height.
[2] None shall be of such height or position that aircraft
warning lights are required by any governmental agency.
(g) The keeping of horses or ponies, subject to the special
requirements of § 203-62.
(h) Intensive fowl or livestock farms, subject to the special
requirements of § 203-67.
(3) Accessory buildings, including storage sheds, greenhouses and
other outbuildings, shall be subject to the following regulations,
which shall supersede the requirements of § 203-59 in this district:
(a) For lots less than three acres in size, the gross floor area of any
individual building shall not exceed 2% of the lot area or 1,500
square feet, whichever is smaller, and the size of all accessory
buildings shall not exceed 2% of the lot area.
(b) For lots of three acres or greater in size, the gross floor area of
any individual building shall not exceed 2% of the lot area, and
the total size of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 4% of
the lot area.
(c) No accessory building shall be located within 10 feet of any
side or rear property line.
(d) No accessory building shall be permitted between the front of
the building and the street line.
(e) Each residential lot shall be allowed no more than two
accessory buildings.
(f) No construction permit shall be issued for the construction of
an accessory building prior to the issuance of a construction
permit for the construction of the principal building or
structure upon the same premises.
§ 203-40 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-40
198:698
(g) An accessory building shall not be located in any required
buffer area (see § 163-42), certain easements (see § 149-58)
and/or drainageway right-of-way.
(h) The height of an accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet or
the height of the principal building, whichever is less.
C. Bulk and area regulations. In order to achieve these purposes, this
section provides for flexibility in designing new residential subdivisions
in the R-1 Residential District by allowing one form of conservation
zoning based upon the number of DUs (dwelling units) as determined
by the conventional zoning "by-right" development:
Table of Options
Option 1 Neutral
Density/Basic
Conservation
Option 2
Conventional
Lotting
Density 87,120 SF/DU
maximum gross
density
87,120 SF/DU
maximum gross
density
Lot size minimum with
minimum lot width
21,780 SF 70 feet 87,120 SF 185 feet
Open space 50% No Common Open
Space
Yards:
Front 30 feet 60 feet
Side 10 feet; 30 feet
between buildings
25 feet
Rear 35 feet 50 feet
Maximum building
coverage
NA 10%
Maximum impervious
coverage
30% on each lot 30% on each lot
Maximum building
height
35 feet 35 feet
(1) Option 1: neutral density and basic conservation, providing for
residential uses at the density permitted by the underlying R-1
Zoning District and the following:
(a) A neutral density/basic conservation development must consist
of at least one tract of land without intervening roads, with
each tract of land containing not less than 10 acres. When a
tract of land less than 10 acres in area is contiguous to existing
open space and would contribute to the fulfillment of the
Township's Open Space Plan, the Joint Land Use Board may
consider a variance to this provision.
§ 203-40 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-40
198:699
(b) Density: as determined through the yield plan described in
Subsection C(1)(m) below.
(c) Minimum required greenway land. The subdivision must
include at least 50% of the gross tract area as greenway land.
Greenway land shall not be used for residential lots.
(d) Greenway land shall be devoted to farming conservation, open
space, municipal and/or recreational purposes. In no case shall
less than 50% of the greenway land area be devoted to upland
area.
(e) Active recreational facilities shall be provided, subject to the
review and approval of the Joint Land Use Board. Such
recreational facilities may be jointly provided by two or more
developers within the R-1 Zone with convenient access to all
users, provided that the facility and/or recreational area shall
equal the recreational requirements of the participating
properties. The location of such recreational facilities shall be
carefully planned to provide privacy for the users and to avoid
problems of noise, lighting and similar nuisances which might
interfere with the use and enjoyment by residents of the
development.
(f) The Joint Land Use Board shall require such grading, drainage,
planting, walkways, fencing, roadways, lighting and such other
improvements in the greenway land as shall be necessary to
enhance the intended open space and recreational uses or
accept a contribution in lieu of making such improvements.
(g) Minimum lot area: 21,780 square feet.
(h) Minimum lot width at building line: 70 feet.
(i) Minimum street frontage: 25 feet.
(j) Yard regulations: The builder or developer is urged to consider
variations in the principal building position and orientation,
but shall observe the following minimum standards:
[1] Front: 30 feet; garage door must be set back at a minimum
of 40 feet from the street line.
[2] Rear: 35 feet.
[3] Side: thirty-foot separation for principal buildings, with no
side yard less than 10 feet from property line.
(k) Maximum impervious coverage: 30% limit on each lot.
(l) Maximum height regulations: 35 feet.
(m) Density determination for Option 1: yield plan approach. The
determination of density or maximum number of permitted
§ 203-40 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-40
198:700
dwelling units shall be based upon a yield plan. Yield plans
shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Yield plans must be prepared as conceptual layout plans in
accordance with the standards of the Subdivision of Land
Ordinance,108 containing proposed lots, streets, rights-ofway,
and other pertinent site features. Yield plans must be
a realistic layout, based upon a field survey, that meets all
zoning district regulations and all bulk and area
regulations for the underlying residential district(s) in
which the tract is located. The yield plan must reflect a
development pattern that could actually be built,
delineating the presence of wetlands, floodplains, steep
slopes, existing easements or encumbrances and, if
unsewered, the suitability of soils for subsurface sewage
disposal. When a tract of land has two (or more)
underlying zoning designations, according to the Zoning
Map of the Township, the yield plan must be designed to
the requirements of the underlying zoning for each zone.
The yield plan must reflect the developer's plan should the
Township choose not to grant the option of conservation
zoning and instead require the developer to design the
subdivision based upon the conventional zoning in place as
reflected in Option 2.
[2] The dimensional standard of Option 2, conventional
zoning, shall be used in the development of a yield plan for
Option 1 subdivisions. The yield plan must identify the
sites' primary and secondary resources, as identified in the
existing resources/site analysis plan (required in the Site
Plan Review and Subdivision of Land Ordinances,109), and
demonstrate that the primary resources could be
successfully absorbed in the development process without
disturbance.
[3] On sites not served by central sewage disposal, density
shall be further determined by evaluating the number of
homes that could be supported by septic systems on
conventional lots. Based on the primary and secondary
resources, identified as part of the inventory and analysis,
and observations made during an on-site visit of the
property, the Joint Land Use Board shall select a tenpercent
sample of the lots considered to be marginal for
on-lot sewage disposal. The applicant shall be required to
provide evidence that these lots meet the standards for an
individual septic system. Should any of the lots in a sample
fail to meet the standard for individual septic system
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision of Land.
109. Editor's Note: See Chs. 149, Site Plan Review, and 163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-40 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-40
198:701
design, those lots shall be deducted from the yield plan
and a second ten-percent sample shall be selected by the
Joint Land Use Board and tested for compliance. This
process shall be repeated until all lots in a given sample
meet the standard for an individual septic system design.
[4] Stormwater management facilities, including, but not
limited to, detention and retention basins, shall be
included on the yield plan. In no case shall the total area
and volume for stormwater management facilities shown
on the yield plan be less than that shown at the cluster
plan.
(n) Design standards for Option 1.
[1] House lots shall not encroach upon primary conservation
areas as identified in § 203-72, and their layout shall
respect secondary conservation areas as described in both
the Zoning Ordinance and in the Site Plan and Subdivision
Review Ordinances.
[2] All new dwelling units shall meet the following
requirements:
[a] Minimum setback from all external road rights-of-way:
100 feet.
[b] Minimum setback from all other tract boundaries: 50
feet.
[c] Minimum setback from cropland or pasture land: 150
feet.
[d] Minimum setback from preserved farms (preserved
farms through the SADC program. the county
program, or through the Township's TDR program):
300 feet.
[e] Minimum setback from buildings or barnyards
housing livestock: 300 feet.
[f] Minimum setback from active recreation areas such
as courts or playing fields (not including tot-lots): 150
feet.
[3] Views of house lots from exterior roads and abutting
properties shall be minimized by the use of change in
topography, existing vegetation, or additional landscaping
which meets the landscaping requirements in Chapters
149, 163 and 203 of the Woolwich Code.
[4] House lots shall be accessed from interior streets, rather
than from roads bordering the tract.
§ 203-40 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-40
198:702
§ 203-41. R-2 Residential District. [Amended 8-1-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-25; 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-19; 5-4-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-05; 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
[5] Standards pertaining to the use, quantity, quality,
configuration, ownership and maintenance of the
greenway land created under this section are contained in
§ 203-72 of this chapter.
(2) Option 2: conventional lotting. In addition to the above preferred
options for subdivision, Option 2, conventional lotting, at a
minimum lot size of 87,120 square feet, is also permitted.
(a) A minimum lot area of 87,120 square feet.
(b) A minimum lot width of 185 feet.
(c) A front yard setback of 60 feet.
(d) A rear yard setback of 50 feet.
(e) A minimum side yard setback of 25 feet.
(f) New dwelling setbacks:
[1] From all external road rights-of-way: 100 feet.
[2] From all other tract boundaries: 50 feet.
[3] From cropland or pasture land: 150 feet.
[4] From preserved farms (preserved farms through the SADC
program, the county program, or through the Township's
TDR program): 300 feet.
[5] From buildings or barnyards housing livestock: 300 feet.
[6] From active recreation areas such as courts or playing
fields (not including tot-lots): 150 feet.
A. Intent.
(1) The intent of the R-2 Residential District is to provide appropriate
regulations for the preservation of agriculture, natural resources,
scenic vistas and the rural landscape of Woolwich Township, along
with the development of single-family detached dwellings and other
permitted uses in portions of the Township characterized as rural,
regardless of the presence or absence of public sewer or water
service. The Township is offering two development options in the
R-2 District. Option 1 is encouraged as the means to best maintain
the rural character while preserving open space and natural
resources in the R-2 District. In conformance with the MLUL, the
purposes of Options 1 and 2 are as follows:
§ 203-40 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-41
198:703
(a) To conserve farmland and open space, including those areas
containing farmland, unique and sensitive natural features
such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, floodplains and
wetlands, by setting them aside from development;
(b) To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the
design of services and infrastructure, including the
opportunity to reduce length of roads, utility runs, and the
amount of paving required for residential development;
(c) To reduce erosion and sedimentation by the retention of
existing vegetation, and the minimization of development on
steep slopes;
(d) To provide for a diversity of lot sizes and housing choices to
accommodate a variety of age and income groups, and
residential preferences, so that the community's population
diversity will be maintained;
(e) To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety
of irreplaceable and environmentally sensitive resource lands
as set forth in the Township's Open Space Plan, including
provisions for reasonable incentives to create a greenway
system for the benefit of present and future residents;
(f) To implement adopted land use, transportation and community
policies, as identified in the Township's Master Plan;
(g) To protect areas of the Township's with productive agricultural
soils for continued or future agricultural use by conserving
blocks of land large enough to allow for efficient farm
operations;
(h) To create neighborhoods with direct visual access to open
space, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space,
and with a strong neighborhood identity;
(i) To provide for the conservation and maintenance of open space
within the Township to achieve the above-mentioned purposes
and for active and/or passive recreational use by residents;
(j) To provide options for landowners in order to minimize impacts
on farming and environmental resources (sensitive lands such
as wetlands, floodplain and step slopes) and disturbance of
natural or cultural features such as mature woodlands,
hedgerows and tree lines, critical wildlife habitats, historic
buildings and fieldstone walls;
(k) To provide standards reflecting the varying circumstances and
interests of individual landowners, and the individual
characteristics of their properties; and
§ 203-41 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-41
198:704
(l) To conserve scenic views and elements of the Township's rural
character, and to minimize perceived density, by minimizing
views of new development from existing roads.
(2) In order to achieve these purposes, this section provides for
flexibility in designing new residential subdivisions in the R-2
Residential District by allowing one form of conservation zoning
based upon the maximum number of DUs (dwelling units) as
determined by a conventional zoning "by-right" development:
(a) Option 1: neutral density and basic conservation, providing for
residential uses at the density permitted by the underlying R-2
Zoning District. Greenway lands shall comprise at least half
the tract.
(b) Option 2: conventional lotting. In addition to the above
preferred option for subdivision, Option 2, conventional
lotting, at a minimum lot size of 1.5 acres, is permitted.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Principal uses. In the R-2 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses: all principal and accessory uses permitted in the 5A
District.
(2) Conditional uses. In the R-2 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(a) Home occupations as part of a continued existing residential
use may occur subject to the criteria governing such home
occupations as contained in § 203-60.
(b) Breweries, distilleries, and wineries subject to the criteria
governing such uses as contained in § 203-77.
(c) Public and private elementary, middle and high schools,
subject to the requirements of the minimum lot sizes as
established by the New Jersey State Department of Education
for school facilities, and subject further to the following:
[1] Location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design shall be compatible with the neighborhood in which
it is to be located.
[2] No building or part thereof or any parking or loading area
shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any street line or lot
line.
(d) Water storage tank or tower, water reservoir, waste or sewer
pumping station and water or sewage treatment plant, 400
§ 203-41 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-41
198:705
square feet or greater in size, subject to the following special
requirements:
[1] Project shall be designed to be structurally compatible and
in keeping with the architectural character of the
neighborhood in which it is to be located.
[2] Project shall be in keeping with the Master Plan or Utility
Master Plan of the Township.
[3] Project shall conform with yard setbacks for the district in
which it is to be located.
[4] Adequate landscaping in conformance with standards
established in §§ 203-68 and 203-69.
(e) Substation, electric, and gas facilities, and all other public
utilities, 400 square feet or greater in size, subject to the
following requirements:
[1] All those requirements of Subsection B(2)(d) of this
section.
[2] No storage of materials and trucks and no repair facilities
or housing of repair crews, except within completely
enclosed buildings.
(f) Transmission lines, transmitting and receiving antennas or
aerials, subject to the following special requirements:
[1] None shall exceed 55 feet in height.
[2] None shall be of such height or position that aircraft
warning lights are required by any governmental agency.
(g) The keeping of horses or ponies, subject to the special
requirements of § 203-62.
(h) Intensive fowl or livestock farms, subject to the special
requirements of § 203-67.
(3) Accessory buildings, including storage sheds, greenhouses, and
other outbuildings, shall be subject to the following regulations,
which shall supersede the requirements of § 203-59A in this
district:
(a) For lots less than three acres in size, the gross floor area of any
individual building shall not exceed 1,500 square feet, and the
total size of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 2% of the
lot area.
(b) For lots of three acres or greater in size, the gross floor area of
any individual building shall not exceed 2% of the lot area, and
§ 203-41 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-41
198:706
the total size of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 4% of
the lot area.
(c) No accessory building shall be located within 10 feet of any
side or rear property line.
(d) No accessory building shall be permitted between the front of
the building and the street line.
(e) Each residential lot shall be allowed no more than two
accessory buildings.
(f) No construction permit shall be issued for the construction of
an accessory building prior to the issuance of a construction
permit for the construction of the principal building or
structure upon the same premises.
(g) An accessory building shall not be located in any required
buffer area (see § 163-42), certain easements (see § 149-58)
and/or drainageway right-of-way.
(h) The height of an accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet or
the height of the principal building, whichever is less.
C. Bulk and area regulations. In order to achieve these purposes, this
section provides for flexibility in designing new residential subdivisions
in the R-2 Residential District by allowing one form of conservation
zoning based upon the number of DUs (dwelling units) as determined
by the conventional zoning "by-right" development:
Table of Options
Option Neutral
Density/Basic
Conservation
Option 2
Conventional
Lotting
Density 65,340 SF/DU
maximum gross
density
65,340 SF/DU
maximum gross
density
Lot size minimum with
minimum lot width
21,780 SF 70 feet 65,340 SF or 1.5
acres 160 feet
Open space 50% No common open
space
Yards:
Front 30 feet 50 feet
Side 10 feet; 30 feet
between buildings
20 feet
Rear 32 feet 30 feet
Maximum building
coverage
NA 10%
§ 203-41 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-41
198:707
Table of Options
Option Neutral
Density/Basic
Conservation
Option 2
Conventional
Lotting
Maximum impervious
coverage
30% on each lot 30% on each lot
Maximum building
height
35 feet 35 feet
(1) Option 1: neutral density and basic conservation, providing for
residential uses at the density permitted by the underlying R-2
Zoning District and the following:
(a) A neutral density/basic conservation development must consist
of at least one tract of land without any intervening roads, with
each tract containing not less than 10 acres. When a tract of
land, less than 10 acres, is contiguous to existing open space
and would contribute to the fulfillment of the Township's Open
Space Plan, the approving Joint Land Use Board may consider
a variance to this provision.
(b) Density: as determined through the yield plan described in
Subsection C(1)(m).
(c) Minimum required greenway land. The subdivision must
include at least 50% of the gross tract area as greenway land.
Greenway land shall not be used for residential lots.
(d) Greenway land shall be devoted to farming conservation, open
space, municipal and/or recreational purposes. In no case shall
less than 50% of the greenway land area be devoted to upland
area.
(e) Active recreational facilities shall be provided, subject to the
review and approval of the Joint Land Use Board. Such
recreational facilities may be jointly provided by two or more
developers within the R-2 Zone with convenient access to all
users, provided that the facility and/or recreational area shall
equal the recreational requirements of the participating
properties. The location of such recreational facilities shall be
carefully planned to provide privacy for the users and to avoid
problems of noise, lighting and similar nuisances which might
interfere with the use and enjoyment by residents of the
development.
(f) The Joint Land Use Board shall require such grading, drainage,
planting, walkways, fencing, roadways, lighting and such other
improvements in the greenway land as shall be necessary to
enhance the intended open space and recreational uses or
accept a contribution in lieu of making such improvements.
§ 203-41 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-41
198:708
(g) Minimum lot area: 21,780 square feet.
(h) Minimum lot width at building line: 70 feet.
(i) Minimum street/frontage: 25 feet.
(j) Yard regulations. The builder or developer is urged to consider
variations in the principal building position and orientation,
but shall observe the following minimum standards:
[1] Front: 30 feet; garage door must be set back a minimum of
40 feet from the street line.
[2] Rear: 30 feet.
[3] Side: thirty-foot separation for principal buildings, with no
side yard less than 10 feet from the property line.
(k) Maximum impervious coverage: 30% limit on each lot.
(l) Maximum height regulations: 35 feet.
(m) Density determination for Option 1: yield plan approach. The
determination of density or maximum number of permitted
dwelling units shall be based upon a yield plan. Yield plans
shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Yield plans must be prepared as conceptual layout plans in
accordance with the standards of the Subdivision of Land
Ordinance,110 containing proposed lots, streets, rights-ofway
and other pertinent site features. Yield plans must be
a realistic layout, based upon a field survey, that meets all
zoning district regulations and all bulk and area
regulations for the underlying residential district(s) in
which the tract is located. The yield plan must reflect a
development pattern that could actually be built,
delineating the presence of wetlands, floodplains, steep
slopes, existing easements or encumbrances and, if
unsewered, the suitability of soils for subsurface sewage
disposal. When a tract of land has two (or more)
underlying zoning designations according to the Zoning
Map of the Township, the yield plan must be designed to
the requirements of the underlying zoning for each zone.
The yield plan must reflect the developer's plan should the
Township choose not to grant the option of conservation
zoning and instead require the developer to design the
subdivision based upon the conventional zoning in place as
reflected in Option 2.
[2] The dimensional standards of Option 2, conventional
zoning, shall be used in the development of yield plan for
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-41 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-41
198:709
Option 1 subdivisions. The yield plan must identify the
site's primary and secondary resources, as identified in
the existing resources/site analysis plan (required in the
Site Plan Review and Subdivision of Land Ordinances111),
and demonstrate that the primary resources could be
successfully absorbed in the development process without
disturbance.
[3] On sites not served by central sewage disposal, density
shall be further determined by evaluating the number of
homes that could be supported by septic systems on
conventional lots. Based on the primary and secondary
resources, identified as part of the inventory and analysis,
and observations made during an on-site visit of the
property, the Joint Land Use Board shall select a 10%
sample of the lots considered to be marginal for on-lot
sewage disposal. The applicant shall be required to
provide evidence that these lots meet the standards for an
individual septic system. Should any of the lots in a sample
fail to meet the standard for individual septic system
design, those lots shall be deducted from the yield plan
and a second 10% sample shall be selected by the Joint
Land Use Board and tested for compliance. This process
shall be repeated until all lots in a given sample meet the
standard for an individual septic system design.
[4] Stormwater management facilities, including, but not
limited to, detention and retention basins, shall be
included on the yield plan. In no case shall the total area
and volume for stormwater management facilities shown
on the yield plan be less than that shown on the cluster
plan.
(n) Design standards for Option 1.
[1] House lots shall not encroach upon primary conservation
areas as identified in § 203-72, and their layout shall
respect secondary conservation areas as described in both
the Zoning Ordinance and in the Site Plan and Subdivision
Review Ordinances.
[2] All new dwelling units shall meet the following
requirements:
[a] Minimum setback from all external road rights-of-way:
100 feet.
[b] Minimum setback from all other tract boundaries: 50
feet.
111. Editor's Note: See Chs. 149, Site Plan Review, and 163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-41 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-41
198:710
[c] Minimum setback from cropland or pasture land: 150
feet.
[d] Minimum setback from preserved farms (preserved
farms through the SADC program, the county
program, or through the Township's TDR program):
300 feet.
[e] Minimum setback from buildings or barnyards
housing livestock: 300 feet.
[f] Minimum setback from active recreation areas such
as courts or playing fields (not including tot-lots): 150
feet.
[3] Views of house lots from exterior roads and abutting
properties shall be minimized by the use of changes in
topography, existing vegetation, or additional landscaping
which meets the landscaping requirements in Chapters
149, 163 and 203 of the Woolwich Code.
[4] House lots shall be accessed from interior streets, rather
than from roads bordering the tract.
[5] Standards pertaining to the use, quantity, quality,
configuration, ownership and maintenance of the
greenway land created under this section are contained in
§ 203-72 of this chapter.
(2) Option 2: conventional lotting. In addition to the above preferred
option for subdivision, Option 2, conventional lotting, at a minimum
lot size of two acres, is also permitted.
(a) A minimum lot area of 65,340 square feet.
(b) A minimum lot width of 160 feet.
(c) A front yard setback of 50 feet.
(d) A rear yard setback of 30 feet.
(e) A minimum side yard setback of 20 feet.
(f) New dwelling setbacks:
[1] From all external road rights-of-way: 100 feet.
[2] From all other tract boundaries: 50 feet.
[3] From cropland or pasture land: 150 feet.
[4] From preserved farms (preserved farms through the
(SADC program, the county program, or through the
Township's TDR program: 300 feet.
§ 203-41 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-41
198:711
§ 203-42. R-3 Residential District. [Amended 8-1-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-25; 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 10-27-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-19]
[5] From buildings or barnyards housing livestock: 300 feet.
[6] From active recreation areas such as courts or playing
fields (not including tot-lots): 150 feet.
A. Intent.
(1) The intent of the R-3 Residential District is to provide appropriate
regulations for the preservation of agriculture, natural resources,
scenic vistas and the rural landscape of Woolwich Township, along
with the development of moderate-density single-family detached
dwellings and other permitted uses in portions of the Township
which are located within the existing public sewer service area, as
of 2004, but which are not part of any planned unit development.
Where public sewer is unavailable, the regulations of the R-2
Residential District shall apply. The Township is offering three
development options in the R-3 District. Option 1 is encouraged as
the means to best maintain the rural character while preserving
open space and natural resources in the R-3 District. In
conformance with the MLUL, the purposes of Options 1, 2 and 3 are
as follows: [Amended 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
(a) To conserve farmland and open space, including those areas
containing unique and sensitive natural features such as
woodlands, steep slopes, streams, floodplains and wetlands, by
setting them aside from development;
(b) To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the
design of services and infrastructure, including the
opportunity to reduce length of roads, utility runs, and the
amount of paving required for residential development;
(c) To reduce erosion and sedimentation by the retention of
existing vegetation and the minimization of development on
steep slopes;
(d) To provide for a diversity of lot sizes and housing choices to
accommodate a variety of age and income groups, and
residential preferences, so that the community's population
diversity will be maintained;
(e) To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety
of irreplaceable and environmentally sensitive resource lands
as set forth in the Township's Open Space Plan, including
provisions for reasonable incentives to create a greenway
system for the benefit of present and future residents;
§ 203-41 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-42
198:712
(f) To implement adopted land use, transportation, and
community polices, as identified in the Township's Master
Plan;
(g) To protect areas of the Township with productive agricultural
soils for continued or future agricultural use, by conserving
blocks of land large enough to allow for efficient farm
operations;
(h) To create neighborhoods with direct visual access to open
space, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space,
and with a strong neighborhood identity;
(i) To provide for the conservation and maintenance of open space
within the Township to achieve the above-mentioned purposes
and for active and/or passive recreational use by residents;
(j) To provide options for landowners in order to minimize impacts
on farming and environmental resources (sensitive lands such
as wetlands, floodplains, and steep slopes) and disturbance of
natural or cultural features such as mature woodlands,
hedgerows and tree lines, critical wildlife habitats, historic
buildings, and fieldstone walls;
(k) To provide standards reflecting the varying circumstances and
interests of individual landowners, and the individual
characteristics of their properties; and
(l) To conserve scenic views and elements of the Township's rural
character, and to minimized perceived density, by minimizing
views of new development from existing roads.
(2) In order to achieve these purposes, this section provides for
flexibility in designing new residential subdivisions in the R-3
Residential District by allowing one form of conservation zoning
based upon the maximum number of DUs (dwelling units) as
determined by a conventional zoning "by-right" development:
(a) Option 1: neutral density and basic conservation: providing for
residential uses at the density permitted by the underlying R-3
Zoning District. Greenway lands shall comprise at least half
the tract.
(b) Option 2: conventional lotting. In addition to the above
preferred options for subdivision, Option 2, conventional
lotting, at a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet, is also
permitted.
(c) Option 3: The underlying density of the parcel would be
eliminated and the parcel would serve as a receiving area for a
density transfer from the PUD Planned Unit Development
District. [Added 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
§ 203-42 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-42
198:713
B. Use regulations.
(1) Principal uses. In the R-3 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses: all principal and accessory uses permitted in the 5A
District.
(2) Conditional uses. In the R-3 District, the conditional uses as
permitted in the R-1 District are allowed.
(3) Accessory buildings, including storage sheds, greenhouses, and
other outbuildings, shall be subject to the following regulations,
which shall supersede the requirements of § 203-59A in this
district:
(a) The gross floor area of any individual building shall not exceed
400 square feet, and the total size of all accessory buildings
shall not exceed 2% of the lot area.
(b) No accessory building shall be located within 10 feet of any
side or rear property line.
(c) No accessory building shall be permitted between the front of
the building and the street line.
(d) No construction permit shall be issued for the construction of
an accessory building prior to the issuance of a construction
permit for the construction of the principal buildings or
structure upon the same premises.
(e) An accessory building shall not be located in any required
buffer area (see § 163-42), certain easements (see § 145-58)
and/or drainage right-of-way.
(f) The height of an accessory building shall not exceed 20 feet or
the height of the principal building, whichever is less.
C. Bulk and area regulations. In order to achieve these purposes, this
section provides for flexibility in designing new residential subdivisions
in the R-3 Residential District by allowing one form of conservation
zoning based upon the number of DUs (dwelling units) as determined
by the conventional zoning "by-right" development: [Amended
5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
§ 203-42 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-42
198:714
Table of Options
Option Neutral
Density/Basic
Conservation
Option 2
Conventional
Lotting
Option 3
Density
Transfer
Option
Density 20,000 SF/DU 20,000 SF/DU
maximum gross
density
Not applicable
due to density
transfer
Lot size
minimum with
minimum lot
width
8,000 SF 60 feet 20,000 SF 70
feet
6,500 SF 60 feet
Open space 40% No common
open space
No required
common open
space
Yards:
Front 30 feet 35 feet 25 feet
Side 10 feet; 20 feet
between
buildings
20 feet 5 feet minimum
on one side and
a minimum of 15
feet aggregate
Rear 35 feet 50 feet 20 feet
Maximum
building
coverage
NA 15% 35%
Maximum
impervious
coverage
40% on each lot 40% on each lot Same as the
contiguous
sections of the
PUD District
Maximum
building height
35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
(1) Option 1: neutral density and basic conservation, providing for
residential uses at the density permitted by the underlying R-1
Zoning District and the following:
(a) A neutral density/basic conservation development must consist
of at least one tract of land without intervening roads with each
tract of land containing not less than 10 acres. When a tract of
land, less than 10 acres in area, is contiguous to existing open
space and would contribute to the fulfillment of the Township's
Open Space Plan, the approving Joint Land Use Board may
consider a variance to this provision.
(b) Minimum required greenway land. The subdivision must
include at least 40% of the gross tract area as greenway land.
§ 203-42 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-42
198:715
(c) Density: as determined through the yield plan described in
Subsection C(1)(m) below.
(d) Greenway land shall be devoted to farming conservation, open
space, municipal and/or recreational purposes. In no case shall
less than 50% of the greenway land area shall be provided to
upland area.
(e) Active recreational facilities shall be provided, subject to the
review and approval of the Joint Land Use Board. Such
recreational facilities may be jointly provided by two or more
developers within the R-3 Zone with convenient access to all
users, provided that the facility and/or recreational area shall
equal the recreational requirements of the participating
properties. The location of such recreational facilities shall be
carefully planned to provide privacy for the users and to avoid
problems of noise, lighting and similar nuisances which might
interfere with their use and enjoyment by residents of the
development.
(f) The Joint Land Use Board shall require such grading, drainage,
planting, walkways, fencing, roadways, lighting and such other
improvements in the greenway land as shall be necessary to
enhance the intended open space and recreational uses or
accept a contribution in lieu of making such improvements.
(g) Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet.
(h) Minimum lot width at building line: 60 feet.
(i) Minimum street frontage: 25 feet.
(j) Yard regulations. The builder or developer is urged to consider
variations in the principal building position and orientation,
but shall observe the following minimum standards:
[1] Front: 30 feet; garage door must be set back a minimum of
40 feet from the street line.
[2] Rear: 35 feet.
[3] Side: twenty-foot separation for principal buildings, with
no side yard less than 10 feet.
(k) Maximum impervious coverage: 40% limit on each lot.
(l) Maximum height regulations: 35 feet.
(m) Density determination for Option 1: yield plan approach. The
determination of density or maximum number of permitted
dwelling units shall be based upon a yield plan. Yield plans
shall meet the following requirements:
§ 203-42 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-42
198:716
[1] Yield plans must be prepared as conceptual layout plans in
accordance with the standards of the Subdivision of Land
Ordinance,112 containing proposed lots, streets, rights-ofway,
and other pertinent site features. Yield plans must be
a realistic layout, based upon a field survey, that meets all
zoning district regulations and bulk and area regulations
for the underlying residential district(s) in which the tract
is located. The yield plan must reflect a development
pattern that could actually be built, delineating the
presence of wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, existing
easements or encumbrances and, if unsewered, the
suitability of soils for subsurface sewage disposal. When a
tract of land has two (or more) underlying zoning
designations according to the Zoning Map of the
Township, the yield plan must be designed to the
requirements of the underlying zoning for each zone. The
yield plan must reflect the developer's plan should the
Township choose not to grant the option of conservation
zoning and instead require the developer to design the
subdivision based upon the conventional zoning in place as
reflected in Option 2.
[2] The dimensional standards of Option 2, conventional
zoning, shall be used in the development of yield plans for
Option 1 subdivisions. The yield plan must identify the
site's primary and secondary resources, as identified in the
existing resources/site analysis plan (required in the Site
Plan Review and Subdivision of Land Ordinances113), and
demonstrate that the primary resources could be
successfully absorbed in the development process without
disturbance.
[3] On sites not served by central sewage disposal, as stated
above, R-2 zoning applies.
[4] Stormwater management facilities, including, but not
limited to, detention and retention basins, shall be
included on the yield plan. In no case shall the total area
and volume for stormwater management facilities shown
on the yield plan be less than that shown on the cluster
plan.
(n) Design standards for Option 1.
[1] House lots shall not encroach upon primary conservation
areas as identified in § 203-72, and their layout shall
respect secondary conservation areas as described in both
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision of Land.
113. Editor's Note: See Chs. 149, Site Plan Review, and 163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-42 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-42
198:717
the Zoning Ordinance and in the Site Plan and Subdivision
Review Ordinances.
[2] All new dwelling units shall meet the following setback
requirements:
[a] Minimum setback from all external road rights-of-way:
60 feet.
[b] Minimum setback from all other tract boundaries: 25
feet.
[c] Minimum setback from cropland or pasture land: 100
feet.
[d] Minimum setback from preserved farms (preserved
farms through the SADC program, the county
program or through the Township's TDR program):
200 feet.
[e] Minimum setback from buildings or barnyards
housing livestock: 200 feet.
[f] Minimum setback from active recreation areas such
as courts or playing fields (not including tot-lots): 150
feet.
[3] Views of house lots from exterior roads and abutting
properties shall be minimized by the use of changes in
topography, existing vegetation, or additional landscaping
which meets the landscaping requirements in Chapters
149, 163 and 203 of the Woolwich Code.
[4] House lots shall be accessed from interior streets, rather
than from roads bordering the tract.
[5] Standards pertaining to the use, quantity, quality,
configuration, ownership and maintenance of the
greenway land created under this section are contained in
§ 203-72 of this chapter.
(2) Option 2: conventional lotting. In addition to the above preferred
option for subdivision, Option 2, conventional lotting, at a minimum
lot size of 20,000 square feet, is also permitted.
(a) A minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet.
(b) A minimum lot width of 100 feet.
(c) A front yard setback of 35 feet.
(d) A rear yard setback of 25 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setbacks of 15 feet.
§ 203-42 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-42
198:718
§ 203-43. CON Conservation District. [Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-13]
The intent in establishing the Conservation District is to recognize and
maintain the environmentally sensitive lands, open space, and animal
habitats by limiting development in these zoned areas.
(f) New dwelling setbacks:
[1] From all external road rights-of-way: 60 feet.
[2] From all other tract boundaries: 25 feet.
[3] From cropland or pasture land: 100 feet.
[4] From preserved farms (preserved farms through the SADC
program, the county program, or though the Township's
TDR program): 200 feet.
[5] From buildings or barnyards housing livestock: 200 feet.
[6] From active recreation areas such as courts or playing
fields (not including tot-lots): 100 feet.
(3) Option 3: PUD Density Transfer Option. Any parcel with a minimum
acreage of 25 acres bounded on three sides by portions of the
Weatherby PUD Planned Unit Development District and not within
the Weatherby General Development Plan shall be eligible for the
density transfer option (eligible parcel). Under this option, singlefamily
detached dwellings shall be the permitted use subject to the
bulk and area regulations of § 203-45C.
(a) The density transfer required to enable this development
option shall be achieved by shifting a portion of the units
permitted by the Weatherby PUD to an eligible parcel outside
the boundaries of the PUD.
(b) The combined development of the parcel receiving the density
transfer and the Weatherby PUD shall not exceed the 4,500
residential units authorized by the existing Weatherby General
Development Plan approval.
(c) The development impacts for the eligible parcels shall be
managed through the mechanisms otherwise applied to the
Weatherby development although the eligible parcels shall not
be included within or subject to the General Development Plan
approval.
(d) The zoning requirements and conditions of the R-3 District
applicable to properties developed under Options 1 and 2 shall
not be applicable to parcels developed under Option 3.
A. Use regulations.
§ 203-42 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-43
198:719
(1) Principal uses. In the Conservation District, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered
which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one
or more of the following uses:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Farmhouses and farm buildings.
(c) Stormwater infrastructure.
(d) Passive recreation.
(e) Agriculture and horticulture, including farm markets located
on and operated in conjunction with farm property qualifying
for farmland assessment.
B. Bulk and area regulations.
(1) Minimum lot size: five acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum yards.
(a) Front yard: 75 feet.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 5%.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage: 15%.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) Maximum gross density: 0.067 dwelling units/acre.
C. Special requirements.
(1) No parking of any vehicle shall be permitted upon any roads or
streets within the district.
(2) No junk cars or abandoned vehicles shall be stored or permitted
upon any lot, road or street.
(3) Removal of topsoil from any lot is prohibited.
(4) Accessory buildings, including storage sheds, greenhouses, and
other outbuildings, shall be subject to the following regulations,
which shall supersede the requirements of § 203-59A in this
district.
§ 203-43 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-43
198:720
§ 203-44. PAC Planned Adult Community.
The intent of this section is to implement the terms of the settlement of a
case entitled “Woolwich Adult LLC v Woolwich Township, et al., Docket No.
413-01.” The PAC District will provide an opportunity to develop integrated
residential communities on large tracts of land that are situated at locations
convenient to shopping. Planned adult communities are intended for
occupancy by households in which at least one member of the household
is age 55 or older, and no permanent member of the resident household is
age 18 or less. Said developments are also intended to offer a full range of
recreational opportunities consistent with the lifestyle of its residents and
developed as part of a well-planned development. It is the further intent of
this article to promote the long-term health, safety and welfare of the public
by promoting greater variety and flexibility in the uses permitted within
a planned development than would otherwise be permitted, and likewise
it will advance the principles of smart growth. The Township Committee
finds that such variety and flexibility will accomplish comparatively greater
benefits to residents, will protect the natural environment and enhance the
provision of public services and facilities. A planned adult community will
provide opportunities for senior citizen housing construction, which is a
specific purpose of zoning. The planned adult community is intended to
permit the development of a balanced community with a range of densities,
recreational facilities and related uses, while preserving a significant
amount of public and common open space.
(a) The gross floor area of any building shall not exceed 2% of the
lot area, and the total size of all accessory buildings shall not
exceed 4% of the lot area.
(b) No accessory building shall be located within 15 feet of any
side or rear property line.
(c) No accessory building shall be permitted between the building
line and the street line.
(d) The height of an accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet or
the height of the principal building, whichever is less.
A. Use regulations.
(1) Principal and accessory uses. In the PAC District, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered
which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one
or more of the following uses: all principal and accessory uses
permitted in the 5A District. In addition, townhouses or multifamily
apartment buildings affordable to low- and moderate-income
households, as defined by the Council on Affordable Housing, shall
be permitted, as well as the following accessory uses:
(a) Golf courses.
§ 203-43 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-44
198:721
(b) Clubhouses with restaurants, catering facilities, and retail
shops related to the golf course and associated recreational
facilities, or planned adult community including, but not
limited to, swimming poo1s, tennis courts, and practice
ranges.
(c) Community centers associated with the planned adult
community and usual and customary accessory uses thereto.
(d) Community gardens.
(2) Conditional uses. All conditional uses permitted in the R-l
Residence District and the following additional uses that may be
permitted as conditional uses.
B. Bulk and area regulations.
(1) Minimum tract area: 200 acres.
(2) Single-family detached dwellings.
(a) Minimum lot size: 5,720 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 52 feet at the building setback line.
(c) Minimum yards.
[1] Front yard: 20 feet.
[2] Side yard.
[a] Aggregate: 12 feet.
[b] Minimum: None required with three feet maintenance
easement.
[3] Rear yard: 20 feet.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
(e) Maximum impervious coverage: 70%.
(f) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(3) Multifamily apartment buildings.
(a) All units must be affordable to low- and moderate-income
households and must meet all applicable criteria necessary to
render the units creditworthy including, but not limited to,
bedroom mix, the 50/50 low- and moderate-income housing
split, phasing, affirmative marketing, and other applicable laws
as set forth in Mount Laurel II, 92 N.J. 158 (1983) and its
progeny, the Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.), the
regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) and other applicable laws.
§ 203-44 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-44
198:722
(b) A fifty-foot perimeter setback from public streets and property
lines shall be required on all sides of the apartment portion of
the development. This perimeter setback shall be occupied by
a thirty-five-foot landscaped buffer, as provided for by
§§ 203-68 and 203-69, and shall not be encroached upon by any
accessory buildings or structure, other than fences and walls,
or by any off-street parking or loading facility.
(c) Minimum distance between buildings shall be as follows:
[1] Front wall to front wall: 50 feet.
[2] Side wall to either front or rear wall: 35 feet.
[3] Side wall to side wall: 25 feet.
[4] Front to rear, rear to rear: 50 feet.
(d) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(4) Townhouses.
(a) All units must be affordable to low- and moderate-income
households and must meet all applicable criteria necessary to
render the units creditworthy including, but not limited to,
bedroom mix, the 50/50 low- and moderate-income housing
split, phasing, affirmative marketing, and other applicable laws
as set forth in Mount Laurel II, 92 N.J. 158 (1983) and its
progeny, the Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.), the
regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) and other applicable laws.
(b) Minimum lot size.
[1] Condominium or rental ownership: none required.
[2] Fee simple ownership: 2,400 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width (fee simple ownership): 26 feet.
(d) Minimum unit width: 24 feet.
(e) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(5) Trash disposal areas shall be enclosed, and the enclosure shall be
of a material, the color and texture of which is consistent with that
of the principal buildings.
(6) Pedestrian access shall be provided to the rear of all townhouse
units.
(7) Storage units for each dwelling unit shall be designed by the
developer as an integral part of each building or privacy fence.
Freestanding accessory storage buildings are prohibited.
§ 203-44 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-44
198:723
§ 203-45. PUD Planned Unit Development District. [Amended
6-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14; 7-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-16;
8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
(8) There shall be no unbroken building plane in excess of 100 feet
without a change of building plane of not less than two feet.
(9) Maximum gross density, based upon the area of the PAC, the
accessory uses and their associated lands, and the area of the golf
course: four dwelling units/acre.
(10) Preservation of open space. In the PAC district a minimum of 50%
of the tract area shall be preserved as open space but this area may
include the golf course in addition to common open space and
drainage basins reserved for the residents of the development. At
least 10% of the required open space shall be reserved for resident
use. Resident open space shall be free from environmental
constraints and shall be distributed through each section of the
PAC development.
(11) All development in the PAC District shall be connected to public
sewer and water systems, and said connection shall be mandatory
if public sewer and water lines exist within 500 linear feet of the
closest lot line. In the event that public sewer and water is
unavailable within a distance of 500 feet from the tract boundary,
or if the property in question does not meet the minimum tract
requirement for this district, the development regulations of the
R-2 Residence District shall apply.
(12) An essential and nonseverable condition of any right to develop in
the PAC zone shall be complete compliance with the settlement
agreement for Woolwich Adult LLC v Woolwich Township, et al.,
Docket No. 413-01.
A. Intent.
(1) The PUD Planned Unit Development District is specifically
designed to implement the intent and purpose of the general
development plan as approved in 1998 by the Planning Board for
the Weatherby Planned Unit Development. It provides for a mixture
of dwelling types as well as nonresidential uses, which are defined
within the Weatherby Commercial Zoning Overlay. This overlay is
intended to apply to the area designated as "town center" within
the Weatherby General Development Plan. This area is expected to
provide opportunities for community-level rather than regional
commercial uses, serving the needs of Weatherby and nearby
neighborhoods. It is also intended to apply to certain out-parcels
that are adjacent to, but not part of, the Weatherby Planned Unit
Development. It is recognized that the exact location of the
commercial overlay may be adjusted, with the approval of the
Planning Board, and the applicability of the overlay to out-parcels
§ 203-44 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-45
198:724
is intended to be flexible as the boundaries of the commercial
overlay within Weatherby are adjusted.
(2) It is the further intent of this article to promote the long-term
health, safety and welfare of the public by promoting greater
variety and flexibility in the uses permitted within a development
than would otherwise be permitted under any one designation
permitted under this chapter and to advance the principles of
smart growth. The Township Committee finds that such variety and
flexibility will accomplish comparatively greater benefits to
residential and nonresidential users, the natural environment and
public services and facilities. A planned development is intended to
permit the development of a balanced community comprised of
residential uses and, under certain circumstances, nonresidential
uses, with a range of densities, recreational facilities and related
uses, while preserving a significant amount of public and common
open space. It is intended that planned developments will
encourage the consolidation of residential and nonresidential
development in sectors of the Township where existing or
anticipated roads and utility services can best accommodate
development and will offer increased design flexibility in order that
entire parcels of land may be developed in a comprehensive
manner and sequence throughout the life of the development. This
district is intended to achieve the following public objectives:
(a) To offer a variety of housing types.
(b) To preserve and enhance open space and natural resources of
all types, for both passive and active recreation purposes.
(c) To permit a greater mixture of compatible residential and
nonresidential land uses in areas designated by the Weatherby
General Development Plan approval.
(d) To promote creativity and innovation in the design process.
(e) To create opportunities for efficient creation of infrastructure
and utilities by means of clustering of development, careful site
planning and construction phasing, and attaining market
economies of scale in project size.
(f) To minimize traffic impacts through the implementation and
development of appropriate design standards as required by
specific on-site conditions.
(g) To insure permanent buffering from other land uses and
development abutting the site.
(3) Due consideration shall be given in the design of all planned unit
developments to each constituent element of an open space system,
including environmentally and ecologically sensitive areas, usable
open space, other common areas, special scenic amenities and
§ 203-45 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-45
198:725
views from the road. To the greatest extent possible, dwellings and
other buildings and structures should be placed in tight clusters
set in the distance beyond expanses of open fields and visually
softened by surrounding trees and plantings.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Residential uses.
(a) A maximum of 4,500 dwelling units shall be permitted, as
specified in the Weatherby General Development Plan. These
uses may include single-family detached dwellings, duplex,
triplex and zero-lot line dwellings, multifamily dwellings and
townhouses (patio homes).
(b) Ten percent of these units shall be provided as age-restricted
dwellings, with occupancy limited to households in which at
least one member of the household is age 55 or older and in
which no members are age 18 or younger.
(c) Residential uses shall be provided in strict conformity with the
Weatherby General Development Plan although the location of
residential subdivisions may be altered upon approval of the
Planning Board, and provided further that the total number of
permitted dwelling units is not increased.
(d) A minimum of 101 affordable housing units shall be
constructed, as specified in the Weatherby General
Development Plan. All such units must be affordable to lowand
moderate-income households in accordance with the
income and bedroom mixes established in the regulations of
the Council of Affordable Housing that were in effect at the
time of general development plan approval. The affordable
units shall also be subject to all other regulations of the
Council on Affordable Housing including controls on
affordability, affirmative marketing, and monitoring.
(e) Agricultural activities may be maintained in all or part of any
lands, including required open space, within the Weatherby
PUD.
(f) Recreation facilities, including but not limited to swimming
pools, tennis courts and similar facilities for the use of the
residents of the development and the Township. Recreation
facilities may include a multipurpose community building in
any development.
(g) Necessary public utilities and services.
(h) Accessory uses and accessory buildings customarily incidental
to the above use.
(2) Nonresidential uses.
§ 203-45 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-45
198:726
(a) Nonresidential uses on land owned by Summit Ventures or its
successors and shall be generally located within the areas
designated as the Weatherby Commercial Overlay and the
town center area shown in the Weatherby General
Development Plan.
(b) The specific boundaries of the Weatherby Commercial Overlay
may be adjusted, with the approval of the Planning Board,
provided that the total acreage provided for in the GDP is not
exceeded.
(c) Where out-parcels or groups of out-parcel land, not owned by
Summit Ventures or its successors, are surrounded by the
Weatherby Commercial Overlay on a minimum of three sides,
or on two sides in the case of a corner property, the provisions
of the commercial overlay shall be applicable to said parcels.
This benefit runs exclusively with the location of the Weatherby
Commercial Overlay and shall be controlled by any adjustment
to the boundaries of the Weatherby Commercial Overlay, as
approved by the Planning Board.
(d) Within the Weatherby Commercial Overlay, one or more of the
following uses are permitted:
[1] Offices for administrative, executive, professional,
business sales and similar uses, the normal attributes of
which do not involve the storage, exchange or delivery of
merchandise on the premises, except as permitted herein.
Within an individual office building, up to 10% of the gross
floor area may be devoted to supporting commercial
enterprises that are intended primarily for the
convenience of those working in the building, provided
that such uses are accessed only from within the office
building. Such uses may include convenience stores,
eating establishments, food specialty stores, branch banks
and newsstands.
[2] Medical and dental clinic.
[3] Retail sales and services, including newspapers, gifts,
novelties, tobacco products, drugs, food, clothing, spirits,
confections, florist items, books and specialty
merchandise, including convenience stores.
[4] Personal service businesses, such as insurance, travel and
banking.
[5] Restaurants and fast-food restaurants.
[6] Hotels.
[7] Theaters for motion pictures or live performances.
§ 203-45 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-45
198:727
[8] Public transportation stations and shelters.
[9] Single-family detached dwellings, single-family
semidetached, single-family attached, single-family and
multifamily dwellings.
[10] Parks, playgrounds, tot-lots and open spaces.
[11] Public and commercial garages.
[12] Amusement, recreation and leisure uses.
[13] Funeral homes and mortuaries.
[14] Shopping centers.
[15] Convenience and community commercial facilities.
[16] Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the
above permitted principal uses.
[17] Agriculture and horticulture, including farm markets
located on and operated in conjunction with farm property
qualifying for farmland assessment.
[18] Any use of the same general character as the above
permitted uses.
(e) The following are permitted as conditional uses:
[1] Telecommunications facilities within the Weatherby
Commercial Overlay, subject to § 203-50.
[2] Public libraries and museums subject to:
[a] Location of access driveways, landscaping and site
plan design are compatible with the neighborhood in
which it is to be located.
[b] No building or part thereof or any parking or loading
area shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any street
line or lot line.
[c] A site plan in accordance with the Woolwich Township
site plan requirements submitted to the Planning
Board pursuant to its conditional use review authority
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67).
[3] Church or other place of worship subject to:
[a] Location of access driveways, landscaping and site
plan design being compatible with the neighborhood
in which it is to be located.
§ 203-45 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-45
198:728
[b] No building or part thereof or any parking or loading
area shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any street
line or lot line.
[c] A parish house, rectory or parsonage, which shall
conform to the requirements for a single-family,
detached dwelling.
[d] A site plan in accordance with the Woolwich Township
site plan requirements submitted to the Planning
Board pursuant to its conditional use review authority
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67).
[e] Sewerage disposal and water supply facilities in
accordance with all relevant requirements of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and
the Gloucester County Health Department codes. This
requirement shall apply to all proposed methods,
including joint or individual septic systems, on-lot
package treatment plants, joint or individual
groundwater supply, connection by special permission
to public systems outside of the Township or to public
systems, etc.
[f] Perimeter buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be
provided as required by §§ 203-68 and 203-69.
[4] Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer,
electricity and gas 400 square feet or greater in size
pursuant to the following:
[a] Project is designed to be structurally compatible and
in keeping with the architectural character of the
neighborhood in which it is to be located.
[b] Project is in keeping with the Master Plan or Utility
Master Plan of the Township.
[c] Project conforms with yard setbacks for the district in
which it is to be located.
[d] Adequate landscaping in conformance with standards
established in §§ 203-68 and 203-69.
[e] Substation, electric and gas facilities, and all other
public utilities, 400 square feet or greater in size,
subject to the following requirements:
[i] No storage of materials and trucks and no repair
facilities or housing of repair crews, except within
completely enclosed buildings.
§ 203-45 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-45
198:729
[f] Transmission lines, transmitting and receiving
antennae or aerials, subject to the following special
requirements:
[i] No transmission line shall exceed 55 feet in
height.
[ii] No transmission line shall be of such height or
position that aircraft warning lights are required
by any governmental agency.
[5] Public and commercial garages subject to the special
requirements of § 203-66.
[6] Accessory uses and accessory buildings customarily
incidental to the above use.
(f) Prohibited uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited
in this district:
[1] Industrial uses.
[2] Manufacturing uses.
[3] Warehouse-distribution uses.
[4] Automotive sales and service of any kind.
[5] Sexually oriented adult entertainment, video, or book
shops.
(g) Mixed uses within the same building. In any planned unit
development, residential and nonresidential uses shall be
permitted within the same structure, provided that the first
floor is entirely devoted to nonresidential uses and the
percentage of gross floor area within the entire structure
devoted to residential uses does not exceed 75%. Residential
and nonresidential uses shall not be permitted on the same
floor of a building unless such uses are:
[1] Entirely separated internally by a party wall;
[2] Provided with a minimum of two separate entrances each;
and
[3] Shown to meet all building, housing and safety codes.
C. Bulk and area regulations.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(a) Minimum lot size: 6,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
§ 203-45 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-45
198:730
(c) Minimum yards.
[1] Front yard: 25 feet.
[2] Side yard: minimum five feet on one side and minimum 15
feet aggregate (on both sides).
[3] Rear yard: 20 feet.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 35%.
(e) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(2) Age-restricted housing.
(a) Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 45 feet.
(c) Minimum side to side distance between buildings: 12 feet.
(3) Duplex, twins and patio homes.
(a) Minimum lot size: 3,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 30 feet.
(c) Minimum yards.
[1] Front yard: 25 feet.
[2] Side yard: 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 20 feet.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 60%.
(e) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(4) Multifamily apartment buildings.
(a) A fifty-foot perimeter setback from public streets and property
lines shall be required on all sides of the apartment portion of
the development. This perimeter setback shall be occupied by
a thirty-five-foot landscaped buffer, as provided for by
§§ 203-68 and 203-69, and shall not be encroached upon by any
accessory buildings or structure, other than fences and walls,
or by any off-street parking or loading facility.
(b) Minimum distance between buildings shall be as follows:
[1] Front wall to front wall: 50 feet.
[2] Side wall to either front or rear wall: 35 feet.
[3] Side wall to side wall: 25 feet.
§ 203-45 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-45
198:731
[4] Front to rear, rear to rear: 50 feet.
(c) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(5) Townhouses.
(a) Minimum lot size: 2,100 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum yards.
[1] Front yard with parking in front: 35 feet.
[2] Front yard with no parking in front: 15 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 20 feet.
(d) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(e) Access. The planned unit development shall have direct access
to a state or federal highway or a road identified as a county
road on the Gloucester County Official Map or a road identified
as an arterial or major collector road on an official municipal
map.
(f) Public water and public sewer shall be required for all
development within the planned unit development and in
adjacent areas covered by the Weatherby Commercial Overlay.
All development within the PUD District shall be connected to
public sewer and water systems, and said connection shall be
mandatory if public sewer and water lines exist within 500
linear feet of the closest lot line. In the event that public sewer
and water is unavailable within a distance of 500 feet from the
tract boundary, the lot shall be developed in accordance with
the standards found in the R-2 Residence District.
(g) Common open space and required public facilities shall be
provided as required by the Weatherby General Development
Plan.
(h) The schedule of development shall be as specified in the
Weatherby General Development Plan.
(i) The developer is encouraged to review its development
schedule with the Planning Board annually and may from time
to time request modifications to the development schedule.
The Planning Board shall hear all requests for amendments to
the development schedule and may waive or modify any
portion of the schedule if, in the Board's opinion, the developer
has demonstrated that, due to local market or general
economic conditions, strict adherence to the schedule would
result in an undue economic burden on the development.
§ 203-45 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-45
198:732
§ 203-46. FOC Flexible Office Commercial District.
The FOC Flexible Office Commercial District is designed to encourage more
intensive nonresidential uses along the Route 322 corridor that adhere to
strong design standards and in which planned, innovative and integrated
development is encouraged. A flexible mix of permitted uses is allowed,
including, office, light industrial, and warehouse/distribution uses, subject
to locational standards found in this article.
(j) Open space dedication for sensitive areas. Designated on-site
sensitive areas, consisting of statutory wetlands, surface water
and floodplains, shall be required to be protected in perpetuity.
Said requirements shall be satisfied by any of the following
means:
[1] Dedication to and acceptance by the municipality, but the
municipality is under no duty or obligation to accept such
a dedication.
[2] Dedication to and acceptance by the state, county or to a
duly constituted conservation trust, if they so choose to
accept.
[3] Creation, approval and recording of conservation
easements on the development plans that are coterminous
with, or encompassing of, the sensitive areas, in addition
to which there shall be placed upon the deed reciprocal
covenants or restrictions as a further measure of
protection.
A. Use regulations.
(1) Principal uses. In the FOC District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses:
(a) Kingsway Commercial Overlay, subject to the provisions of
§ 203-46D.
(b) Offices for administrative, executive, professional, business
sales and similar uses.
(c) Banks and other financial institutions.
(d) Recreation facilities.
(e) Business and household service uses including repair shops for
business equipment, appliances, and the shops of tradesmen
such as plumbers and electricians.
§ 203-45 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-46
198:733
(f) Warehouse and distribution uses, provided that they are
located at least 400 feet from the right-of-way of U.S. Route
322.
(g) Light manufacturing and assembly operations, provided that
they are located at least 400 feet from the right-of-way of U.S.
Route 322.
(h) Public transportation stations and shelters.
(i) Agriculture and horticulture, including farm markets.
(j) Breweries, distilleries, and wineries.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Uses and buildings incidental to the above permitted principal
uses.
(3) Conditional uses. In the FOC District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(a) Automobile dealerships for new cars and trucks, subject to
§ 203-66.
(b) Telecommunications towers and antenna, subject to the
provisions of § 203-50.
(c) Public libraries and museums subject to the following
conditions:
[1] Location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design being compatible with the neighborhood in which it
is to be located.
[2] No building or part thereof or any parking or loading area
shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any street line or lot
line.
[3] A site plan in accordance with the Woolwich Township site
plan requirements submitted to the Planning Board
pursuant to its conditional use review authority (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67).
(d) Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer, electricity
and gas 400 square feet or greater in size pursuant to the
requirements of § 203-39A(2)(e) and (f).
(e) Service stations and auto repair shops, subject to the special
requirements of § 203-66.
(f) Public and commercial garages, subject to the special
requirements of § 203-66.
(4) Prohibited uses.
§ 203-46 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-46
198:734
(a) Sexually oriented adult entertainment, video, or book shops.
B. Bulk and area regulations. Bulk standards are designed to encourage
the consolidation of smaller lots into larger tracts and to promote
integrated, planned development. Accordingly, bulk and area standards
are more restrictive for smaller parcels than for larger tracts, and all
area and bulk standards are controlled by the minimum lot areas.
(1) Minimum lot size: four acres, 10 acres, 25 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 350 feet, 500 feet, 1,000 feet.
(3) Minimum yards.
(a) Front yard.
[1] Parking screened by building: 50 feet, 50 feet, 50 feet.
[2] Parking not screened by building: 100 feet, 100 feet, 100
feet.
(b) Side yard (each, where applicable): 35 feet, 50 feet, 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet, 75 feet, 75 feet.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 10%, 12%, 15%.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.10, 0.12, 0.15.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 50%, 60%, 70%.
(7) Maximum building height, exclusive of parapet walls: 25 feet, 40
feet, 40 feet.
C. Site development requirements. All proposed development shall comply
with the applicable regulations set forth in Article VII of this chapter,
Chapter 149, Site Plan Review, and Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land,
and the following requirements: [Amended 5-4-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-05]
(1) All development in this district shall comply with the design
standards contained in § 203-49.
(2) Industrial parks and office parks may have more than one
freestanding principal building on a lot, more than one principal
permitted or conditional use on a lot and more than one principal
permitted or conditional use in a building, provided that:
(a) The development is designed in a unified and comprehensive
plan; and
(b) The development parcel is a minimum of five acres.
(3) Along both principal and secondary frontage in a proposed
development, it is required that, at a minimum, sidewalks and
§ 203-46 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-46
198:735
street trees be installed in accordance with municipal
specifications and of an appropriate and acceptable nature to the
Planning Board. In the event that such facilities are already present
or are otherwise to be provided, the Planning Board may require
provision of other reasonable amenities related to the
establishment or improvement of a streetscape environment. In
all cases, provision of streetscape amenities that are beyond and
in addition to sidewalks and street trees (such as benches, grass
strips, planters, statues and other street furniture) shall be
encouraged, subject to Planning Board approval.
(4) Where a development in the FOC District abuts any residential
district, special buffering improvements shall be mandatory within
required rear and/or side setbacks on the site. Said improvements
shall be designed so as to significantly reduce visibility, noise, litter
and (unlimited) pedestrian access and shall consist of combinations
of any of the following, at the discretion of the Planning Board, as
needed: dense plantings, including hedges, coniferous or broadleaf
evergreens; oversized earth berms; visually impermeable
fences or walls; retention of natural vegetation; and retention of
natural topographic features and watercourses. Buffers shall be in
accordance with §§ 203-68 and 203-69. Buffers may occur in
required yard areas, but the applicant's desire to place parking or
drive aisles within the required buffer area shall not constitute
grounds for zoning relief from this requirement.
(5) All development in the FOC District shall be connected to public
sewer and water systems when practical, and said connection shall
be mandatory if public sewer and water lines exist within 500 linear
feet of the closest lot line. In the event that public sewer and water
is unavailable within a distance of 500 feet from the edge of the
tract boundary closest to the available utility in question, a
maximum lot coverage of 50% of the amount otherwise authorized
by § 203-46B(5) shall be permitted.
(6) New or upgraded public roadways shall meet local engineering/
design standards and be dedicated to the municipality or other
appropriate governmental jurisdiction. On-site driveways may be
designated as site service drives and may be exempted from the
preceding requirements, unless they are judged to carry volumes
sufficient for the Planning Board to request their designation as
public streets in accordance with Article VII, § 203-65. Curbing
shall be required and curb cuts shall be designed so as to limit
vehicular access in accordance with proper traffic engineering
principles and the New Jersey Highway Access Code and, in doing
so, promote traffic safety and efficiency of flow.
(7) All parking areas and walkways shall be adequately illuminated for
security and safety purposes. The lighting plan in and around the
parking areas shall provide for non-glare lights focused downward.
All lighting shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient detail to
§ 203-46 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-46
198:736
allow a determination of the effects upon adjacent properties,
traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The objective is to minimize
undesirable off-premises effects.
(8) All rights-of-way as required by the Woolwich Township Master
Plan, by the County of Gloucester, or by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (as applicable) shall be offered for
dedication at the time of site plan application.
(9) Parking and loading. Parking and loading spaces shall be provided
in accordance with the regulations set forth in Article IX of this
chapter provided, however, that no parking shall be permitted in
any required front yard. When adjacent to any residential use,
loading areas shall be screened with walls to obscure their view
from the adjacent lot.
D. Kingsway Town Center and Commercial Overlay Districts. [Added
12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-02]
(1) Intent.
(a) It is the intent of this subsection to establish an area within the
FOC Zoning District where the most intensive commercial
shopping centers and office campuses can be concentrated, so
that the resulting potential for congestion can be more
effectively controlled by limiting their location to a carefully
regulated area in close proximity to the interchange of U.S.
Highway 322 and Interchange 2 of the New Jersey Turnpike.
Two such areas are identified on the Zoning Map as the
Kingsway Commercial Overlay and the Kingsway Town Center
Overlay.
(b) The Kingsway Town Center is subject to special regulations
designed to encourage the creation of a pedestrian-oriented
central area within the Township that contains an integrated
mix of retail, office, and entertainment uses that can serve as a
community focal point. The Kingsway Town Center will
encourage innovative planning techniques, which will facilitate
higher quality development that is consistent with the
recommendations in the Woolwich Township Master Plan.
(c) The Kingsway Commercial Overlay is intended for higherintensity
retail, commercial and office uses that are more
oriented to customers, clients and employees who will arrive
by automobile and who are not expected to walk to a
significant number of other destinations within the
development.
(d) It is the goal of both component overlay areas to provide
incentives in the form of increased building coverage,
increased impervious coverage and increased floor area ratio
to encourage the implementation of the Township Master Plan
§ 203-46 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-46
198:737
and a conceptual "bubble diagram-style" site plan submitted
for the Kingsway Town Center and Commercial Overlays as
part of a settlement agreement between Woolwich Township
and Woolwich Adult LLC.
(e) Kingsway Commercial and Town Center Overlays will
encourage a unified architectural and building scheme within
each section of the development, pedestrian-oriented
walkways connecting buildings within each section of the
development, unified landscaping and signage, coordinated
storm drainage, and common open space areas. Special
regulations shall be mandated to create the desired visual and
practical results.
(f) The provisions of the Kingsway Commercial and Town Center
Overlays shall apply only to those areas that are designated as
such on the Zoning Map which meet the minimum tract area
standard of this subsection.
(2) Use regulations.
(a) Principal uses. In the Kingsway Commercial Overlay and the
Kingsway Town Center Overlay, no building or premises shall
be used and no building shall be erected or altered which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used except for one or
more of the following uses, and in no case shall any commercial
or retail use be permitted in any area designated for off-street
parking or loading on the approved site plan: [Amended
5-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
[1] Retail sales and services, including but not limited to
supermarkets, wholesale clubs, lumber, hardware and
garden centers, convenience stores, the sale of a full range
of retail merchandise, exclusive of automobile products,
except when accessory to a retail store with a gross floor
area of 75,000 square feet or more, and related uses
without limitation;
[2] Offices for administrative, executive, professional,
business sales, government offices and similar uses,
provided that the use does not occur on the first floor
portion of a building within the Town Center Overlay;
[3] Personal service businesses, including hair salons, tanning
salons, nail salons, dry cleaning outlets, dressmaking or
tailor shops, shoe repair shops and related uses, except for
tattoo studios and body piercing establishments;
[4] Outpatient medical, rehabilitation or dental facilities,
provided that the use does not occur on the first floor
portion of a building within the Town Center Overlay;
§ 203-46 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-46
198:738
[5] Banks and other financial institutions, including drive-in
facilities;
[6] Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments located
inside and outside and fast-food restaurants without
limitation;
[7] Theaters for motion pictures and live performances;
[8] Amusement, recreation and leisure uses not otherwise
prohibited;
[9] Shopping centers;
[10] Bakeries, confectioners, health clubs, dance and exercise
studios;
[11] Hotels, motels, conference centers, bed-and-breakfasts,
and inns;
[12] Day-care establishments for children and adults;
[13] Public and private elementary, middle and high schools,
subject to the requirements of the minimum lot sizes as
established by the New Jersey State Department of
Education for school facilities, provided that the use is not
permitted in the Kingsway Town Center Overlay and
subject further to the following:
[a] Location of access driveways, landscaping and site
plan design shall be compatible with the
neighborhood in which it is to be located.
[b] No building or part thereof or any parking or loading
area shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any street
line or lot line.
[14] Funeral homes and mortuaries, provided that the use is
not permitted in the Kingsway Town Center Overlay;
[15] Billboards, provided that the use is not permitted in the
Kingsway Towns Center Overlay; that they are designed
and constructed so that they may be viewed from the New
Jersey Turnpike; and that they are not located within 750
feet of any other billboard;
[16] Public transportation stations and shelters;
[17] Agriculture and horticulture, including farm markets;
[18] Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the
above permitted principal uses;
§ 203-46 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-46
198:739
(b) Conditional uses. In the Kingsway Commercial or Town Center
Overlay Districts, the following uses may be permitted as
conditional uses:
[1] Telecommunications towers and antennas, subject to the
provisions of § 203-50.
[2] Public libraries and museums, subject to:
[a] Location of access driveways, landscaping and site
plan design being compatible with the neighborhood
in which it is to be located.
[b] No building or part thereof or any parking or loading
area shall be located nearer than 35 feet to any street
line or lot line.
[c] A site plan in accordance with the Woolwich Township
site plan requirements submitted to the Planning
Board pursuant to its conditional use review authority
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67).
[3] Church or other place of worship subject to:
[a] Location of access driveways, landscaping and site
plan design being compatible with the neighborhood
in which it is to be located.
[b] No building or part therefor or any parking or loading
area shall be located nearer than 35 feet to any street
line or lot line.
[c] A parish house, rectory or parsonage which shall
conform to the requirements for a single-family
detached dwelling.
[d] A site plan in accordance with Woolwich Township site
plan requirements submitted to the Planning Board
pursuant to its conditional use review authority
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67).
[4] Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer,
electricity and gas, 400 square feet or greater in size,
pursuant to the requirements of § 203-40A(2)(e) and (f).
(c) Prohibited uses within the Kingsway Commercial and Town
Center Overlays:
[1] Sexually oriented adult entertainment, video, or book
shops.
(3) Bulk and area regulations. No waivers or variances shall be
required to create a financial subdivision. A lot within a larger
planned development may be subdivided and conveyed to an entity
§ 203-46 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-46
198:740
separate from the owner of the planned development, provided
that the entire planned development is operated as a uniform
development and is subject to reciprocal cross easements
controlling access, parking, common area maintenance and the
like. In the FOC District bulk standards are designed to encourage
the consolidation of smaller lots into larger tracts and to promote
integrated, planned development. The same concept applies to the
Kingsway Commercial Overlay and to the Kingsway Town Center
and the following standards shall apply in the overlays:
(a) Minimum tract area, including the combined area of lands
within both the Kingsway Commercial and Town Center
Overlays: 100 acres.
(b) Standards for retail or shopping center development in the
Kingsway Commercial Overlay.
[1] Minimum lot area: 25 acres.
[2] Minimum aggregate street frontage.
[a] Lots fronting on Rt. 322: 500 feet.
[b] Lots not fronting on Rt. 322: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum setbacks for buildings.
[a] Front yard: 25 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Each, where applicable, not adjacent to a
residential use or district: 25 feet.
[ii] Each, where applicable, adjacent to a residential
use or district: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Not adjacent to a residential use or district: 50
feet.
[ii] Adjacent to a residential use or district: 75 feet.
[4] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.20.
[5] Maximum total gross floor area (square feet).
[a] Power center: 845,064.
[b] Freestanding retail anchor store: 230,000.
[6] Maximum building coverage: 0.20.
[7] Maximum impervious coverage: 0.80.
§ 203-46 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-46
198:741
[8] Maximum building height; exclusive of parapet walls not
exceeding a height of five feet: 42 feet.
(c) Standards for office parks in the Kingsway Commercial
Overlay:
[1] Minimum lot area: four acres.
[2] Minimum aggregate street frontage: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum setbacks for buildings:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Each, where applicable, not adjacent to a
residential use or district: 25 feet.
[ii] Each, where applicable, adjacent to a residential
use or district: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Not adjacent to a residential use or district: 35
feet.
[ii] Adjacent to a residential use or district: 75 feet.
[4] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.25.
[5] Maximum total gross floor area (square feet): 1,034,550.
[6] Maximum building coverage: 0.25.
[7] Maximum impervious coverage: 0.80.
[8] Maximum building height, exclusive of parapet walls not
exceeding a height of five feet: 60 feet.
(d) Standards for the Kingsway Town Center Overlay:
[1] Minimum lot area: 25 acres.
[2] Minimum aggregate street frontage: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum perimeter setbacks (not applicable to individual
buildings).
[a] Front yard: 35 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Each, where applicable, not adjacent to a
residential use or district): 35 feet.
§ 203-46 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-46
198:742
[ii] Each, where applicable, adjacent to a residential
use or district): 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Not adjacent to a residential use or district: 35
feet.
[ii] Adjacent to a residential use or district: 75 feet.
[4] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.25.
[5] Maximum total gross floor area (square feet): 718,740.
[6] Maximum building coverage, exclusive of outdoor sales
areas not enclosed within a building: 0.25.
[7] Maximum impervious coverage: 0.80.
[8] Maximum building height, exclusive of parapet walls not
exceeding a height of five feet: 60 feet.
[9] Special design standards applicable to the Kingsway Town
Center Overlay:
[a] The Kingsway Town Center shall not require yard
setbacks in the traditional sense. Building setbacks
and buffers shall instead be regulated from adjacent
uses, streets and parking areas.
[b] No setback is required from adjacent buildings, but
when provided, buildings shall have a minimum
separation of 25 feet.
[c] Buildings shall be set back from contiguous adjacent
lots by streets or a landscaped buffer, as herein
defined, as shown on the approved general
development plan or on a subsequent approved
preliminary and final site plan.
[d] Buildings shall be set back from US Route 322 by a
landscaped buffer and screen, as herein defined, not
less than 35 feet in width. The buffer shall be
continuous, except for sidewalks, driveway and road
crossings, and permitted signage. No surface parking
lots shall be permitted between the buildings and this
landscaped area.
[e] Buildings shall be set back from any interior road as
shown on the approved general development plan or
on a subsequent approved preliminary and final site
plan. The area between the building and the street
shall be occupied by sidewalks, landscaping, including
§ 203-46 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-46
198:743
street trees, plazas, street furniture, lighting and
permitted signage only.
(4) Landscaping and buffers shall be in accordance with §§ 203-68 and
203-69; provided, however, that the applicant shall have the option
of planting street and shade trees at an initial caliper of two inches
to 2 1/2 inches in return for providing 1.5 times the quantity of
trees otherwise required. All other landscaping requirements of the
Township Code, including compensatory plantings, shall be
applicable, excepting only facade plantings as modified above.
(5) In the event of a conflict between the maximum permitted
impervious coverage and requirements of this subsection for
landscaping off-street parking and loading and for vehicular and
pedestrian circulation ways; the standards for landscaping, offstreet
parking and loading, and vehicular and pedestrian
circulation shall take precedent over the standards for impervious
coverage.
(6) When parking structures are utilized, the height of the structure
shall not exceed the height of the building that it is designed to
serve, provided that said structure is not located within 100 feet of
any street frontage.
(7) Every development in the Town Center shall provide the following:
(a) Pedestrian and vehicular connections with adjacent properties,
to facilitate circulation.
(b) A reduction in the number of curb cuts onto existing streets to
the greatest extent practical, consistent with the principles of
highway safety.
(c) All developments shall be constructed in a uniformed
architectural and building scheme and shall provide a unified
landscaping and signage plan.
(d) A coordinated storm drainage and common space plan shall be
submitted and maintained by the landowner.
(e) All uses in this district shall be subject to the design standards
contained in § 203-49. In addition, the design of the
development shall place particular emphasis upon pedestrian
circulation and aesthetics, including integrated architecture,
landscaping and screening so as to ensure cohesive
development. Mixed use buildings are permitted. The design
shall be governed by the following criteria:
[1] Architectural style of the development shall be designed to
avoid the massive scale and uniform impersonal
appearances of a "big box" commercial center through
facade ornamentation, building offsets, window
§ 203-46 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-46
198:744
treatments, variation in rooflines, entry treatments and
building materials.
[2] First floor activities that promote multiple pedestrian
destinations, such as retail, restaurant, banking and
entertainment uses, are to be encouraged.
(f) All interior roads and collector drive aisles shall he private.
When a zero building setback from the street is implemented,
said private streets are required to have an effective cartway
width of a minimum of 24 feet. When on-street parking is
proposed, an additional ten-foot width will be added to the
cartway for each side of the street containing on-street
parking. Sidewalks, street trees and other required
landscaping shall be provided outside of this cartway.
(g) Buildings shall be sited to form a progression of pedestrianoriented
open spaces, or promenades, with visual as well as
pedestrian connections between such spaces. Vehicular
circulation is permitted through these spaces, as is limited onstreet
parking. Parking lots are not permitted in these
pedestrian areas and shall be screened by buildings or
landscaping. Open air or enclosed pedestrian-oriented spaces
shall act as connecters of buildings and shall contain such
amenities as benches, water features, fountains, opportunities
for entertainment, and seating areas to provide a sense of
place and orientation for its users.
(h) The following additional design standards shall be required:
[1] The project shall strive to achieve the goal of a pedestrianoriented
village.
[2] Loading facilities shall be provided in a manner that is not
visually or functionally obtrusive to patrons using the
parking areas.
[3] One or more squares or plazas shall be provided, which
are meant to identify places where people would
congregate. Such places should he designed and built as a
park or gathering place, marked with special pavements,
shade trees, benches and other pedestrian amenities
approved by the Township. The squares or plazas shall be
the design focus of the development.
[4] Walkways shall be provided as follows:
[a] Walkways, not less than six feet in width, shall be
provided along any building facade that is adjacent to
a parking area or that adjoins a connecting
passageway from a parking area to the pedestrianoriented
open space and walkways of not less than 10
§ 203-46 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-46
198:745
§ 203-47. I-C Cemetery District.114 [Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-10]
feet shall be provided along any building facade that
contains a main pedestrian entrance to the building.
A. Purpose. The intent of the I-C Cemetery District is to provide
appropriate regulations to maximize and efficiently use land for the
interment of human remains and related services, and to harmonize
and blend the appearance of cemeteries with adjoining districts.
B. Use.
(1) Principal use. Within the I-C District, all functions, buildings, and
structures used for or associated with the interment of human
remains and related services and purposes are permitted. The
following functions, buildings, and structures are specifically
permitted:
(a) Administration/office building; provides space for:
[1] Meeting with purchasers and owners of interment sites;
[2] Records regarding interment sites;
[3] Administrative and clerical employees; and
[4] Bathrooms for administrative and clerical employees and
clients.
(b) Maintenance building; provides space for:
[1] Storage of interment and maintenance machinery; and
[2] Lockers and lunchroom for maintenance supervisors and
employees.
(c) Features/monuments; serving:
[1] As decoration;
[2] Social/memorial functions and purposes; and
[3] Religious functions and purposes.
(d) Mausoleums: provide aboveground interment of human
remains.
(e) Columbaria: provide for interment of ashes of human remains.
(f) Grounds burials: provide belowground interment of human
remains.
114. Editor's Note: Former § 203-47, Conservation Overlay District, was repealed 8-1-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-25.
§ 203-46 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-47
198:746
(g) Assembly buildings: provide space for:
[1] Social and religious gatherings.
(h) Spoils pit/trash enclosure: limited to compostable materials
and safe (tested) soil; it is specifically not intended to be a
dump.
(2) The use of property for the interment of human remains and related
services is not limited to the functions, buildings, or structures
listed above. Any functions, buildings, or structures used for the
interment of human remains and related services may be combined
or separated. Ground burials shall not be limited as to the number
of interments provided.
C. Bulk and area regulations (general).
(1) Landscape buffer [includes a decorative fence and shrubs/trees
(approximately 50% transparent)].
(a) Twenty-five feet from any right-of-way.
(b) Twenty-five feet from any property line not adjacent to a rightof-
way.
(c) The landscape buffer shall include a decorative fence in
conjunction with trees and shrubs (approximately 50%
transparent) along street frontages and up to 100 feet back
along side property lines, and a living fence consisting of a
black vinyl-coated (cyclone) fence in conjunction with trees
and shrubs (50% transparency) for all other areas of the side
property line set back further than 100 feet from the street
frontage. At the Joint Land Use Board's discretion, existing
living fences will be considered for appropriateness in
satisfying the intent of this section.
(2) Building setback.
(a) Fifty feet from any right-of-way.
(b) Fifty feet from any property line not adjacent to a right-of-way.
(c) Buffers and setbacks shall be measured from future rights-ofway
articulated in the TDR circulation plan.
(3) Building height.
(a) Twenty-five feet at the setback line.
(b) Mausoleums, features/monuments, and assembly structures
may be 45 feet in height.
(c) For every one foot of increase in the height of a mausoleum,
feature/monument, or assembly structure above 25 feet, the
§ 203-47 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-47
198:747
closest edge of that structure must be an additional five feet
further from the nearest setback line.
(4) Minimum lot size/area.
(a) The minimum lot size/area is 50 acres.
(5) Coverage.
(a) If adjacent to a rural or a low-density district, then the
maximum building coverage shall be 20%, and the maximum
impervious surface shall be 40%.
(b) If adjacent to a high-density district, then the maximum
building coverage shall be 30%, and the maximum impervious
surface shall be 50%.
(c) The I-C district, except as specifically provided by this section,
is exempt from any municipal resolution, ordinance, or
regulation governing or requiring conservation easements,
curbing, directional or traffic signs, drainage, fencing,
landscaping, lighting, parking lots, sidewalks, streets, trash
collection, or trees.
(d) No provision of this section shall be construed to impose any
conditions that create any hardship or inconvenience, however
slight, with respect to social or religious customs, observances,
or practices.
D. Access. Emergency and ADA access shall be available to all structures
on the entire site and otherwise comply with federal ADA laws. Access/
circulation/parking pathways shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. To the
extent that employee or visitor safety is not severely compromised, they
shall be designed to allow temporary parking alongside each edge, and
to allow surface flow of drainage to and over adjacent or nearby open
space or ground burial lawns. Roadways having the shortest route from
the public right-of-way to an administrative, maintenance, or assembly
building shall be designed to accomodate emergency vehicles. The
entrance points must be coordinated with the TDR master plan grid, to
the greatest extent possible.
E. Lighting. Accent lighting is permitted, provided that the applicant
minimizes lighting shining directly on adjacent properties. Security
lighting is permitted for administrative offices and maintenance
buildings, provided that the applicant minimizes lighting shining
directly on adjacent properties.
F. Landscaping. Cemeteries shall not be subject to any municipally
imposed landscaping requirements along interior access/circulation/
parking pathways. Cemeteries shall be subject to municipal
landscaping requirements for institutional districts along public
roadways, drainage basins, parking lots, and administrative,
§ 203-47 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-47
198:748
maintenance, and assembly buildings. Any question as to the sufficiency
of the existing vegetation and other landscaping, specifically alongside
property lines, shall be resolved by the Joint Land Use Board Planner.
G. Drainage. To the extent that such a design is safe and practicable, the
design should allow surface flow of drainage to and over adjacent or
nearby ground burial lawns and open spaces.
H. Fences. The fencing along any public right-of-way shall be decorative. If
the applicant owns or operates other cemeteries, then the style of the
decorative fencing shall be allowed to match other cemeteries as much
as is practicable, where the Township will not unreasonably withhold its
consent as to the specific type or style of fencing. At the Joint Land Use
Board's discretion, existing living fences will be considered for
appropriateness in satisfying the intent of this section.
I. Signage. A lighted identification sign not exceeding 32 square feet in
area, as measured using the minimum area containing its content, is
permitted at the main entrance and at any point along the edge of the
property in common with a public right-of-way, provided that such signs
are separated by at least 500 feet and are not located within the rightof-
way line and shall not be placed within a sight triangle. Only indirect
lighting is permitted for the signage; internal illumination is prohibited.
J. Specific structures/functions.
(1) Administration/office building.
(a) Parking. At least one parking space shall be provided for each
person working in the administration building, plus two
additional spaces for customers/visitors, plus at least one
handicapped-accessible space.
(2) Maintenance building.
(a) Parking. At least one parking space shall be provided for each
person working at the maintenance building.
(b) Landscaping. The maintenance building shall be landscaped so
as to minimize its impact on and harmonize its appearance
with the landscaping provided in the cemetery.
(c) Access. An additional access point may be provided for the
maintenance building. The driveway to the maintenance
building must be at least 12 feet in width.
(3) Features/monuments, and garden-style mausoleums and
columbaria.
(a) Landscaping. The applicant at its discretion shall provide
appropriate landscaping for each feature, monument, and
garden-style mausoleum or columbarium.
§ 203-47 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-47
198:749
§ 203-48. Light Industrial/Office District.
The specific intent in creating the Light Industrial Office District is to
make provision for light industrial and related office and research uses to
create employment centers in those portions of the Township best suited
for such use by reason of accessibility to the major circulation system and
compatibility with adjacent uses. In view of the predominantly agricultural
nature of the Township at present, provision is also made for continuation
of agricultural uses.
(4) Assembly structures.
(a) Parking.
[1] If adjacent to a rural or a low-density district, then the
applicant shall provide one parking place for every eight
fixed seats or 350 square feet, whichever amount is lesser,
plus at least one handicapped space.
[2] If adjacent to a high-density district, then the applicant
shall provide one parking place for every four fixed seats
or 175 square feet, whichever amount is lesser, plus at
least one handicapped space.
(b) Landscaping. The applicant shall provide appropriate
landscaping for each assembly structure.
(5) Trash enclosure. The trash enclosure(s) or receptacle(s) shall be
landscaped and fenced so as to provide easy access and to hide it
from view.
A. Use regulations. [Amended 5-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05;
8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
(1) Principal uses. In the Light Industrial Office District, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered
which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one
of the following uses:
(a) Light manufacturing, light industrial, and light assembly as
defined in this chapter, which does not have characteristics
which are noxious, injurious, offensive or hazardous to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(b) Offices for administrative, executive, professional, business
sales and similar uses, the normal attributes of which do not
involve the storage, exchange or delivery of merchandise to the
general public.
(c) Research, experimental or testing laboratories.
§ 203-47 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-48
198:750
(d) Retail sales and services, provided that such use is within a
planned unit development and does not exceed 15% of the
gross floor area of each office building.
(e) The warehousing and distribution of goods and products,
provided that no goods are sold at retail from the premises.
(f) Repair and maintenance of equipment and machinery normally
utilized in any of the uses permitted in this district.
(g) Service uses, such as restaurants, fitness centers, office
furniture and supplies, auto and equipment rentals.
(h) Multiple-use buildings that combine office, storage and other
uses permitted by this section.
(i) Agriculture and horticulture, including farm markets located
on and operated in conjunction with farm property qualifying
for farmland assessment.
(j) Public playgrounds, conservation areas and parks.
(k) Breweries, distilleries, and wineries.
(l) Brewpubs.
(m) Any use of the same general character as the above permitted
uses.
(n) Any combination of the above.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Uses and structures incidental to the above permitted principal
uses.
(3) Conditional uses. In the Light Industrial Office District, the
following uses may be permitted as conditional uses:
(a) Utility facilities including telephone, water, sewer, electric and
gas 400 square feet or greater in size subject to the following:
[1] Project is designed to be structurally compatible and in
keeping with the architectural character of the
neighborhood in which it is to be located.
[2] Project is in keeping with the Master Plan or Utility Master
Plan of the Township.
[3] Project conforms with yard setbacks for the district in
which it is to be located.
[4] Adequate landscaping in conformance with standards
established in Chapter 149, Site Plan Review, and Chapter
163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-48 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-48
198:751
[5] Substation, electric and gas facilities, and all other public
utilities, 400 square feet or greater in size, subject to the
following requirements:
[a] No storage of materials and trucks and no repair
facilities or housing of repair crews, except within
completely enclosed buildings.
[6] Transmission lines, transmitting and receiving antennae
or aerials, subject to the following special requirements:
[a] No transmission line shall exceed 55 feet in height.
[b] No transmission line shall be of such height or
position that aircraft warning lights are required by
any governmental agency.
(b) Church or other place of worship pursuant to the following
requirements:
[1] Location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design being compatible with the neighborhood in which it
is to be located.
[2] No building or part thereof or any parking or loading area
shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any street line or lot
line.
[3] A parish house, rectory or parsonage, which shall conform
to the requirements for a single-family detached dwelling.
[4] A site plan in accordance with the Woolwich Township site
plan requirements submitted to the Planning Board
pursuant to its conditional use review authority (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67).
[5] Sewerage disposal and water supply facilities in
accordance with all relevant requirements of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the
Gloucester County Health Department codes. This
requirement shall apply to all proposed methods, including
joint or individual septic systems, on-lot package
treatment plants, joint or individual groundwater supply,
connection by special permission to public systems outside
of the Township or to public systems, etc.
[6] Perimeter buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be required in
compliance with §§ 203-68 and 203-69.
(c) Public and commercial garages subject to the special
requirements of § 203-66.
§ 203-48 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-48
198:752
(d) Telecommunications facilities, subject to the provisions of
§ 203-50.
B. Bulk and area regulations.
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(2) Maximum building height: 40 feet.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage: 65%.
(4) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.40. [Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-13]
(5) Minimum street frontage: 40 feet.
(6) Front yard paving setback: 25 feet.
(7) Front yard building setback: 40 feet.
(8) Side yard setback (each): 30 feet.
(9) Rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(10) Separation between buildings: 40 feet.
C. Design standards. All uses shall comply with the design standards set
forth in Article VII, § 203-65, of this chapter and Chapter 149, Site Plan
Review, and Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land.
D. Performance standards. All uses shall comply with the performance
standards set forth in Article VII, § 203-65, of this chapter.
E. Signs. Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Article VIII of this
chapter.
F. Parking and loading. Parking and loading spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the regulations set forth in Article IX of this chapter.
G. Mixed uses. Combinations of permitted uses within any individual
building may be proposed as the developer or owner sees fit.
H. Site development requirements. All proposed development shall comply
with the regulations set forth in Article VII of this chapter, Chapter 149,
Site Plan Review, and Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land, and the
following requirements:
(1) Along both principal and secondary frontage in a proposed
development, it is required that, at a minimum, sidewalks and
street trees be installed in accordance with municipal
specifications and of an appropriate and acceptable nature to the
Planning Board. In the event that such facilities are already present
or are otherwise to be provided, the Planning Board may require
provision of other reasonable amenities related to the
establishment or improvement of a streetscape environment. In all
§ 203-48 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-48
198:753
§ 203-49. Design standards.
cases, provision of streetscape amenities that are beyond and in
addition to sidewalks and street trees (such as benches, grass
strips, planters and other street furniture) shall be encouraged,
subject to Planning Board approval.
(2) Provision shall be made for safe and convenient pedestrian access,
by creating links within and between parcels, sites or other distinct
units of development, to the maximum feasible degree.
(3) Provision shall be made for connection to public sewer and water
systems, where either or both of these systems is available.
(4) New or upgraded public roadways shall meet local engineering/
design standards and be dedicated to the municipality or other
appropriate governmental jurisdiction. On-site travelways may be
designated as site service drives and be exempted from the
preceding requirements, unless they are judged to carry volumes
sufficient for the Planning Board to request their designation as
public streets, in accordance with Chapter 149, Site Plan Review,
and Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land. Curbing shall be required
and curb cuts shall be designed so as to limit vehicular access in
accordance with proper traffic engineering principles, and in doing
so, promote traffic safety and efficiency of flow.
(5) In locations where permitted but not fully compatible uses abut one
another, such as residences adjoining commercial or office
development, adequate screening and buffering shall be provided,
consisting of buffer strips, visually impermeable fences or walks,
earth berms, trees and shrubs, or combinations of the preceding, in
accordance with planned development design standards, as well as
§ 203-65 of this chapter.
A. Design review purpose. The purpose of this architectural design section
is to safeguard the heritage, environment, and living quality of
Woolwich Township, for present and future generations. It shall ensure
that among other things, general design, arrangement, and use of
materials for proposed buildings and structures is complimentary and
harmonious to the character and environment of Woolwich Township,
fosters civic pride among its residents, and contributes to the overall
economic development of the Township. Overall design character of
buildings shall be controlled to ensure that the appearance and quality
of Township communities is not eroded by poor design that is either
monotonous or cluttered. The architecture, project layout (site design),
landscaping, and signage shall contribute to a harmonious and diverse
character, while maintaining a strong sense of unity. Monotony shall be
avoided. Interest and diversity shall be implemented, while avoiding
chaotic or discordant design schemes.
§ 203-48 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-49
198:754
B. Applicability. Evaluation on such factors described above shall apply to
all nonresidential structures, regardless of zone, and will be reviewed
and approved by the Woolwich Township Planning Board in the best
interest of the residents of Woolwich Township.
C. Architectural styles. Existing primary architectural styles within the
Township generally include vernacular, colonial revival, Georgian
revival, and Queen Anne victorian. The design of new buildings should
be representative of the current era, yet incorporated with design
elements of existing primary architectural styles of the Township.
(1) Vernacular. Floor plans are square, T or L in shape. Exterior
features include raised front porches, wood siding, or masonry
walls, various pitched gable roofs, and symmetrical fenestration on
the front facade.
(2) Colonial revival. Wood frame rectangular structures having wood
or brick exteriors. Most buildings have symmetrical floor plans with
flanking wings, roof forms such as hipped, double-pitched, and
mansard. Other features include double-hung multipaned windows,
pediment dormers, raised porticos, and fan lighting entries.
(3) Georgian revival. The overall features may be described as
symmetrical composition enriched with classical detail. Common
features include wood siding on wood frame construction, or red
brick siding. Roofs can be hipped, or gambrel shaped, and eaves
are generally detailed as a classical cornice. The central portion of
the facade may project and have a pediment, with or without
pilasters.
(4) Queen Anne victorian. Queen Anne styles have asymmetrical
shapes characterized by bays, and prominent, varied rooflines.
Common characteristics are rich yet simple ornament, a variety of
materials including wood, terra cotta, stone, and pressed metal,
expansive porches, bays, and irregular roof lines with many
dormers and chimneys.
D. Building and structure design. Critical attention shall be given to
building materials, use of color and texture, building or structure
massing and height as they relate to site conditions, and harmonious
integration with similar existing elements in neighboring buildings or
structures. Buildings or structures shall be designed to be part of
individual communities or streetscapes that are appropriate to
Woolwich Township. Prototype or formula buildings and color schemes
are undesirable unless they conform to the standards of this section.
(1) Facades.
(a) Building facades shall emphasize the architectural philosophy
of relief and rhythm. Rhythm should be used in the design to
provide interest and variety, and avoid monotony. Details that
create shade, and cast shadows can be used to provide visual
§ 203-49 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-49
198:755
relief to the building. Buildings shall be broken into a series of
volumes that lessen the overall mass.
(b) Building facades shall be segmented with architectural details
such as recesses, projections, overhangs, canopies or porticos,
arcades, raised parapets, peaked roof forms, integral planters,
and other similar features. Building facades greater than 60
feet in length (including separate buildings that are attached),
shall incorporate a minimum of three architecture elements as
described above. Recesses or projections shall extend a
minimum of three feet from the primary building wall plane.
(c) There shall be no uninterrupted walls greater than 40 feet in
length. The length of the building shall visually appear to be
proportional to the height, using a rate of 2.5 times the height
of the building equal to the length. Architectural details may be
utilized to create the appearance of segmented buildings
where several smaller freestanding buildings are not feasible.
(2) Roofs. Variation of building rooflines is encouraged. Use of gable,
mansard, hipped, saltbox, gambrel, pyramidal, and shed roof styles
are recommended. Use of flat roofs should be avoided unless
hidden by parapet walls.
(3) Windows. Window proportions shall be balanced against the overall
building size. Consideration shall be given to cohesive fenestration.
(4) Exterior materials. The building exterior shall be composed of one
primary or dominant material and not more than two additional
materials. The dominant material shall be utilized on all exterior
sides of the building. Dominant exterior materials may include
brick, stone, stucco (including exterior insulation and finish
systems, EIFS), wood, and split-face concrete masonry units.
Dominant exterior materials may not include smooth-face concrete
masonry units, unarticulated tilt-up concrete panels, aluminum
siding, vinyl siding, or glass that is highly reflective or mirrored.
The texture of the building materials should enhance the design
appearance.
(5) Exterior colors. The building exterior color shall be composed of
nonreflective, subtle, neutral earth tones. The use of high-intensity
colors such as bright reds, oranges or yellows shall not be
permitted. Metallic colors and “black” shall also be prohibited.
Building trim and/or accents may feature complimentary brighter
colors that are compatible with the primary building color. Color
schemes shall be harmonious and complimentary with adjacent
structures and developments. Neon tube lighting shall not be used
for building trim or accent.
E. Site design.
§ 203-49 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-49
198:756
(1) Complexes. Where the development is a complex of buildings, such
as a shopping center or an office or industrial park with its own
design guidelines, the complex should have a strong sense of place
and unity of design. The complex should not be out of keeping with
the surrounding buildings, but may clearly establish its own
identity. The following shall be used in evaluating the complex. The
complex shall have a sense of place. This should be accomplished
by several elements:
(a) Commonality of materials and style.
(b) A uniform sign package that limits style of letters, colors, and
has rules for size, location and height, based on building
importance in the complex.
(c) An element or elements that provide a strong identifying
image. The strength of the image should be related and
proportional to the scale of the development. A small project
should have an image that is more closely related to neighbors,
while a large regional facility should have greater
differentiation from its neighbors. Features such as a clock
tower, fountain, sculpture, or corner building that has a strong
image are ways in which a strong identity may be created.
(2) Orientation and siting. In the case of freestanding buildings or
structures, and depending on individual site characteristics,
consideration shall be given to site design that provides a desirable
visual composition, avoids blocking natural vistas, and provides
desirable and pleasing space enclosures.
(3) Screening. Careful screening of undesirable design elements such
as storage areas, loading areas, trash bins, mechanical equipment
(ground level or roof-mounted) is critical. These areas and items
shall be screened from any adjacent residential district or use,
highway, road, street or accessway. Trash and storage bins shall be
located in the rear yards of the building or structure, or as
recommended by the Planning Board, and screened. Screening
shall be accomplished and render instant effect by either
architectural design or landscaped buffer or combination thereof,
or as otherwise deemed acceptable by the Planning Board. Earthtone
colors shall be used to maintain the theme established by the
primary building colors.
F. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ARCADE — A covered passageway, often between streets with shops or
stalls. A structure composed of a series of arches supported by columns.
CANOPY — An ornamental projection over a door, window, niche, etc.
Also a roof-like covering supported by columns or other device.
§ 203-49 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-49
198:757
CORNICE — The uppermost section of moldings along the top of a wall
or just below a roof.
DORMER — A roof projection, normally with a window that is built out
from the slope of a roof. The dormer has its own roof, which may be flat,
arched, or pointed.
EAVE — The edge of a roof. Eaves usually project beyond the side of the
building.
EIFS — Exterior insulation finish system, or EIFS, is a synthetic stuccocladding
used on exterior walls in both commercial and residential
construction. EIFS uses a stucco-like polymer-based outer coating
containing a plastic resin, which makes the coating softer and more
flexible than traditional hard-coat stucco.
FACADE — The main front of a building.
FANLIGHT — A semicircular or semielliptical window, normally over a
doorway or another window.
FENESTRATION — The arrangement and proportioning of windows in
a building, their size, placement, style, etc.
GABLE — The triangular upper part of a wall closing the end of a ridged
roof.
GAMBREL ROOF — A roof with its slope broken by an obtuse angle,
the lower slope being steeper, and the upper slope gentler. Many farms
have gambrel roofs.
HIP ROOF — A roof sloping directly in from the walls on every side, and
thus having no gable ends.
MANSARD — A roof divided into a steep lower part and a less steep
upper part on all four sides.
PARAPET — A low wall projecting from the edge of a platform, terrace,
or roof.
PEDIMENT — The gable over the front of a building with a two-pitched
roof, triangular in classical architecture, later arched or broken at the
peak.
PILASTER — A rectangular column engaged in a wall. The pilaster
projects only slightly from the wall, and often has a base, a shaft, and a
capital. Greek revival homes often have pilasters.
PORTICO — A colonnade or covered passageway in classical
architecture.
PYRAMIDAL — A hipped roof that forms a pyramid shape.
RELIEF — The projection of a figure above the ground or plane on
which it is formed.
RHYTHM — A regular or harmonious pattern created by lines, forms,
and colors.
§ 203-49 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-49
198:758
§ 203-50. Telecommunications towers, antennas, and related
facilities.
SALTBOX — Similar to a gable roof, but the two sides are not
symmetrical.
SHED — A sloped roof, usually a single plane.
G. Design review process.
(1) The subsections above are set forth as design guidelines.
Additional architectural elements sought to be applied to any new
construction or rehabilitation to existing buildings shall be
submitted to the Woolwich Township Planning Board for approval.
(2) The Woolwich Township Committee reserves the right to establish
an Architectural Design Advisory Board from which the Planning
Board may request advice and recommendations. The advice and
recommendations from the Architectural Design Advisory Board
shall be made in writing and submitted to the Planning Board.
H. Submittal requirements. Colored renderings of the proposed new
structure, renovation or rehabilitation shall be submitted for review.
Renderings shall depict all building elevations, including a roof plan,
and shall be drawn at a scale of one-fourth inch equals one foot, or as
appropriate to adequately and accurately convey the details and overall
appearance of the proposed structure(s). Rendering colors shall
represent the true color of the proposed building materials, and where
appropriate or requested, actual building material samples shall be
submitted to clearly show the colors and textures of the proposed
materials of construction.
A. Telecommunications towers, antenna, and related facilities shall be
permitted as conditional uses in the nonresidential districts where they
are authorized by this chapter, subject to the following:
(1) Location on an existing telecommunications tower, building, water
tower, or similar facility shall be utilized prior to consideration of
any new sites for towers.
(a) Said facilities shall be painted the same color as the structure
on which it is located.
(b) Welding on a water tower shall be done in such a manner that
no peeling of paint shall occur on either the interior or external
sides of the tank.
(c) When new masts or antennas are added to preexisting towers,
they shall be spaced so as to create the minimal possible signal
interference with other carriers and to promote the maximum
colocation of masts and antennas from other carriers.
§ 203-49 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-50
198:759
(2) Where existing structures are infeasible or unavailable to provide a
reasonable level of service to the carrier, they shall be permitted
only when on a monopole-style tower that does not exceed a height
of 150 feet. Permission to construct such a tower, or to add
antennas to an existing tower, shall be granted only upon
presentation of the following information, to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board:
(a) Municipally owned land shall be considered first as a site for
telecommunications facilities if existing facilities are
unavailable or unsuitable.
(b) A radio frequency coverage map shall be presented and
explained, showing the coverage area of the specific applicant
carrier, before and after installation of the new facilities.
(c) Photo simulations of the facility, taken from the surrounding
area, showing views of the site after installation is complete.
(d) Certifications must be provided that the carrier has a valid
license from the Federal Communications Commission and that
it meets all applicable federal and state safety regulations and/
or guidelines, relating to RF emissions and the structural
stability of the facility, taking into account 110% of the
maximum wind load that can be anticipated in this area.
(e) Base areas, including equipment shelters, shall be surrounded
with a six-foot chain link fence. The use of barbed wire is
prohibited.
(f) The fenced base area shall be surrounded by an opaque
evergreen landscape screen with a height at time of
installation equal to six feet.
(g) Any company proposing to erect a new tower shall design it to
accommodate a minimum of five total carriers and shall submit
a letter of intent to the Township, pledging their willingness to
grant space on the tower to other carriers.
(h) Any tower which is unused for a period of six consecutive
months following commencement of operations shall be
considered to have been abandoned, and shall be removed at
the expense of the companies affected.
(i) Freestanding telecommunications facilities shall be considered
principal uses and shall be required to be located on a separate
lot consisting of not less than 1/2 half acre. The Board may
waive street frontage requirements provided that vehicular
access is provided by means of an easement.
(j) No telecommunications facilities shall be permitted when a
one-hundred-fifty-foot radius, drawn around the base of the
§ 203-50 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-50
198:760
telecommunications tower falls within or adjacent to a park,
playground, or school facility. Telecommunications facilities
may be located on vacant park, playground or school land
provided that no buildings, fields, courts, or playground
equipment are located within the aforementioned onehundred-
fifty-foot radius.
§ 203-50 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-50
198:761

ARTICLE VI
Voluntary TDR Program115
[Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20; amended 8-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-09; 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 203-51. Allocation and transfer of development rights.
A. The Voluntary TDR Program is intended as a method of preserving land
within certain designated zoning districts by allowing landowners the
voluntary option of transferring their right to develop land to a
receiving zone or district or any other area so designated in this article
and thereby restricting the subject property in perpetuity to agriculture
use, farmland, conservation land, open space or public areas, except as
modified herein. This voluntary land use option will preserve land in
locations where there is limited infrastructure while directing
development to areas most suited for housing and other development
within the Township.
B. Agricultural land involved in an approved development transfer shall be
provided the right to farm benefits under the New Jersey Right to Farm
Act and other benefits that may be provided pursuant to the New Jersey
Agriculture Retention and Development Act.
C. Property from which and to which development potential has been
transferred shall be assessed at its fair market value reflecting the
development transfer. Development potential that has been removed
from a sending zone but has not yet been employed in a receiving zone
shall not be assessed for real property taxation. Property in a sending
zone or receiving zone that has been subject to a development potential
transfer shall be newly valued, assessed, and taxed as of October 1 next
following the development potential transfer.
D. A parcel's eligibility for inclusion under the Voluntary TDR program is
described in the allocation plan which is attached to this article and is
made part of it by reference.116
E. The following minimum eligibility requirements shall be met in order
for an applicant or developer to participate in the Voluntary TDR
Program:
(1) A sending zone parcel shall be designated on the TDR Plan of the
Township Master Plan, and/or on the Acquisition/Preservation Plan
developed in accordance with criteria established by ordinance, as
it may be last amended or superseded. The TDR Plan shall be a subplan
element of the Master Plan of the Township of Woolwich and
shall be amended or superseded pursuant to the provisions of any
applicable law.
115. Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Planned Developments, as amended, which consisted of
§§ 203-50 through 203-57, was repealed 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-24.
116. Editor's Note: The allocation plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 203-51 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-51
198:763
(2) A sending zone parcel must be at least 10 acres in size on the date
that the ordinance is adopted, except as indicated on the parcel list
and map attached hereto.
(3) Sending zone parcels identified on the TDR Plan Map may be
increased in size to support agricultural use of the property without
eliminating the parcels eligibility for credits. Additional credits for
the lands added which have not been enrolled prior to their
addition to an existing lot may be obtained by following the credit
allocation appeal process outlined in § 203-53 below.
(4) A parcel located within a sending zone shall not be subject to
existing deed restrictions or other prohibitions on further
development or subdivision, with the exception of those
participating in the eight-year farmland preservation program or
has had its rights to sewer allocation purchased and/or retired.
(5) No transferable development rights are available for lots or
properties from which all of the development rights have already
been sold or transferred; on which an easement or other restriction
in a deed or other document has been granted to a farmland
preservation program, with the exception of those participating in
the eight-year farmland preservation program, any utility company,
to any other program or agency, or to any person, partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity; lots or properties which have
been restricted from development by the terms or conditions of a
development plan, subdivision approval, or other agreement that
restricts the property from further development; land within the
ultimate right-of-way of existing roads; and lots or properties or
portions of lots or properties which have been designated and used
to meet the open space or resource protection requirements of a
subdivision or site plan.
(6) A sending zone parcel or development right shall not be owned by a
government, government agency, or other political subdivision, a
public utility as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13; or an interstate energy
transmission company regulated by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.
(7) The property which shall become the subject of the deed of
easement, restriction and enrollment shall contain general
reservation or dedication language for rights-of-way and easement
areas that may be needed for state, county and Township
infrastructure improvements, such as road and drainage
improvements, so long as the public improvements individually or
collectively have no more than a diminimis impact on the actual or
potential use of the premises for agricultural production. The rightof-
way dedication shall be submitted to the state, county or
Township prior to filing the deed language. Impacted properties
shall receive full credit value for public dedications. If the
government entity chooses to purchase right-of-way or easement
§ 203-51 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-51
198:764
areas after the filing of the TDR deed of easement, the purchase
price will be based on the residual value of the property.
(8) Except for uses expressly authorized herein, any site which has
been developed for uses inconsistent with agricultural use and
farmland, open space or public areas shall be deemed ineligible to
participate in the TDR program.
(9) The only criterion for participating in the receiving zone is that the
parcel is located within the boundaries of a receiving zone as
amended and as identified on the TDR Plan Map of the Township
Master Plan.
(10) The locations within the Township of the sending and receiving
zones are attached to this article and made a part of it by
reference.117
F. The applicable base zoning in the sending area shall be a minimum one
single-family detached dwelling unit per 15 gross acres, if the owner of
a sending zone parcel chooses not to participate in the TDR program.
However, if the owner of a vacant sending zone lot smaller than 15
acres existing as of the date of this chapter chooses not to participate in
the TDR program, the owner of that vacant lot shall be entitled to
develop one single-family detached dwelling on that lot provided that
the lot size conforms to the minimum lot size of the underlying zoning.
G. In the Route 322 Corridor receiving area, properties participating in
TDR and subject to residential development under TDR shall be
assigned by-right credits based on one dwelling unit per 1.5 acres in the
RR-2 to RR-6 Zoning Districts. The underlying development rights in
the RR-1 Zoning District is 385,000 square feet of hotel and/or office
space per the Woolwich Adult Settlement Agreement. The applicable
base zoning in the Route 322 Corridor receiving area shall be a
minimum one single-family detached dwelling unit per 15 gross acres
with a mandatory clustering of that gross density to a two-acre lot size
for a single-family detached dwelling unit, if the owner of a receiving
zone parcel which is subject to residential development under TDR
chooses not to participate in the TDR program. Properties participating
in TDR and subject to the Woolwich Adult Settlement Agreement shall
be assigned by-right credits based on 3.5 dwelling units per acre
totaling 797 units in RR-BD-1 (extension to five smaller parcels) and
261 units in RR-BD-2. The base zoning in all other portions of the Route
322 Corridor receiving area shall remain as that which were in effect on
the date Ordinance No. 2008-20 was adopted on October 27, 2008.
H. In the Route 322 Corridor receiving area, properties zoned MU-1
bounded by Route 322, Kings Highway and Pancoast Road shall not be
permitted by-right residential development. If developers choose to
develop housing units in mixed use retail/residential buildings,
117. Editor's Note: The locations are on file in the Township offices.
§ 203-51 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-51
198:765
participation in TDR will be required to support those units. [Amended
9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12]
I. In the Auburn Road receiving area, by-right credits are calculated
based on zoning in effect on the date Ordinance No. 2008-20 was
adopted on October 27, 2008. However, no more than 130 single-family
houses may be constructed using these by-right credits. All remaining
by-right credits shall be used to construct twin dwelling units on the
basis of 1.6 twins being the equivalent of one single-family unit.
Nonparticipation in TDR results in permitted densities based on the
zoning in effect on October 27, 2008.
J. No density increases may be achieved in a receiving area without the
use of appropriate instruments of transfer.
K. Increasing the development potential of a parcel of property not located
in a designated receiving zone for which a variance has been granted by
more than 5% shall constitute a receiving zone and the receiving zone
provisions of this article shall apply with respect to the amount of
development potential required to implement the variance. This shall
not apply to any development that fulfills the definition of a minor site
plan or minor subdivision plan.
L. This Voluntary TDR Program shall no longer be reasonable if state plan
endorsement or regulations adopted pursuant thereto are no longer in
effect or a sufficient percentage of the development potential has not
been transferred as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-156.
M. This Voluntary TDR Program, including the real estate market analysis,
shall be reviewed by the Joint Land Use Board and the Township
Committee at the end of three years subsequent to its adoption. This
review shall include an analysis of development potential transactions
in both the private and public market, an update of current conditions
in comparison to the development transfer plan element of the
Township's Master Plan and Capital Improvement Program, and an
assessment of the performance goals of the development transfer
program, including an evaluation of the units constructed with and
without the utilization of the development transfer ordinance. A report
of findings from this review shall be submitted to the County Planning
Board, the State Office for Planning Advocacy and the County
Agricultural Development Board (CADB), for review and
recommendations. Based on this review, the Township shall act to
maintain and enhance the value of development transfer potential not
yet utilized and, if necessary, amend the Capital Improvement Program,
the Development Transfer Plan Element of the Master Plan, and this
TDR article.
N. This Voluntary TDR Program, including the real estate market analysis,
shall also be reviewed by the Joint Land Use Board and Township
Committee at the end of five years subsequent to its adoption. This
review shall provide for the examination of the development transfer
§ 203-51 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-51
198:766
ordinance and the real estate market analysis to determine whether
the program for development transfer and the permitted uses in the
sending zone continue to remain economically viable, and, if not, an
update of the Development Transfer Plan Element of the Master Plan
and Capital Improvement Program shall be required. If at least 25% of
the development potential has not transferred at the end of this fiveyear
period, the development transfer ordinance shall be presumed to
be no longer reasonable, including any zoning changes adopted as part
of the development transfer program, within 90 days after the end of
the five-year period unless one of the following is met:
(1) The Township immediately takes action to acquire or provide for
the private purchase of the difference between the development
potential already transferred and 25% of the total development
transfer potential created in the sending zone under the
development transfer ordinance;
(2) A majority of the property owners in a sending zone who own land
from which the development potential has not yet been transferred
agree that the TDR ordinance should remain in effect;
(3) The Township can demonstrate either future success or can
demonstrate that low levels of development potential transfer
activity are due, not to ordinance failure, but to low levels of
development demand in general. This demonstration shall require
the concurrence of the County Planning Board and the State Office
for Planning Advocacy and shall be the subject of a Township public
hearing conducted prior to a final determination regarding the
future viability of the TDR program;
(4) The Township can demonstrate that less than 25% of the remaining
development potential in the sending zone has been available for
sale at market value during the five-year period.
O. The Joint Land Use Board and the Township Committee shall review the
TDR ordinance and the real estate market analysis at least every five
years with every second review occurring in conjunction with the
review and update of the Township Master Plan. This review shall
provide for the examination of the ordinance and the real estate market
analysis to determine whether the program and uses permitted in the
sending zone continue to be economically viable and, if not, an update
of the Development Transfer Plan Element of the Master Plan and
Capital Improvement Program shall be required. If 25% of the
remaining development transfer potential at the start of each five-year
review period in the sending zone under the TDR ordinance has not
been transferred during the five-year period, the Township Committee
shall repeal the development transfer ordinance, including any zoning
changes adopted as part of the development transfer program, within
90 days after the end of that five-year period unless the Township meets
one of the standards established pursuant to § 20 of P.L. 2003, c. 2
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-156).
§ 203-51 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-51
198:767
§ 203-52. Credit allocation.
P. The county shall not be permitted to sell development rights to
receiving zone buyers, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-160, from
already preserved lands under the provisions of the Agriculture
Retention and Development Act, P.L. 1983, c. 32 (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-11 et
seq.).
Q. The number of credits from one sending parcel may be allocated to
more than one receiving parcel and one receiving parcel may accept
credits from more than one sending parcel.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-137, a transfer of development rights
program must seek to transfer the development potential from areas
where preservation is most appropriate to areas where growth can be
better accommodated and maximized.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-115, "development potential" is defined as
"the maximum number of dwelling units or square feet of nonresidential
floor area that could be constructed on a specified lot or in a specified
zone under the Township Master Plan and land use regulations in effect
on the date of the adoption of the development transfer ordinance and
in accordance with recognized environmental constraints."
C. The Township TDR credit allocation formula seeks to closely estimate
the number of dwelling units which could have been built on each
eligible parcel given the base zoning density as set forth in the district,
which zoning is replaced by the adoption of this article and the
environmental constraints present on the site. As referenced above,
base zoning density shall be based on the zoning in place as of October
27, 2008, per Ordinance No. 2005-25 (and further amended per
Ordinance No. 2008-19) which stipulates the zoning densities for the
R-1 Zone District, R-2 Zone District, R-3 Zone District and 5A Zone
District respectively.
D. The underlying zoning district requires the use of individual septic
tanks for sewage disposal. Accordingly, it has been determined that it is
the suitability of soil for septic tank permitting which most directly
indicates the development rights or credits that are allocated.
E. The standard source of information related to the septic suitability of
soils located in Gloucester County is the USDA Soil Conservation
Service (SCS) soil survey (survey). The SCS survey characteristics soil
based on numerous factors, one of which is the disposal of septic
effluent. The combination of the soils' characteristics results in a septic
suitability rating of slight, moderate or severe.
F. In order to allocate credits in a manner consistent with the preexisting
zoning but within the context of environmental constraints, the formula
set forth below was developed and applied to the computerized soils
data generated for each parcel. Prior to applying the formula, each
§ 203-51 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-52
198:768
§ 203-53. Credit allocation appeal process.
parcel had an infrastructure factor assigned to it to reflect acreage
needs accordingly. From that, the net acreage was calculated, to which
the formula set forth below was then applied.
G. All sending zone parcels are assigned a minimum of one full credit. Any
allocation above one credit is rounded down to the nearest 1/4 credit.
H. Credit allocation formula:
R1
TDR Credits =
Infrastructure
Factor: 0.88
Acres of Slight
Soils/2 +
Acres of
Moderate Soils/
2*1/2.22 +
Acres of Severe
Soils/2*1/18
R2 & R3*
TDR Credits =
Infrastructure
Factor: 0.88
Acres of Slight
Soils/1.5 +
Number of Acres
of Moderate
Soils/1.5*1/
2.22+
Number of Acres
of Severe Soils/
1.5* 1/18
5 Acre
TDR Credits =
Infrastructure
Factor: 0.97
Acres of Slight
Soils/5+
Acres of
Moderate Soil/
5*1/2.22 +
Acres of Severe
Soils/5* 1/18
* Note: Parcels in the R-3 Zoning District that are sending zone
parcels are outside of the existing sewer service area and are
therefore subject by ordinance to R-2 regulations as per § 203-42,
amended 8-1-2005.
I. All parcels eligible for participation in the TDR program as set forth in
the Master Plan have been identified and a computation of the TDR
credits allocated pursuant to the credit allocation plan, which is
incorporated within this section by reference.
J. Upon the adoption of this section the Township Clerk shall file with the
County Recording Office a copy of the allocation plan and Zoning Map
showing graphically the location of the Township's sending and
receiving areas. A change in the credit allocation made by the allocation
plan by appeal, assignment or transfer to be effective must similarly be
recorded in the County Recording Office.
A. Any landowner eligible for participation in a TDR program who is
dissatisfied with their credit allocation may appeal their allocation in
accordance with the procedures set forth below.
B. Any appeal of a credit allocation must occur prior to the recording of a
TDR deed of easement. Once a property is restricted through the
§ 203-52 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-53
198:769
recording of the easement, the opportunity for an allocation appeal
is lost and the parcel's owner shall be irrefutably presumed to have
elected to accept the allocation given as an appropriate measure of the
development potential of the parcel.
C. The landowner shall submit a properly completed and required TDR
credit appeal application and applicable review fees to the
Administrative Officer. Review fees shall be the same as TDR fees in
effect at the time of appeal. The TDR credit appeal application shall
include the following information:
(1) Date of appeal.
(2) Name(s), mailing address(es) and telephone number(s) of all
property owners, of record.
(3) Copy of the latest legal description and deed to the property.
(4) Title report if so requested by the Administrative Officer if the
Administrative Officer or other Township Officials have reason to
believe that the property is the subject of a development
restriction.
(5) Block and lot number(s) of the tract parcel(s).
(6) Acreage of parcel(s) pursuant to Tax Map or property survey.
(7) Number of credits assigned to the parcel pursuant to the Allocation
Table and number requested by the applicant.
(8) Supporting documentation which fulfills the requirements of the
appeal process.
(9) Signature of applicant(s) and landowner(s), if different from the
applicant.
(10) The appeal shall be publicly noticed in the same manner as notices
for other applications for development in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12.
D. In order to appeal the allocation of credits, the landowner must include
the following submissions:
(1) A NJ-Geoweb map, GIS map or equivalent showing the premises
boundary and mapped wetlands, streams, and waterbodies.
(2) A soils map, based on current Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) Web Soil Survey data, depicting all mapped soil
types with name, symbol, and sewage disposal suitability rating
[not limited, somewhat limited, or very limited based on the sewage
disposal (NJ) rating] on the premises.
(3) Soil borings or test pits shall be performed. A minimum of two soil
borings/test pits shall be performed within each separate soil map
§ 203-53 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-53
198:770
unit containing at least one acre and at least one soil boring/test pit
shall be performed within each separate soil map unit containing
less than one acre. Additional soil borings or test pits shall be
performed so that that the total is at least one per two acres of the
total tract. Soil boring/test pit locations shall be distributed evenly
throughout the premises. An explanation of any areas avoided shall
be submitted. Where necessary to determine the soil suitability
rating, permeability testing shall be performed at each boring/
test pit location in accordance with the soil testing procedures
as required in NJAC 7:9A, Standards for Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems. A soil boring/test pit location map, soil
logs, and permeability results shall be submitted. If necessary
to accurately map the sewage disposal suitability of soils on the
premises, the Joint Land Use Board Planner may request additional
soil tests be performed.
(4) A report and map to summarize the findings of the soil testing and
categorize the disposal suitability throughout the premises. The
report and map shall include areas (acreage) of each alternatively
proposed sewage disposal rating and an explanation of the
rationale for the change in rating.
(5) A calculation of the credit allocation pursuant to the credit
allocation formula contained in § 203-52H for the proposed revised
areas of sewage disposal suitability of soils based on the sewage
disposal (NJ) rating. The terminology of sewage disposal suitability
of soils based on the sewage disposal (NJ) rating has modified the
terminology used in § 203-52H so that "slight limitation" is now
"not limited," "moderate limitation" is now "somewhat limited," and
"severe limitation" is now "very limited." For purposes of the
calculations, soils that are not limited for sewage disposal pursuant
to the sewage disposal (NJ) rating shall be treated as equivalent to
"slight soils" as set forth in § 203-52H, soils that are somewhat
limited for sewage disposal pursuant to the sewage disposal (NJ)
rating shall be treated as being equivalent to "moderate soils" and
soils that are very limited for sewage disposal pursuant to the
sewage disposal (NJ) rating shall be treated as equivalent to
"severe soils."
(6) The Joint Land Use Board Planner shall review the soil tests,
report, map and credit allocation calculation to determine what
adjustments, if any, should be made to the credit allocation that
was assigned to the premises pursuant to § 203-52.
E. If the Joint Land Use Board determines based on the information
submitted that the credit allocation made pursuant to § 203-52 should
be adjusted, then the adjusted credit allocation for the premises shall
be recorded in the Allocation Table.
§ 203-53 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-53
198:771
§ 203-54. TDR bank, creation, transfer and use.
F. The landowner shall receive an additional one-time 1/4 credit if the
appeal process as described above results in showing that the Township
credit allocation was off by 20% or more.
G. Appeal of a Joint Land Use Board decision in the determination of the
allocation of credits shall be made to a New Jersey Court of competent
jurisdiction as provided for by law.
A. TDR bank creation.
(1) The Township of Woolwich TDR Bank ("TDR Bank") is hereby
created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-158.
(2) Members.
(a) The TDR Bank shall be governed by a Board of Directors
comprising five members appointed by the Township
Committee, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Committee.
The members shall have expertise in banking, law, land use
planning, natural resource protection, historic site
preservation or agriculture. The Board of Directors shall
include the Township's Director of Community Development
and four other Township officials appointed by the Township
Committee, who shall serve as ex-officio members of the Board.
(b) A Board Chairperson shall be elected annually from among the
members of the Board.
(3) Executive Director.
(a) The Board of Directors shall appoint an Executive Director as
the chief administrative officer of the TDR Bank. The Executive
Director shall serve at the pleasure of the Board.
(4) Powers of TDR Bank.
(a) The TDR Bank is established for the purchase, sale or
exchange of the development potential that is available for
transfer from a sending zone. In accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-159, the TDR Bank shall have the following powers:
[1] Purchase property in a sending zone if adequate funds
have been provided for these purposes and the person
from whom the development potential is to be purchased
demonstrates possession of marketable title to the
property, is legally empowered to restrict the use of the
property in conformance with P.L. 2004, c.2 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-137 et seq.), and certifies that the property is not
otherwise encumbered or transferred.
§ 203-53 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-54
198:772
[2] For the purposes of its own development potential
transactions, establish a municipal average of the value of
the development potential of all property in a sending
zone, which value shall generally reflect market value
prior to the effective date of the development transfer
ordinance. The establishment of this municipal average
shall not prohibit the purchase of development potential
for any price by private sale or transfer, but shall be only
taken into consideration when the development transfer
bank itself is purchasing the development potential of
property in the sending zone. Several average values in
any sending zone may be established for greater accuracy
of valuation.
[3] Sell, exchange or otherwise convey the development
potential of property that it has purchased or otherwise
acquired pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 2004, c.2
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-137 et seq.), but only in a manner that
does not substantially impair the private sale or transfer of
development potential.
[4] When a sending zone includes agricultural land, the TDR
Bank shall, when considering the purchase of development
potential based upon values established by the municipal
average, submit the municipal average arrived at pursuant
to Subsection A(4)(a)[2] of this section for review and
comment to the County Agricultural Development Board.
The TDR Bank shall coordinate the development transfer
program with the farmland preservation programs
established pursuant to the Agriculture Retention and
Development Act, P.L. 1983, c.32 (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-11 et seq.)
and the Garden State Preservation Trust Act, Sections 1
through 42 of P.L. 1999, c.152 (N.J.S.A. 13:8C-1 et seq.) to
the maximum extent practicable and feasible.
[5] Apply for funds for the purchase of development potential
under the provisions of Sections 1 through 42 of P.L. 1999,
c.152 (N.J.S.A. 13:8C-1 et seq.), or any other act providing
funds for the purpose of acquiring and developing land for
recreation and conservation purposes consistent with the
provisions and conditions of those acts.
[6] Apply for matching funds for the purchase of development
potential under the provisions of the Garden State
Preservation Trust Act, sections 1 through 42 of P.L. 1999,
c.152 (N.J.S.A. 13:8C-1 et seq.) for the purpose of farmland
preservation and agricultural development consistent with
the provisions and conditions of that act and the
Agriculture Retention and Development Act, P.L. 1983,
c.32 (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-11 et seq.). In addition, the TDR Bank
may apply to the State Transfer of Development Rights
§ 203-54 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-54
198:773
Bank established pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1993, c.339
(N.J.S.A. 4:1C-51) for either planning or development
potential purchasing funds, or both, as provided pursuant
to Section 4 of P.L. 1993, c.339 (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-52).
[7] Undertake any and all other functions granted to
development transfer banks by the State Transfer of
Development Rights Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-137 et seq., as
may from time to time be amended.
(5) By-laws.
(a) The Board of Directors is hereby authorized to adopt by-laws
for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business.
(6) Regular meetings.
(a) A regular meeting of the Board of Directors shall be held no
less than quarterly, at a time to be fixed by its members, and
shall be held in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act,
P.L. 1975, c.231 (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
(7) Special meetings.
(a) Special meetings may be called at any time by the Board
Chairperson. The Chairperson may set any time and place to
hold special meetings, which shall be held in accordance with
the Open Public Meetings Act, P.L. 1975, c. 231 (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6
et seq.).
B. All sending and receiving transactions shall be recorded with the New
Jersey State TDR Bank per Subdivision C of 40:55D-147(e) and the
State Transfer of Development Rights Bank Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-53.
C. A landowner seeking to enroll his land within the TDR program and
thus create credits which may thereafter be transferred shall abide by
the following procedures:
(1) The landowner, on forms authorized by the Joint Land Use Board
and obtained from the Township Clerk, shall submit to the
Administrative Officer:
(a) The original and two copies of a fully completed application for
enrollment form.
(b) All costs associated with the review of the assignment
application, including professional fees authorized by this
article.
(c) The original and two copies of the TDR deed of easement.
(d) Clear proof of title by a New Jersey certified title company.
§ 203-54 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-54
198:774
(2) The Administrative Officer shall, within 45 days of receipt,
determine that the application:
(a) Accurately specifies the number of TDR credits available to the
parcel.
(b) Covers a parcel of land eligible for inclusion within the TDR
program.
(c) Accurately sets forth the block and lot description of the parcel
seeking enrollment.
(d) Reserves sufficient credits for the existing and proposed uses
on the site.
(e) Contains all other information as required by the Township
Application for Enrollment.
(3) The Administrative Officer, upon receipt, shall forward to the Joint
Land Use Board Solicitor for review:
(a) One copy of the enrollment application and form(s).
(b) The original and one copy of the TDR deed of easement.
(c) Clear proof of title provided by the landowner.
(d) A copy of each of the foregoing documents shall also be sent to
the County Planning Board so that the County Board can
determine the nature and extent of any areas which should be
withheld from the TDR deed of easement for future
infrastructure purposes. The County Planning Board shall have
14 days from receipt of the same to advise the Administrative
Officer and Joint Land Use Board Solicitor of its concerns,
comments and recommendations.
(4) The Joint Land Use Board Solicitor shall determine within 14 days
of receipt that:
(a) The TDR deed of easement is in a proper legal form for
recording in the County Clerk's office.
(b) The applicant for enrollment holds legal title clear of any
encumbrances to the parcel or that the holder of any lien,
mortgage or other interest has agreed in writing to
subordinate their interest in the parcel to the public interests
set forth in the TDR deed of easement.
(5) Upon determining the facts set forth above, the Joint Land Use
Board Solicitor shall certify to these facts by:
(a) Signing the TDR deed of easement at a space provided.
§ 203-54 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-54
198:775
(b) Returning the original TDR deed of easement to the
Administrative Officer for further processing.
(6) Upon return of the original TDR deed of easement signed by the
Joint Land Use Board Solicitor, the Administrative Officer shall:
(a) Assign serial numbers to each TDR credit sought to be created.
(b) Sign the easement form, certifying that the application
procedures required by this article have been followed and
that, upon proper recording of the easement, the parcel will
contain the number of transferable credits specified within the
certification, provided that the easement is recorded within 90
days for the date that the certification is signed. If unrecorded,
the enrollment shall be null and void and the landowner must
reapply.
(c) Return the fully executed and notarized easement to the
landowner for recording. The TDR deed of easement shall be
recorded with the Township and the County.
(7) If the Administrative Officer or Joint Land Use Board Solicitor shall
fail to act within the time periods specified, unless these time
periods are extended by the applicant, the application shall be
deemed approved.
(8) After the TDR deed of easement has been recorded, the landowner
shall file proof of the recording with the Administrative Officer
prior to the approval of any transfer of any credit created under the
easement.
(9) Upon receipt of proof that a TDR deed of easement has been
recorded, the Administrative Officer shall:
(a) Record the fact of recordation upon the records of the
Township. This record shall include the Clerk's assigned book
and page of recording, if known.
(b) Forward a copy of the recorded easement to the Joint Land Use
Board and the County Agricultural Development Board for
their information.
(c) Forward a copy of the recorded easement and the state TDR
enrollment notification form to the State TDR Bank within 10
business days and of receipt of proof of easement recording.
(10) A landowner shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
review of the enrollment application, including professional fees
authorized by this article.
(11) The Administrative Officer shall act on all applications submitted in
the order in which they are submitted and determined to be
complete.
§ 203-54 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-54
198:776
D. Assignment. A landowner against whose land a TDR deed of easement
has been recorded may assign any of the credits created through the
use of the following procedures:
(1) The landowner or subsequent owner of the credits, on forms
authorized by the Joint Land Use Board and obtained from the
Township Clerk, shall submit to the Administrative Officer for
review:
(a) An original and two copies of the application for assignment of
TDR credits.
(b) An original and two copies of the proposed assignment.
(c) Appropriate review fees.
(2) The Administrative Officer, within 45 days, shall determine that the
application:
(a) Contains all of the information required by the form.
(b) Seeks to assign no more than the maximum number of credits
available and not already assigned or extinguished.
(c) Provides the recording information about the TDR deed of
easement, in applications where the credits are being assigned
for the first time.
(d) Accurately reflects the information contained in it.
(e) Reflects that no material change in the title of the parcel has
occurred since the TDR deed of easement was recorded.
(3) The Administrative Officer, upon receipt, shall forward to the Joint
Land Use Board Solicitor for review:
(a) One copy of the application for assignment.
(b) The original and one copy of the assignment.
(c) Clear proof of title provided by the landowner.
(4) The Joint Land Use Board Solicitor shall determine within 14 days
of receipt that:
(a) The assignment is in a proper legal form for recording in the
County Clerk's office.
(b) The applicant for an initial assignment holds legal title clear of
any encumbrances to the parcel or that the holder of any lien,
mortgage or other interest has agreed in writing to
subordinate their interest in the parcel to the public interests
set forth in the assignment.
§ 203-54 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-54
198:777
(c) For subsequent assignments, that the applicant is the legal
owner of the credits to be transferred.
(5) Upon determining the facts set forth above, the Joint Land Use
Board Solicitor shall return the original assignment to the
Administrative Officer for further processing.
(6) If the Administrative Officer determines that the application and
supporting documentation establishes the criteria as set forth
above, the Administrative Officer shall sign the assignment,
certifying that upon recording the assignment will transfer the
number of credits contained within it to the party named, provided
that if the assignment is not recorded within 90 days of the date
that the certification is signed, unless this time period is extended
by the applicant, the assignment shall be null and void.
(7) If the Administrative Officer shall fail to act within the time period
provided, the application shall be deemed approved.
(8) Upon signing, the assignment shall be returned to the landowner
for recording.
(9) The assignee of the credits shall, upon filing of the assignment, file
proof of recording with the Administrative Officer prior to the
approval of any credit use.
(10) Upon receipt of proof that the assignment has been recorded, the
Administrative Officer shall:
(a) Record the fact of recordation upon the records of the
Township. The record shall include the Clerk's assigned book
and page of recording, if known.
(b) Forward a copy of the recorded assignment to the Joint Land
Use Board and the County Agricultural Development Board for
their information.
(c) Forward a copy of the recorded assignment and the state TDR
bank assignment notification form to the State TDR Bank
within 10 business days and of receipt of proof of assignment
recording.
(11) A landowner shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
review of the assignment application, including professional fees
authorized by this article.
(12) The Administrative Officer shall act on all applications in the order
in which they are received and determined to be complete.
E. At the time a final plan for the first section of an approved subdivision
plan is signed by representatives of the Township or the signing of an
approved plan by the Township Engineer of a final site plan which
utilized or effects, in the opinion of the Joint Land Use Board Solicitor,
§ 203-54 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-54
198:778
the operation of the TDR program in the receiving area, the person
or entity submitting the application for development cited shall record
against the land to be developed a deed of dedication and enrollment
of land within the receiving area on forms approved by the Township of
Woolwich which dedicates the entire site for use in the TDR program.
The by-right credits existing on the land covered by the development
shall be deemed created only upon the filing of the deed of dedication
cited. Filing the deed of dedication shall entitle the land owner to
use the credits created on the land affected by the application of
development at the density or for the uses permitted by the TDR
provisions of this article adopted on October 27, 2008. Until the deed
of dedication is recorded, the land is subject to the zoning density and
land use restrictions otherwise controlling within the TDR receiving
zone, area or district.
F. Credit use and extinguishment. An owner or developer of land located
within the receiving area may utilize credits held by a landowner of land
located within a sending area or his assigns to increase the number of
units that may be developed by utilizing the following procedures:
(1) The owner/developer of land within the receiving area must first
obtain final approval for the development of a project within the
receiving area contingent and conditioned on the acquisition and
extinguishment of TDR credits.
(2) To meet the condition of approval, the owner/developer, at or prior
to the signing of a subdivision plat or the issuance of the first
building permit, whichever occurs first, on forms approved by the
Joint Land Use Board and obtained from the Township Clerk, shall
submit to the Administrative Officer:
(a) An original and two copies of a deed of credit use and
extinguishment, which indicates the source of credit to be used
within the development.
(b) All appropriate fees for review.
(3) The Administrative Officer shall, within 45 days of receipt,
determine that the request:
(a) Accurately specifies the number of TDR credits needed for the
development of the parcel sought to be developed.
(b) Demonstrates that the developer owns, by assignment or
otherwise, all credits needed for the proposed development.
(c) Accurately specifies by reference to assigned serial numbers or
otherwise which credits are being used by the development.
(d) Accurately provided such other information required by the
application.
§ 203-54 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-54
198:779
(e) Demonstrates that the parcel from which the credits arise are
subject to a recorded easement.
(4) The Administrative Officer, upon receipt, shall forward to the Joint
Land Use Board Solicitor for review the original and one copy of
the deed of credit use and extinguishment.
(5) The Joint Land Use Board Solicitor shall, within 14 days of receipt:
(a) Determine that the deed of credit use and extinguishment is in
a proper legal form for recording in the County Clerk's office;
and
(b) The owner holds legal title clear of any encumbrances to the
parcel or that the holder of any lien, mortgage or other interest
has agreed in writing to subordinate their interest in the parcel
to the public interests set forth in the deed of credit use and
extinguishment; or
(c) The developer owns the credits to be used and extinguished.
(6) Upon determining the facts set forth above, the Joint Land Use
Board Solicitor shall certify to these facts by:
(a) Signing the deed of credit use and extinguishment at a space
provided.
(b) Returning the original deed of credit use and extinguishment
to the Administrative Officer for further processing.
(7) If the Administrative Officer determines that the request and
supporting documentation establishes the criteria set forth above,
the Administrative Officer shall sign the deed of credit use and
extinguishment, certifying that upon recording the deed of credit
use and extinguishment will permanently transfer the number of
credits contained within it to the parcel of land cited, provided that
if the deed of credit use and extinguishment is not recorded within
90 days of the date that the certification is signed, unless this time
period is extended by the applicant, the deed of credit use and
extinguishment shall be null and void.
(8) If the Administrative Officer shall fail to act within the time periods
provided, the application shall be deemed approved.
(9) Upon signing, the deed of credit use and extinguishment shall be
returned to the landowner for recording.
(10) The owner or developer of the land using the credits shall, upon
filing of the deed of credit use and extinguishment, file proof of
recording with the Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of
any building permit for development of the land upon which the
credit is to be used.
§ 203-54 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-54
198:780
(11) Recording the deed of credit use and extinguishment shall
extinguish the ability to use any credit transferred except upon the
parcel to which the TDR credit has been transferred.
(12) Upon receipt of proof that the deed of credit use and
extinguishment has been recorded, the Administrative Officer
shall:
(a) Record the fact of recordation upon the records of the
Township. The record shall include the Clerk's assigned book
and page of recording, if known.
(b) Forward a copy of the recorded deed of credit use and
extinguishment to the Joint Land Use Board and the TDR Bank
for their information.
(c) Forward a copy of the recorded deed of credit use and
extinguishment and the State TDR Bank credit use and
extinguishment notification form to the State TDR Bank within
10 business days and of receipt of proof of easement recording.
(13) A landowner shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
review of the deed of credit use and extinguishment, including
professional fees authorized by the ordinance.
(14) The Administrative Officer shall act on all requests in the order in
which they are received and determined to be complete.
(15) The purchaser of transfer credits shall be obligated to present
credible evidence of the transfer to the Township Clerk or other
designee within 30 days of the transaction. Each and every day in
which the transaction record has not been so transmitted to the
Township Clerk within the specified time limit shall constitute a
separate violation of the provisions of this article and is enforceable
by fine, imprisonment, and/or community service as otherwise
provided herein. The Township Clerk shall so record the
transaction in the Record of Transfer and annually in January
provide a copy of the Record of Transfer to the Administrative
Officer and the Tax Assessor's Office to be kept on file.
(16) The Township shall annually prepare and submit a report on
activity undertaken pursuant to this article to the County Planning
Board which in turn is expected to submit copies of the Township
report along with an analysis of the effectiveness of the article to
the Office for Planning Advocacy, the County Agriculture
Development Board, and the State TDR Bank on July 1 of the third
year next following enactment and annually thereafter.
G. Land included in the sending area from which credits are severed shall
be subject to the following TDR deed of easement. The uses permitted
in the deed of easement will continue to be authorized on the premises
as set forth herein following recordation of the deed of easement.
§ 203-54 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-54
198:781
(1) TDR deed of easement.
(a) Agricultural uses as defined in Article II.
(b) All nonagricultural uses, if any, existing on the premises at the
time of deed restriction may be continued and any structure
may be restored or repaired in the event of partial destruction.
No new structures, or the expansion of preexisting structures
for nonagricultural uses, are permitted, except as specifically
authorized herein. In the event a preexisting nonagricultural
use is abandoned, the right to continue the use is extinguished.
(c) The provision of structures for housing of agricultural labor
employed by the land owner or the operator of the agricultural
operation is permitted, provided all necessary approvals are
obtained. Such housing shall not be used as a residence for
land owner, land owner's spouse, land owner's parents, land
owner's lineal descendants, adopted or natural, land owner's
spouse's siblings, parents or land owner's spouse's lineal
descendants, adopted or natural.
(d) The construction of any new buildings for residential use or
any residential subdivision, regardless of its purpose, shall be
prohibited except, subject to receipt of all necessary approvals,
the following are permitted:
[1] The construction of a residential building anywhere on the
premises in order to replace any permitted single- or
multifamily residential building that exists on the premises
and that is not a structure unfit for human occupancy
pursuant to the International Property Maintenance Code
or that if it is a structure unfit for human occupancy it was
lived in for at least 90 days during the past two years;
[2] The construction of up to a fifty-percent expansion of any
existing single- or multifamily residential building on the
premises up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet, provided
that no new dwelling unit is created and the addition is
used solely for residential purposes;
[3] If at the time of recording of the deed of easement the
premises contains no residential unit(s) and is greater
than 15 acres but less than 50 acres in size, the
construction of one new single-family residential unit
provided that the grantor has retained one TDR credit for
this purpose at the time of conveyance of the deed of
easement;
[4] If at the time of recording of the deed of easement the
premises is 50 acres or more in size excluding the land
area occupied by any buildings or structures used for a
nonconforming nonresidential use, the construction of
§ 203-54 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-54
198:782
new single-family residential units is permitted on the
premises without the use of TDR credits provided the
total number of single-family residential units (including
existing units) which may be built on the premises shall
not exceed one unit per 50 acres of gross land area, except
as provided in Subsection G(1)(d)[6] or [7] below;
[5] Subdivision of the premises resulting in parcels of at least
50 acres is permitted without the use of a TDR credit;
[6] Unless a lot for an existing or new single-family detached
dwelling has been subdivided from the premises in
accordance with § 203-54H below, a one-time subdivision
of the premises resulting in a vacant parcel that is at least
15 acres but less than 50 acres in size provided one TDR
credit was retained by the grantor at the time the deed of
easement was recorded for a proposed single-family
detached dwelling unit on that lot;
[7] Subdivision of a lot for an existing or new single-family
detached dwelling in accordance with § 203-54H below
provided that at the time of the conveyance of the deed of
easement, the grantor shall have retained one TDR credit
for the existing or new single-family detached dwelling
and provided further that the remaining vacant lot shall
contain at least 15 acres and no residential development of
the remaining vacant lot shall occur unless that lot
contains at least 50 acres.
[8] Any single-family residential building constructed
pursuant to this Subsection G(1)(d) or any existing singlefamily
residential building may also contain any of the uses
permitted in Subsection G(1)(e), (r) or (s) below; provided
that the overall building size contains no more than 5,000
square feet and it is demonstrated that the uses
individually or collectively will not diminish the actual or
potential use of the premises for agricultural production.
Any lots created by the division of property by
testamentary or intestate provisions without approval of
the Joint Land Use Board shall be entitled to only those
benefits under this Chapter 203 the property would have
been entitled to if the lot had not been so subdivided. If
more than one of the permitted expansions authorized
herein and in Subsection G(1)(e), (r) and (s) below occurs,
the total expansion shall not exceed a fifty-percent
expansion of the existing building or a maximum of 2,000
square feet.
(e) To the extent permitted by Chapter 203, existing buildings on
the premises including a fifty-percent expansion of any existing
building up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet may be retained
§ 203-54 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-54
198:783
for a winery, brewery, distillery and/or other alcohol production
facility on the premises provided that the predominant crops
on the premises are used in the production of alcohol if it
is demonstrated that the uses individually or collectively will
not diminish the actual or potential use of the premises for
agricultural production. If more than one of the permitted
expansions authorized in Subsection G(1)(d) above and
Subsection G(1)(r) and (s) below occurs, the total expansion
shall not exceed a fifty-percent expansion of the existing
building or a maximum of 2,000 square feet. Nothing herein
shall limit the ability to develop an alcohol production facility
authorized pursuant to Subsection G(1)(a), (b), or (1) of this
section.
(f) No activity shall be permitted which would be detrimental to
drainage, flood control, water conservation, erosion control, or
soil conservation, nor shall any other activity be permitted
which would be detrimental to the continued agricultural use
of the premises.
(g) Public improvements including but not limited to roadways,
drainage facilities and other public infrastructure are
permitted so long as the public improvements individually or
collectively have no more than a de minimis impact on the
actual or potential use of the premises for agricultural
production.
(h) The right to maintain all roads and trails existing upon the
premises as of the date of the deed of easement shall be
preserved. The construction, improvement or reconstruction of
any roadway necessary to service crops, agricultural buildings,
or reservoirs is permitted as necessary.
(i) To the extent permitted by Chapter 203, the premises may be
used for certain recreational activities such as hunting, fishing,
cross-country skiing and ecological tours, only if such activities
do not interfere with the actual or potential use of the land for
agricultural production. Other recreational activities which
alter the premises, such as indoor recreational facilities, golf
courses and athletic fields, are prohibited unless expressly
authorized by the TDR deed of easement pursuant to this
section. However, if the premises is acquired by a
governmental entity, the governmental entity may establish
outdoor active recreational uses on the premises.
(j) Disposal of sludge or any waste material resulting from
treatment of waste water, domestic or otherwise, is expressly
prohibited. No sand, gravel, loam, rock or other minerals shall
be deposited on or removed from the premises except those
materials required by the agricultural purpose for which the
land is used. No dumping or placing of trash or waste material
§ 203-54 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-54
198:784
shall be permitted unless expressly authorized by the State
Agricultural Development Committee or the County
Agricultural Development Board as an agricultural
management practice and pursuant to the Right to Farm Act
and subject to any restrictions imposed by the Township
consistent with that Act.
(k) No historic building or structure (included in the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places) located on the premises may be
demolished by the grantor or any other person without the
prior approval of the Township Committee, with a
recommendation from the Joint Land Use Board.
(l) The construction of billboards, golf courses, cellular phone
towers, solar panels, wind turbines, airstrips, and helicopter
pads is expressly prohibited. Notwithstanding this Subsection
G(1)(c), solar panels and wind turbines used to generate
electricity for uses on the premises are permitted to the extent
permitted by Chapter 203. To the extent permitted by Chapter
203 or the Right to Farm Act, fences may be constructed in
support of the agricultural operation and to prevent
trespassing. On any designated public areas, the grantor may
not erect fences to block access to public areas from the
general public.
(m) Agricultural management practices as have been and continue
to be promulgated by the New Jersey State Agriculture
Development Committee pursuant to its authority under
N.J.A.C. 2:76-2.1 et seq., N.J.A.C. 2:76-2A.1 et seq., N.J.A.C.
2:76-2B.1 et seq. and the Right to Farm Act (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et
seq.) are expressly permitted.
(n) The right to plant, grow, and harvest trees, timber and forest
products and to engage in other woodland management
activities related thereto provided that the same are carried
out in a manner consistent with the Farmland Assessment Act
of 1964 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.).
(o) To the extent permitted by Chapter 203, permissible
improvements allowed in conjunction with permitted uses to
include the installation of needed driveway and/or road access
and ancillary unpaved parking areas for a maximum of 75
vehicles, if it is demonstrated that the uses individually or
collectively will not diminish the actual or potential use of the
premises for agricultural production and subject to the review
and approval of the Joint Land Use Board. The use of hiking
and biking trails for motorized vehicles is not permitted except
for necessary access to the premises.
§ 203-54 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-54
198:785
(p) New buildings for nonresidential agricultural purposes may be
constructed on the premises to the extent permitted by
Chapter 203.
(q) Use of the designated public area of the premises for a public
passive recreational use is permitted consistent with the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Green Acres
Program Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:36-1.1 et seq.).
(r) To the extent permitted by Chapter 203, existing buildings on
the premises, including a fifty-percent expansion of any
existing building up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet may be
retained for use as a bed-and-breakfast if it is demonstrated
that the uses individually or collectively will not diminish the
actual or potential use of the premises for agricultural
production. If more than one of the permitted expansions
authorized in Subsection G(1)(d) and (e) above and Subsection
G(1)(s) below occurs, the total expansion shall not exceed a
fifty-percent expansion of the existing building or a maximum
of 2,000 square feet.
(s) To the extent permitted by Chapter 203, existing buildings on
the premises, including a fifty-percent expansion of any
existing building up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet, may be
retained for use for social events such as weddings, and
temporary structures may be used for said social events if it is
demonstrated that the uses individually or collectively will not
diminish the actual or potential use of the premises for
agricultural production. If more than one of the permitted
expansions authorized in Subsection G(1)(d), (e) and (r) above
occurs, the total expansion shall not exceed a fifty-percent
expansion of the existing building or a maximum of 2,000
square feet.
(t) To the extent permitted by Chapter 203, the premises may be
retained for use as a day camp if it is demonstrated that the
uses individually or collectively will not diminish the actual or
potential use of the premises for agricultural production.
(u) To the extent permitted by Chapter 203, the premises may be
retained for use as a botanical garden or arboretum if it is
demonstrated that the uses individually or collectively will not
diminish the actual or potential use of the premises for
agricultural production.
H. Subdivision for new or existing single-family house or farmstead.
(1) Landowners desiring to subdivide a lot for a new or an existing
single-family detached house or farmstead on land proposed for
transfer of credits shall meet the following requirements:
§ 203-54 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-54
198:786
§ 203-55. Disenrollment.
(a) The applicant may simultaneously file an application for minor
subdivision approval to create a lot for the new or existing
residence or farmstead. The minor subdivision application
shall not be subject to the creeping subdivision provisions of
the definition of "minor subdivision" whereby any second
subdivision of land subsequent to involving the same tract shall
be deemed a major subdivision.
(b) The lot proposed for subdivision containing the new or existing
single-family detached house or farmstead shall meet the
minimum standards for lots within the zoning district, but shall
not exceed two acres in area.
(c) The newly created lot for the new or existing residence or
farmstead shall be deed restricted from further subdivision.
(d) One full credit shall be subtracted from the total credits to be
transferred from the tract, and so recorded in the Record of
Transfers.
(e) The remaining vacant lot shall contain at least 15 acres. No
new single-family detached dwelling can be developed on the
vacant lot pursuant to Subsection G(1)(d)[3] above if the
vacant lot contains less than 50 acres. A new single-family
detached dwelling can be developed pursuant to Subsection
G(1)(d)[7] above on any vacant lot containing at least 50 acres.
(2) Any lots created by the division of property by testamentary or
intestate provisions without approval of the Joint Land Use Board
shall be entitled to only those benefits under this Chapter 203 the
property would have been entitled to if the lot had not been so
subdivided.
I. One full credit shall be subtracted from the total credits to be
transferred from the tract, and so recorded in the Record of Transfers,
if a subdivision of lots occurs between at least 15 acres but less than 50
acres in size for one new lot created for an existing or proposed singlefamily
detached dwelling unit. The land owner must decide whether to
utilize a credit at the time of easement dedication. Subdivision of the
premises resulting in parcels of at least 50 acres is permitted without
the use of a TDR credit.
J. Should the Township acquire ownership of a sending parcel, the land
may be used for recreation coincidental with the definition of "public
areas" while continuing to promote farmland preservation,
conservation of open space, and preservation of view sheds.
A. It is understood that the TDR Program is voluntary. The Master Plan
and Zoning Ordinance provide a reasonable balance between the
number of credits which are allocated to the sending area(s) and the
§ 203-54 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-55
198:787
capacity of the acreage within the receiving area(s) to accommodate
transferred credits; however, if a number of landowners/developers
within the receiving area elect to subdivide their land without the
use of credits, it is conceivable that more credits capable of being
transferred will have been created than available locations for their
receipt. Recognizing the inherent unfairness which may be visited upon
a property owner in the sending zone or his assignee should property
be enrolled within the program without there being in existence an
adequate area within the receiving zone to utilize the credits so
created, this subsection has been created to provide relief. Section C,
40:55D-154 of the Municipal Land Use Law establishes standards for
the rebuttable presumption that the development transfer ordinance is
no longer reasonable and as such a land owner may seek disenrollment
if the ordinance is deemed to be no longer reasonable by the Township.
B. If a rebuttable presumption exists pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-154 and
the Township has failed to demonstrate that any of the criteria in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-156a-d have been met or if the Township has repealed
this Article VI, a landowner owning a parcel of land enrolled within a
TDR program and having imposed the required TDR deed of easement
on the land may apply to the Joint Land Use Board for disenrollment of
the procedures set forth below.
C. Procedure for disenrollment.
(1) A landowner who desires to disenroll his land from involvement
with the TDR program shall follow the following procedures:
(a) The landowner, on forms authorized by the Board and obtained
from the Township Clerk, shall submit to the Administrative
Officer:
[1] The original and two copies of a fully completed
application for TDR disenrollment form.
[2] Review fees.
[3] The original and two copies of the disenrollment document
designed to terminate the restrictions imposed upon the
landowner's property.
[4] Clear proof of title provided by the landowner.
[5] Proof that none of the credits created for the property by
enrollment have been used by another property owner or
developer through the filing of a deed of credit transfer or
assigned to a third party who does not consent to the
disenrollment application.
(b) The Administrative Officer shall, within 45 days of receipt,
determine that the application is complete.
§ 203-55 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-55
198:788
(c) Upon determination that the application is complete, the
Administrative Officer shall schedule a public hearing before
the Joint Land Use Board on notice to the public unless the
Township has repealed this Article VI. At this hearing, the Joint
Land Use Board shall determine whether a rebuttable
presumption exists pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-154 and if so
whether any of the criteria specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-156a-d
exist. In reaching these conclusions, the Joint Land Use Board
shall take into consideration all evidence, both submitted in
favor of and in opposition to the relief required, in accordance
with the procedures normally available for development
applications before the Board. After this review, the Board
shall reduce its findings to a written resolution recommending
to the Township Committee whether to grant or deny the
application proposed. If the Board fails to act within 90 days of
the date the application is submitted, unless this time period is
extended by the applicant, the application shall be deemed
denied and the applicant shall be required to reapply if relief is
to be obtained.
(d) If the application is approved, the record before the Board,
including its findings, shall be submitted to the Township
Committee, to the applicant and to all persons who
participated in the public hearing. The Township Committee
shall review the proceedings before the Joint Land Use Board
and determine whether good cause exists for the relief
specified. If they agree that the relief should be granted or if
the Township has repealed this Article VI, they shall direct the
Mayor and Township Clerk to execute the disenrollment
document. Upon execution by the Mayor and Clerk, approval to
disenroll shall be recorded in the County Clerk's Office.
(e) The landowner shall request approval of the release of the
restrictions imposed upon the landowner's property from the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection in accordance with
the requirements of the New Jersey Conservation Restriction
and Historic Preservation Restriction Act, N.J.S.A. 13:8B-1 et
seq. Proof of the release, which is evidenced by a certificate of
the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, shall be
recorded in the same manner as the restriction and the
disenrollment document.
(f) Upon receipt of proof of recording of the disenrollment
document and the release certificate issued by the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection, the Administrative
Officer shall:
[1] Record the fact that the disenrollment document has been
recorded on the Township records, including the Clerk's
assigned book and page of recording, if known.
§ 203-55 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-55
198:789
§ 203-56. Building regulating plan.
[2] Forward a copy of the recorded disenrollment document to
the Joint Land Use Board and TDR Bank for their
information.
D. The landowner seeking disenrollment shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the review of the disenrollment, including professional
fees authorized by this article.
E. The landowner may extend the time limits for administrative action by
the Administrative Officer or by the Planning Board. This right to
extend shall not apply to any time period set forth in this article for
recording of a document.
A. The use of development credits shall occur as indicated on an approved
plan for the receiving area lots that have been specified for
development. Receiving area lots have "by-right" densities as
established in the TDR real estate market analysis as base zoning that
may be exercised as part of the TDR development process.
B. Each of the permitted housing types shall be equal to the following
development credits for units transferred from the sending zone(s):
US 322 Corridor Receiving Zone:
1.3 Single-family
detached
= 1 credit
2.25 Duplex or twin unit = 1 credit
2.95 Townhouse = 1 credit
3.3 Urban apartment/
flat
= 1 credit
C. (Reserved)118
D. The TDR development option may be exercised only for parcels located
within receiving zones or districts. Applicants exercising the TDR
development option shall submit an application that includes land
within both the areas or districts in accordance with their respective
requirements. Application for receiving zone development may only be
made after the layout for that portion of the receiving districts intended
for importation of credits from the sending zone(s) has received
preliminary subdivision approval from the Planning Board. The
applicant shall have secured through an equity interest all necessary
credits for increasing the permitted density in the receiving area(s)
prior to final action being taken by the Planning Board.
E. Prior to any approval of a receiving area development plan, the Joint
Land Use Board shall find the following facts and conclusions:
118. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding credits for housing units, was repealed
9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12.
§ 203-55 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-56
198:790
§ 203-57. (Reserved)
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject properties conform
to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c;
(2) That the proposals for the maintenance and conservation of
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate;
(3) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate;
(4) That the proposed development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be
established;
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate;
(6) That the proposed development will have adequate public water
and public sanitary sewer capacity for the intensity of development
requested.
F. The Joint Land Use Board shall act upon an application for a
development within the receiving area in the same time and manner as
for a preliminary major subdivision application pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48. No action shall be taken upon the development application
unless a complete submission has been made in accordance with the
applicable checklist.
G. Affordable housing requirements.
(1) For nonresidential uses, compliance with the Statewide Non-
Residential Development Fee Act,119 or other relevant statute, is
required subject to all applicable affordable housing requirements
as contained in Article XII.
(2) For residential uses in the RR-BD and MU Zoning Districts, a
minimum of 204 units shall be affordable, subject to all applicable
housing requirements as contained in Article XII.
(3) For residential units in the RR Zoning District, a development fee of
1.5% of the equalized assessed value of the residential construction
shall be paid into the Township's Housing Trust Fund.
119. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 et seq.
§ 203-56 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-57
198:791

ARTICLE VII
Supplemental Use Controls
§ 203-58. Supplemental use controls.
Each supplemental use control set forth in this Article VII shall apply in any
district in the Township in which the use subject to such supplemental use
control is permitted.
§ 203-59. Controls for residential accessory uses.
A. Storage sheds, greenhouses and other outbuildings in residential zones
shall conform to the following:
(1) No structure shall be permitted between the building setback line
and the street line.
(2) No structure shall be located within five feet of a side property line.
[Added 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2]
(3) No structure shall be located within five feet of the rear property
line. [Added 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2]
B. Walls and fences. In all planned developments, walls may be
constructed in front, side and in rear yard areas for the purpose of
enclosing private patios and courtyards. The enclosed space resulting
from the walls shall not be roofed. Such walls shall be constructed of
brick, wood, masonry or concrete with stucco or other appropriate
finish but shall be similar within groups of houses.
C. Driveways.
(1) No driveways shall be within five feet of any property line unless
such driveway is shared by an adjacent house.
(2) No driveway shall be constructed so that there is more than one
entrance to a street.
(3) No driveway shall be constructed in such a way as to create a
drainage problem on the subject property or an adjacent property.
D. Other accessory use controls.
(1) No commercial or industrial activities, except customary home
occupations and professional offices, shall be permitted unless
specifically stated in the applicable zoning district.
(2) No activities shall be permitted which create a public nuisance or
interfere with the use of adjacent residential lots.
(3) Nothing in this section shall limit other uses not mentioned so long
as they are accessory to the residential use of the land, are
temporary in nature and do not create a threat to the public health,
safety or welfare of the community.
§ 203-58 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-59
198:793
§ 203-60. Home occupations.
In residential districts, all dwelling units with direct access to a public
street, except apartment units, may be used for the practice of home
occupations, provided that the approving authority grants conditional use
approval subject to the following:
E. Except as specifically otherwise permitted, any customary accessory
use shall be governed by the area and bulk regulations applicable to the
primary use on the same lot.
A. The principal person so employed shall be the owner of the dwelling
unit.
B. Such occupations shall be incidental or secondary to the use of the
property as a residence and are limited to those occupations
customarily conducted within a dwelling unit.
C. No other persons except the owner shall be employed to practice the
occupation.
D. Such operations shall be operated as a sole proprietorship, except that,
should the owner/operator be substantially physically handicapped, a
nonresident may be employed to assist the owner/operator in his/her
work to the extent required to compensate for the aforesaid handicap
condition.
E. The area used for the practice of a home occupation shall occupy no
more than 1/3 of the total floor area of the dwelling unit.
F. Manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work shall be performed
in an enclosed area so that such activity shall be conducted in such a
way that no noise, odor, dust, vibration, electromagnetic interference,
smoke, heat or glare or any radiation of any kind which is in the defined
radio frequency spectrum shall be noticeable at or beyond the property
lines, or no potentially dangerous effluent shall be discharged.
G. No storage of materials or products in open areas shall be permitted.
H. No retail sales shall be permitted, except for home-produced goods.
I. No material designed for use as an explosive shall be reproduced or
stored on the premises.
J. (Reserved)120
K. No display of products shall be visible from the street.
L. The driveway and parking area shall be paved in accordance with
acceptable engineering standards.
120. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection J, regarding signs for home occupations, was repealed
5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07.
§ 203-59 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-60
198:794
§ 203-61. Professional office in home.
Professional office or studio of a physician, dentist, lawyer, architect,
engineer, musician, artist, teacher, real estate broker, registered nurse or
other similar professional person shall be permitted in a dwelling in any
residential district, subject to the following conditions:
§ 203-62. Livestock, animals and fowl. [Added 3-21-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-2]
M. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for the floor area devoted to
the home occupation.
N. No sign identifying or advertising the home occupation shall be
permitted.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in addition to those
otherwise required in this chapter according to the nature of the
profession or business practiced.
B. No more than two persons shall be employed by the practitioner, who
must be the owner, of the professional occupation to provide
secretarial, clerical, technical or similar assistance.
C. The area used for the practice of a profession shall occupy no more than
1/3 of the total floor area.
D. No manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work shall be
performed outside the dwelling unit. When such activity is conducted
inside the dwelling unit, it shall be conducted in such a way that no
noise, heat, glare, odor, vibration, electromagnetic interference or
smoke shall be perceptible at or beyond the property line.
E. No storage of materials or products outside the dwelling unit shall be
permitted unless completely housed.
F. The professional use shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of
the dwelling unit and shall not change the essential residential
character of the dwelling.
G. No display of products shall be visible from outside the building.
A. The intent of this section is to establish standards for the keeping of
livestock, animals and fowl on a noncommercial basis and in a manner
which will not endanger the health, safety and welfare of the Township
residents and which will assure that such livestock, animals and fowl
are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and not subjected to
suffering, cruelty or abuse.
B. The keeping of livestock, animals and fowl shall be subject to the
following special requirements:
§ 203-60 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-62
198:795
§ 203-63. Excavation of material.
In all districts, subject to the provisions elsewhere in this chapter and
subject to the provisions in other Township ordinances, excavation shall
be limited to the removal of topsoil, substrata or sod under the following
conditions:
§ 203-64. Controls for nonresidential accessory uses.
Controls for nonresidential accessory uses shall include the following:
(1) Livestock, poultry, rabbits, bees and domestic pets may be kept by
the resident on the premises where he resides, provided that said
activities are primarily for personal, noncommercial purposes and
said premises, exclusive of the residence portion, have a lot area of
not less than two acres. The number of livestock per acre (exclusive
of a minimum area of one acre devoted to residential use) shall not
exceed one adult horse or cattle or two adult sheep or goats with
their young under six months of age. Kennels are prohibited.
(2) No structure for animals or poultry other than fencing or grazing
land shall be closer than 30 feet to property or street lines or 15
feet to a property line and 75 feet to any neighboring residence,
whichever is greater.
C. Dogs and cats, as pets, are permitted, but not more than three of each,
over four months of age per lot.
D. The raising of poultry, rabbits and other small animals for private use
shall be permitted on lots at least one acre in size, provided that said
poultry and animals are housed in yards no closer than 75 feet from any
residence other than that of the owner or user of the property.121
A. Where necessary for the construction or alteration of a building or the
grading incidental to such building.
B. Where necessary in connection with normal lawn preparation and
maintenance.
C. Where necessary in connection with the construction or alteration of a
street or utility.
A. Garages. Such buildings shall be designed to conform with the main
building and shall not be within 50 feet of any street line.
B. Maintenance building. Such buildings shall not be located within 30
feet of any street line.
C. Recreational facilities. Such uses shall be conducted within a building
or in a landscaped area which is set back 50 feet from any street line.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 203-62 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-64
198:796
§ 203-65. Performance standards for industrial uses.
The following performance standards shall be applicable to all industrial
uses in the Township:
D. Sewage treatment plants and facilities. No such facility shall exceed the
height limit of the district in which it is situated or 50 feet in height,
whichever is less. No such facility shall be located within 100 feet of the
lot line of any residential use.
E. Storage areas. All such facilities shall be located in a building which has
direct access to a street or driveway. No such building shall be located
within 50 feet of any street line.
F. Other accessory use controls. All uses shall be restricted to the
activities related to the primary use, excluding accessory services to
adjacent uses on nearby lots.
G. Dwelling quarters for watchman or caretakers. Such uses shall be
located on the premises of the primary use.
H. Area and bulk regulations. Except as specifically otherwise permitted,
any customary accessory use shall be governed by the area and bulk
regulations applicable to the primary use on the same lot.
A. Dissemination of smoke, fumes, dust, dirt or other noxious gases from
any use shall not extend beyond the boundaries of the zone in which
said use is located.
B. Liquid wastes and effluent shall be discharged into an approved
existing sewage treatment plant in accordance with that plant's
regulations, or each industry shall treat its own liquid wastes and
effluent in a treatment plant or process which is in compliance with the
state statutes, the requirements of the State Department of Health and
applicable Township health ordinances.
C. Precaution against fire hazards, proper handling and storage of
materials, structural design and safeguards for the health of workers
shall comply with state statutes and requirements of the State
Department of Labor and Industry.
D. Operations or processes involving the generation of offensive light or
glare shall be confined to a structure or enclosure and shall not be
visible outside of said building or enclosure.
E. Any noise, resulting from the operation of any use measured at a
distance of 100 feet from the source of said noise shall not be in excess
of 60 decibels above the reference level.
F. The reference level for noise measurement shall be the American
Standards Association standard sound pressure reference level of
0.0002 dyne per square centimeters at 1,000 cycles. Instrumentation
and methods of measurement shall be based upon the ASA standards.
§ 203-64 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-65
198:797
§ 203-66. Service stations, auto repair and new and used car lots.
[Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6; 12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-24]
G. Uses involving any operation or process which causes vibration at a
point 100 feet from the source of said vibration shall not be permitted.
A. In those districts in which service stations, public and commercial
garages, auto repair shops and new and used car lots may be permitted
as a conditional use, the following special requirements shall apply:
(1) In no district shall a service station, auto repair shop, new or used
car lot or commercial garage be erected, enlarged or established
within 200 feet of:
(a) A public school or playground;
(b) A duly organized school giving regular instruction at least five
days a week for eight or more months a year;
(c) A hospital; or
(d) A church.
(2) A detailed set of plans, specifications and site plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Board, showing:
(a) The location of such service station or commercial garage.
(b) The location and number of fuel pumps.
(c) The location, depth and capacity of fuel tanks.
(d) The type of structure and accessory buildings to be
constructed.
(e) The number of vehicles to be garaged.
(f) The location and extent of driveways.
(3) Pump islands shall not be less than 30 feet from any street line. All
fuel tanks shall be installed underground and in compliance with
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
standards.
B. Outside pits, racks or lifts shall be prohibited.
C. For all service stations, auto repair shops and new or used car lots, the
first 25 feet of lot width adjacent to a public street shall be landscaped
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 203-68 and 203-69 (except for
necessary drive aisles) and the display or parking of vehicles within this
area shall be prohibited.
D. Service stations, auto repair shops and new or used car lots adjacent to
permanent and transient residential uses and public or private open
§ 203-65 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-66
198:798
spaces shall be screened by twenty-five-foot-wide evergreen screening
buffer in accordance with §§ 203-68 and 203-69, not less than six feet
in height and which shall be maintained in a safe and sightly condition.
E. Driveways. Driveways shall cross the sidewalk at right angles and shall
not be more than 36 feet wide at any point thereof. Driveways must be
at least five feet from any side lot line and 50 feet from the intersection
of street lines. There shall be no more than one driveway on any one
street frontage unless the street frontage is in excess of 70 feet, in
which case there may be a maximum of two driveways on street
frontage, provided that such driveways are 25 feet apart.
F. Curbing. A raised concrete curb shall be constructed and maintained in
a sound and safe condition along all street property lines, except at
driveways. All such required curbs shall conform to the following
dimensions:
(1) Overall height: 16 inches, with six inches above ground level and
10 inches below ground level.
(2) Width: six inches across the top and eight inches across the base.
G. Paving. The entire area of the station traversed by motor vehicles shall
be paved with an all-weather surface.
H. Landscaping. At least 5% of the interior of the lot area, exclusive of
required perimeter buffers, shall be planted with trees or shrubs.
I. All gasoline or fuel tanks with a capacity of more than 275 gallons shall
be underground.
J. Minimum frontages. In order to minimize traffic hazards and permit
safe ingress and egress to and from service stations, the following
minimum frontages are hereby required:
(1) Where stations are located on municipal streets or county
highways, not less than 150 feet for stations with not more than
three dispensing units, and for every three additional units or
fraction thereof, there shall be an additional 50 feet of frontage.
(2) Where stations are located on state highways, not less than 200
feet for stations with not more than three dispensing units, and for
every three additional units or fraction thereof, there shall be an
additional 50 feet of frontage.
(3) Where stations are located at intersections, the frontage shall be
that portion facing on the more heavily traveled street or highway,
as determined by the Planning Board. Such stations located at
intersections shall have a minimum average lot depth of 150 feet.
(4) All new and used car lots shall have a minimum street frontage of
300 feet.
§ 203-66 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-66
198:799
§ 203-67. Intensive fowl or livestock farms.
K. Minimum lot areas and bulk standards.
(1) All service stations, public and private garages, which are principal
uses, and auto repair shops, shall conform to the minimum lot area
and other bulk standards of the zoning district in which they are
located.
(2) All new and used car lots shall have a minimum lot area of 10 acres
and shall conform to all other bulk standards of the zoning district
in which they are located.
A. Intensive fowl or livestock farms, as defined in Article II, § 203-5, of this
chapter, may be established in any district, but only as a conditional use
after site plan review and approval by the Planning Board in accordance
with the following standards and requirements and other applicable
regulations. In addition to normally required site plan information, the
application shall set forth:
(1) The purpose of the operation.
(2) The manner in which animals or fowl would be housed or ranged.
(3) The number, size, species and type of animals or fowl proposed to
be kept and the number of each per gross acre.
(4) Location of and methods for the storage, disposal or other
utilization of liquid and/or solid wastes.
(5) The location of any outside fowl ranges or livestock pens or corrals.
(6) Proposed lighting and ventilation.
B. The Planning Board must find the system for disposal of waste from the
animals is adequate and has reasonable assurance that it will continue
to be adequate, practical and efficient for the foreseeable future and, if
necessary, can require guaranties of same. Disposal of waste by a
combination of holding tanks and injection into land owned by the
operator may be required by the Planning Board after taking into
consideration the number and type of animals, the type and amount of
confinement and the amount of land owned by the operator on which
waste will be spread.
C. The Planning Board must find that the operation planned will not
reasonably be expected to constitute a nuisance because of odor, sound
or sight to the neighborhood nor create any reasonably foreseeable
sanitation or health problems.
D. No building, fenced run or other enclosure for the containment of fowl
or livestock, or for the storage of animal waste on an intensive fowl or
livestock farm shall be closer to any front, side or rear property line or
zoning district boundary line than 500 feet. However, a pasture may be
§ 203-66 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-67
198:800
§ 203-68. Landscaping. [Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-24]
established and maintained closer than 500 feet to a boundary and
animals kept in it under the following conditions:
(1) An adequate fence is maintained.
(2) A growth of grass or other foraging vegetation has been
established and is maintained.
(3) No feeding of any animals is done in the pasture other than the
grazing by the animals of the vegetation growing there.
(4) The density of animals in the pasture shall not be so great as to
cause an overgrazing of the pasture so as to render any part of it
barren of vegetation.
E. The feeding of swine upon garbage or similar refuse material, either
cooked or uncooked, is specifically prohibited.
F. In reviewing any application for an intensive fowl or livestock farm, the
Planning Board may request:
(1) An advisory opinion from the Soil Conservation District concerning
the adequacy of plans for liquid or solid waste management
(including proposed handling methods if off-site disposal is
contemplated), as to whether such plans comply with Standards for
Animal Waste Management as adopted by the Gloucester
Conservation District; and
(2) An advisory opinion from the office of the County Agricultural
Agent concerning the adequacy of plans for dealing with specific
potential nuisance characteristics in relation to any applicable
published standards or guidelines issued by the State of New
Jersey or Rutgers, the State University.
G. Any certificate of occupancy shall remain valid only so long as the
intensive fowl or livestock farm is operated in a nuisance-free manner
in accordance with the above-listed standards and any additional
conditions imposed by the approval authority.
A. Purpose.
(1) Landscaping shall be designed with an overall concept, to integrate
the various elements of the site, and to preserve and enhance the
particular identity of the site, consistent with the purposes of the
Municipal Land Use Law.122
(2) To preserve and enhance the existing natural features on individual
sites, thereby maintaining and conserving the Township’s natural
amenities. This can be achieved by utilizing methods such as
122. Editor’s Note: see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 203-67 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-68
198:801
planting natives, xeriscaping (using drought-tolerant plants), using
drip irrigation systems and sustainable materials.
(3) To provide for the harmonious development of contiguous
properties in the same and different zoning districts by providing
certain minimum landscaping requirements for all land
developments including, but not limited to, residential, multifamily
residential, motel, office commercial, institutional, industrial and
public purposes.
(4) To help prevent soil erosion and sedimentation; to retard glare,
heat, pollution and noise.
B. Applicability.
(1) The tree protection and landscaping standards shall be applicable
to all subdivisions of land and any parcels undertaking site plan
activities. All parts of properties being redeveloped, renovated or
improved as part of a subdivision or site plan application shall be
brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter, to
the fullest extent possible.
(2) Landscaping may include plant materials such as trees, shrubs,
ground covers, perennials, annuals, and mulch. It may also include
other man-made and natural elements such as rocks, land forms
and berms, water, sculpture, art, walls, fences, street furnishings
and paving materials.
(3) For buffer and screening requirements, see § 203-69.
C. Tree protection management plan.
(1) A tree protection management plan must be submitted at the time
of site plan application, pursuant to this chapter, if there are one or
more live trees proposed to be cut or removed from the property.
(2) Tree protection management plan(s) shall be submitted with each
site plan or major subdivision plan application. They shall be on the
same size sheets and at the same scale as other corresponding
layout plans in the set, and shall contain the following information:
(a) Location of all existing or proposed buildings, driveways,
grading, septic fields, easements, underground utility lines,
rights-of-way, and other improvements.
(b) Location of existing natural features, including wooded areas,
watercourses, wetlands, and floodplains.
(c) The limits of the tree protection zone, according to the
following distances from proposed improvements:
[1] House or building: 12 feet.
[2] Pavement (parking lot, driveway, sidewalk): five feet.
§ 203-68 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-68
198:802
[3] Septic fields, underground utilities, the base of berm
grading of stormwater management basins, pools, sheds,
picnic shelters and other improvements: 10 feet.
(d) Location of all existing individual live trees outside of the tree
protection zone (i.e., within the area to be disturbed), with
trunk diameters five inches or greater measured 4 1/2 feet
above ground level. Each tree shall be noted by its species, size
and general health condition. Whenever possible, the actual
canopy spread shall be shown, but if it must be estimated, the
canopy shall equal 1 1/2 feet of diameter per one inch of trunk
diameter.
(e) Location of all tree masses to be preserved. Only the outermost
canopy line of these tree masses shall be shown.
(f) Each tree, or mass of trees, to be removed or transplanted
shall be clearly labeled as such.
(g) A chart tabulating the diameter inches being removed, the
required diameter inches to be replaced, and the equivalent
number of compensatory trees.
(h) Specifications for the removal of existing trees and for the
protection of existing trees to be preserved, including detail(s)
of tree protection fencing.
D. Landscape plan requirements.
(1) The requirements and standards described herein shall be
considered the minimum for all landscape plans as required by this
chapter. Standards established by other Township ordinances or by
state and federal rules and regulations shall apply where those
standards are more restrictive than the standards set forth herein.
(2) The landscape plan shall be prepared and sealed by a certified
landscape architect or other similarly qualified professional
acceptable to the Planning Board.
(3) Landscape plans shall be submitted with each site plan or major
subdivision plan application. They shall be on the same size sheets
and at the same scale as other corresponding layout plans in the
set, and shall contain the following information:
(a) Existing vegetation to remain and the location of proposed
plantings, with transplants and compensatory plants clearly
labeled on both the plan and in the planting list/schedule.
(b) Existing and proposed improvements, including structures,
utilities, lighting, signage, stormwater management system
structures, pavement materials, water features, fences, walls.
§ 203-68 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-68
198:803
(c) All ground plane treatments including seed, sod, ground covers
and mulch beds, with beds clearly defined.
(d) Existing and proposed grades, including berm contours.
(e) A plant list on the same sheet, or reference to the sheet on
which it appears, which contains a key or symbol reference,
corresponding to labels or symbols on the plan; the proposed
quantity of each plant species; the scientific and common plant
names; the size of the plant at installation; the root condition;
plant spacing; and any special specifications or instructions.
(f) Details of the proposed method of planting, staking and tree
protection.
(g) Standard planting notes reflecting current industry standards,
including, but not limited to, the guarantee period and
maintenance commitment.
(4) Detailed planting areas, which are not clearly legible on plans at a
smaller scale, shall be shown at a scale of one inch equals 30 feet or
larger, to depict the detail. This may be necessary to communicate
plantings around signage, project entries, in courtyards, tot-lots or
building foundations, for example.
E. Standards for plant material.
(1) Plant species selected shall be suitable to the site’s microclimate,
be appropriate for the intended function, be proportional to site
features, and minimize the amount of maintenance required.
(2) With the exception of transplanted material, all proposed plant
materials shall be nursery-grown, disease-free, and shall conform
to the standards listed in American Standard for Nursery Stock,
ANSI Z60.1, current edition, published by the American Nursery
and Landscape Association (ANLA).
(3) Plant material shall conform to the following minimum sizes and
root condition:
(a) Shade and street trees shall have a minimum caliper of three
inches to 3 1/2 inches, measured six inches above ground level,
and a minimum height of 13 feet to 15 feet at installation. A
minimum of 50% of the trees shall be native to the region.
Multiple-trunked trees should be identified as such in the plant
list. Multiple-trunked trees shall be counted as one tree.
(b) Ornamental and flowering trees shall have a minimum height
of eight to 10 feet at installation. Multiple-trunked trees should
be identified as such in the plant list. Multiple-trunked trees
shall be counted as one tree.
§ 203-68 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-68
198:804
(c) Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of six feet at
installation.
(d) The roots of all trees shall be contained in soil, and shall be
balled and burlapped, except as otherwise noted in this
chapter.
(e) Upright shrubs shall be a minimum height of three feet at
planting. Spreading shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in
spread at planting.
(f) Ground covers, perennials, bulbs and annuals shall be
appropriate to type.
(4) A variety of plant species are encouraged to avoid monocultures, to
encourage long-lived species, and to promote wildlife habitat. Tree
and shrub plantings shall contain the following minimum species
mix:
Number of Trees Minimum Species
1 to 9 1
10 to 49 2
50 to 99 3
100 to 199 4
Over 200 5
Number of Shrubs Minimum Species
1 to 49 1
50 to 99 3
Over 100 5
(5) Other plant types, such as those marginally hardy to the area or
those which have an unusual form, and/or nonvegetative features,
such as water or rock gardens, may be incorporated into required
planting areas. However, only those plants, which meet the
requirements above, may be counted toward satisfying the
minimum planting requirements of this chapter.
(6) Guarantee and maintenance. All landscape materials, including
compensatory and transplanted trees depicted on the approved
landscape plan, shall be financially secured, guaranteed and
maintained, including, without limitation, compliance with the
following:
(a) All landscape improvements to be provided shall be installed
and maintained by accepted practices as recognized by the
American Nursery and Landscape Association. Planting and
maintenance of vegetation shall include, as appropriate, but
not necessarily be limited to, provisions for surface mulch,
§ 203-68 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-68
198:805
staking and guying, irrigation, fertilization, insect and disease
control, pruning, mulching, weeding and watering.
(b) The applicant shall make arrangements acceptable to the
Township that all landscape improvements installed in
accordance with this chapter shall be guaranteed and
maintained in a healthy and/or sound condition, or otherwise
be replaced by equivalent improvements, for a period of at
least two years following their installation. The guarantee
period shall be noted on the plans.
(c) After installation and prior to commencement of the guarantee
period required above, the Township shall perform an
inspection of the finished site for compliance with the
approved landscape plan. Following this inspection, an as-built
landscape plan shall be furnished to the Township by the
applicant. Provided the finished site is found to be in
compliance, the two-year guarantee period shall commence
five days from the date of inspection.
(d) Plants found to be in poor health or lacking normal growth
habit during the two-year guarantee period shall be replaced
with nursery-grown plants, in accordance with the approved
landscape plan, within 60 days of being notified by the
Township, or during the next planting season, if notified out of
season. All replacement plants shall be subject to a new twoyear
guarantee period.
(e) Where accidental damage or vandalism of plants occur, the
applicant shall replace the damaged plant material in
accordance with the original or an approved modified
landscape plan.
(f) The applicant shall be required to escrow sufficient funds for
the maintenance and/or replacement of the proposed
vegetation, including compensatory plantings, during the twoyear
guarantee period. The escrow amount shall be equivalent
to 110% of the amount of the cost estimate submitted with the
approved landscape plan. In addition, an escrow shall be
required for existing plants being disturbed by construction
activities and/or transplanted plants that are being used to
satisfy the minimum requirements contained in this chapter.
This amount shall be equivalent to 110% of the cost of
replacement with nursery-grown stock, based on the number
of tree credits received for each existing tree or transplant. An
escrow is not required for existing preserved trees outside the
construction limits, or for transplanted material not being used
to satisfy the minimum requirements of this chapter.
F. Transplanted plants.
§ 203-68 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-68
198:806
(1) On a case-by-case basis, provisions may be made for the moving of
existing trees, shrubs or other natural features to other locations
on the site if requested by the applicant or the Planning Board.
(2) When used to satisfy a minimum requirement contained in this
chapter, the transplanted plant materials shall be at least the same
size as required nursery-grown material, and shall also be subject
to the same protection, maintenance and guarantee requirements
of this section.
(3) Transplanted material shall be handled according to the ANLA’s
guidelines and pruned according to the NAA’s publication “A300
Pruning Standard.” When pruning, a more conservative crown
clearing is recommended, removing up to 25% of the branches.
G. Compensatory planting.
(1) In the event that preservation of existing trees within the tree
protection zone (outside of the development zone) is impossible,
and/or relocation of improvements impractical, then compensatory
planting shall be required for each live tree within the tree
protection zone, and each specimen tree anywhere on the site.
(2) Trunk diameters shall be measured according to the following
guidelines.
(a) For single-trunked shade trees, at a point 4 1/2 feet above
ground level.
(b) For single-trunked ornamental trees, at a point 12 inches
above ground level.
(c) For evergreen trees, at a point 12 inches above ground level.
(d) For multitrunked trees that branch between one and 4 1/2 feet
above ground level, at a point just below the split.
(e) For multitrunked trees that branch below one foot above
grade, the diameter shall be 60% of the sum total of all trunks
measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
(3) Compensatory trees shall be provided in the following ratios, based
on the sum total of the diameter inches of trees being removed.
These standards are applicable to both deciduous and evergreen
trees. Compensation is not required for shrubs, unless otherwise
required by the Planning Board.
(a) For trees five to 24 inches in diameter, one inch of new tree
caliper shall be provided for every one inch of existing tree
diameter cut or removed.
§ 203-68 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-68
198:807
(b) For trees 24 inches in diameter or greater (specimen trees),
two inches of new tree caliper shall be provided for every one
inch of existing tree diameter cut or removed.
(c) For existing street trees within the right-of-way, one tree, with
a caliper of three to 3 1/2 inches, shall be replanted in the
street tree planting strip.
(d) For other significant areas of woods containing deciduous
trees smaller than five inches in diameter, or evergreens less
than six feet in height, replanting shall be with seedling
material, of comparable native species, placed on a ten-foot-byten-
foot grid. Compensation shall be at a rate of one square
foot of new planting area for one square foot area of
disturbance. This material may be bare root or containergrown
stock.
(4) The number of compensatory trees should be calculated from the
total diameter inches to be replaced, divided by three, rounded up
to the next whole number.
(5) Compensatory trees shall be three to 3 1/2 inches in caliper, and
planted in accordance with the standards contained within
Subsection E above. Evergreen and ornamental trees may be
substituted at a ratio of 2:1 shade tree, for up to 50% of the
requirement. Alternative types of compensatory planting may be
permitted, when approved by the Planning Board.
(6) Locations of compensatory trees must be clearly labeled on the
landscape plan. They may be placed anywhere on the site, but are
in addition to other required trees.
(7) In the event that the applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that constraints incident to the land itself
(including, without limitation, extreme topography, unsuitable
soils, rock outcrops and existing uninterrupted dense canopy)
render it impractical to locate on the lot the required number of
compensatory trees, then, at the election of the Planning Board, the
applicant shall: install a portion of the required compensatory trees
on other public lands within the Township; contribute to the
Township the estimated cost of those trees which cannot practically
be installed on the property for later installation of trees on public
lands; and/or install fewer, larger or more valuable compensatory
trees on the lot with an aggregate cost as installed and guaranteed
not less than the estimated aggregate cost of the required number
of compensatory trees. Whichever alternative is elected by the
Board shall serve as the basis for calculating the required financial
security in conformance with Subsection E(7)(f) above.
H. Street trees.
§ 203-68 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-68
198:808
(1) Street trees shall be required along all existing or proposed public
or private streets when they abut or lie within the proposed
subdivision or site plan, and are in addition to other required
plantings.
(2) Street trees shall be placed in a planting strip located between the
proposed sidewalk and curb, within the right-of-way line. Where no
sidewalks are proposed and are not planned in the future, the trees
shall be placed five feet behind the curb or edge of pavement.
Street trees shall not be planted within clear sight triangles, as
defined in this chapter.
(3) Street trees shall comply with the size and spacing requirements
below. A minimum of 50% of the proposed street trees shall be
native to the region.
Tree Size
(feet)
Planting Interval
(feet)
Large trees (40+) 40
Medium-sized trees (30-40) 30
Small trees (to 30) 20
(4) The linear footage of right-of-way or pavement frontage shall be
divided by the planting interval, without deducting the areas of
driveway cuts or crosswalks. Fractions shall be rounded up. Trees
shall be distributed along the entire planting strip, although they
need not be evenly spaced.
(5) To prevent the total obliteration of sections of trees by disease or
insect infestation, a variety of trees shall be used in each street tree
planting. Species mix shall conform to Subsection E(4) above.
Street tree species should not be alternated, but should be grouped
at the designer’s discretion. This does not preclude the limited use
of a singular species of tree to create a strong design statement. In
general, no more than 20 trees in a row or in a cluster should be of
the same species, unless otherwise approved.
(6) In certain rural sections of the Township, the planting of groves or
clusters of street trees may be more appropriate to replicate the
naturally occurring patterns of succession. In these cases, the
following additional guidelines shall apply:
(a) Two street trees with a minimum one-and-one-half-inch to twoinch
caliper may be substituted for each one required street
tree.
(b) Clusters shall contain from two to seven trees. The number of
trees in each sequential cluster should be varied.
§ 203-68 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-68
198:809
(c) The trees within the clusters shall be spaced from 15 feet to 30
feet on center.
(d) The maximum distance between clusters shall be no greater
than 75 feet.
(e) The width of the tree planting strip may extend up to 15 feet
onto the lot from the right-of-way line.
(7) Alternate arrangements to create a special effect (i.e., columnar
trees spaced 15 feet on center at a development entry) may be
permitted on a case-by-case basis, when approved by the Planning
Board.
(8) Trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with the installation
and maintenance of sidewalks and utilities, in accordance with the
following guidelines.
(9) Plantings shall not block, impede or interfere with the installation,
safe use, operation or maintenance of roadways, sidewalks, sight
easements, utilities, and lighting in accordance with the following
guidelines. Plantings shall not be of an invasive nature, weedy or
brittle character, easily susceptible to pest infestations and/or
diseases, or possess hazardous characteristics (bee-attracting,
poisonous, thorny) when used in areas designated for sitting or
play.
(a) Five feet from curbs and sidewalks. If trees are located closer
than 10 feet to a sidewalk, root barriers shall be placed along
the tree side of the sidewalk for a distance of 12 feet, centered
on the trunk. Root barriers are not required along the curb;
(b) Ten feet from underground utilities;
(c) Fifteen feet from overhead utilities, unless the use of small
shade or ornamental trees is approved; and
(d) Trees planted adjacent to sidewalks shall be limbed to a
minimum of seven feet.
(10) The street tree requirement may be waived where existing
preserved vegetation is considered sufficient to meet these
requirements, and is reasonably assured of continued survival.
(11) If tree pits are used within paved areas, they may be covered with
tree grates and/or a variety of porous materials; however, the
minimum surface area for gas exchange must be 15 square feet per
tree, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board.
I. Landscaping for parking lots, loading and vehicle storage areas.
(1) Except for detached single-family and two-family dwelling units, a
screen planting, berm, fence, wall or combination thereof, no less
§ 203-68 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-68
198:810
than four feet in height, measured from the center line of the
adjacent street, shall be provided between the off-street parking
areas and any lot line or street line except where a building
intervenes or where the distance between such areas and the lot
line or street line is greater than 150 feet.
(2) All site plans/subdivisions that contain parking lots, access lanes
and service drives shall be designed to include planting islands,
divider strips and/or building foundation plantings. Such
landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the vehicular use
area, or along their perimeter, in order to break the view of parked
vehicles in a manner not impairing visibility.
(3) Planting islands shall conform to the following standards:
(a) Planting islands shall be distributed throughout the parking
lot, according to one of these two formulas:
[1] One planting island, a minimum of nine feet wide by 18
feet long, spaced not more than 180 feet apart, or every 20
parking stalls, in single or double bays; or
[2] One diamond tree pit, a minimum of four feet square,
spaced not more than 45 feet apart, or every five parking
stalls in double bays. These are to be placed at an angle of
45° to the stalls, at the conjunction of four adjacent stalls.
In addition, islands 18 feet in width shall be provided at
the ends of rows in which diamond tree pits are used.
(b) Islands should be placed opposite each other in adjacent rows
of parking, to reduce the number of raised islands, and to
increase the area available for tree roots.
(c) The last parking stall in a row shall be separated from drive
aisles by a planting island, a minimum of nine feet in width.
(d) Each planting island shall contain one shade tree plus three
shrubs, ground cover, perennials and/or mulch to cover the
entire area at maturity. At least 50% of the proposed shade
trees shall be native to the region. Shrubs located at the ends
of the islands shall be maintained at a maximum height of 2 1/2
feet for sight line and safety purposes.
(4) Divider strips shall conform to the following standards:
(a) Divider strips shall be placed at every other bay of parking,
running the length of the rows of parking, and be landscaped
with plantings of shade, ornamental, and/or flowering trees,
plus shrubs, ground cover and/or mulch to cover the entire
area at maturity. A “bay of parking” is the width of pavement
needed to accommodate either one or two rows of parking
stalls plus one access lane.
§ 203-68 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-68
198:811
(b) Divider strips shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, unless a
sidewalk is proposed within the divider strip, then the divider
strip shall be increased in width by six feet. An approved root
barrier shall be placed along the tree side of the sidewalk for a
distance of 12 feet, centered on the trunk.
[1] The quantity of shade trees required shall be calculated at
one tree per 40 feet of divider-strip length, exclusive of
end islands. Two ornamental trees may be substituted for
one shade tree, for up to 50% of the requirement. The
trees need not be spaced evenly apart; however, the
maximum spacing shall be 50 feet.
[2] The quantity of shrubs shall be calculated at one shrub per
10 feet of divider strip, exclusive of end islands. Shrubs
shall be spaced according to size, but not more than five
feet apart. Gaps may be placed between the shrub
plantings to provide areas for ground covers, decorative
mulch beds, artwork, crosswalks, or flowering plants.
Shrubs within 10 feet of the ends of the strips shall not
exceed 2 1/2 feet in height, so as not to block visibility. This
shall not preclude the use of taller shrubs elsewhere
within the divider island.
(5) All loading areas shall be landscaped and screened sufficiently to
obscure the view of the parked vehicles and loading platforms from
any public street throughout the year. Such screening shall be by
an extension of the building, a fence, berm, wall, planting or
combination thereof and shall not be less than five feet in height at
the time of planting, and eight feet in height at maturity.
(6) To prevent conflicts with the opening and closing of automobile
doors, and to reduce damage from automobile overhangs, all shrub
plantings in parking lot islands and divider strips located adjacent
to or abutting parking stalls shall be set back a minimum of two
feet from the curb or edge of pavement.
(7) Plantings required within the parking areas are exclusive of other
planting requirements such as street trees, buffer and
compensatory plantings.
(8) See § 203-69 for further requirements for buffers.
J. Facade plantings. To break up long stretches of facade and provide a
more comfortable pedestrian environment, plantings shall be placed
along the sides of buildings facing parking lots and street rights-of-way,
according to the following standards:
(1) Plantings are required for all sides of a non-single-family
residential building facing parking lots or areas intended primarily
for pedestrian use. Plantings are not required along the sides of
buildings containing service or loading areas, unless they also face
§ 203-68 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-68
198:812
parking areas. If part of a side of the building faces parking, only
that portion is subject to these requirements.
(2) Plantings are required for all sides of a non-single-family
residential building facing a street right-of-way.
(3) Plantings shall front a minimum of 50% of the length of the building
and any outdoor retail, cafe or occupied areas. Screen plantings
are not required in front of outdoor sales or cafe areas; however,
consideration should be given to placing some of the required trees
in front of these areas.
(4) Facade plantings should consist of a minimum of 50% evergreen
material to ensure that landscaping is present during the late fall to
early spring seasons.
(5) The minimum planting requirement shall be one shade tree per 40
feet of building facade, plus six shrubs (including ornamental
grasses with a minimum height of three feet) per 20 feet of building
facade, outdoor retail, cafe or other occupied areas. To allow for
design flexibility, the following substitutions may be made:
(a) Up to 50% of the required quantity of shade trees may be
substituted with two ornamental or evergreen trees, or six
shrubs, per shade tree.
(b) Up to 25% of the required quantity of shrubs may be
substituted with two ground cover shrubs or perennials per
shrub.
(6) Plantings may be placed in a lawn area, tree pits, and/or planters as
appropriate to the character of the development, using the
following guidelines as to placement:
(a) Shade trees shall be placed at least 15 feet from a building
wall. Ornamental and evergreen trees shall be placed at least
10 feet from a building wall.
(b) If any tree is located closer than 10 feet to a sidewalk,
approved root barriers shall be placed along the tree side of
the sidewalk for a distance of 12 feet, centered on the trunk.
(c) Planters shall be at least 30 inches high, but no higher than 42
inches, and contain drainage holes.
K. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEVELOPMENT ZONE — The area where the majority of development
on a site will take place. This area is located outside of the tree
protection zone, and is typically where buildings, parking lots and
stormwater basins are proposed. Only specimen trees (24 inches and
greater) are to be compensated for within the development zone.
§ 203-68 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-68
198:813
§ 203-69. Buffer and screen standards. [Amended 12-15-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-24]
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — An area bounded by the parameters
outlined in Subsection C(2)(c) where trees are to be preserved as much
as possible. All trees five inches or greater that are removed from this
area must be compensated for.
A. Purpose and applicability.
(1) Buffers and screens shall be submitted with all site plan and
subdivision applications.
(2) The primary purpose of buffers is to eliminate views and reduce
noise perception beyond the lot.
(3) The primary purpose of screens is to reduce view into lots.
B. Type, location and width.
(1) Buffers are required in the following locations:
(a) Along all lots and streets separating residential and industrial
uses from arterial and collector streets;
(b) Separating all nonresidential uses from residential uses or
zoning districts;
(c) On reverse-frontage lots, adjacent to the higher-classified
street right-of-way; and
(d) Along all state highways and railroad rights-of-way.
(2) Screens are required in the following locations:
(a) Along all street lines where loading and storage areas can be
seen from the street;
(b) Along all nonaccessible sides of trash enclosures, equipment or
storage buildings and yard and utility boxes;
(c) Along the entire perimeter of stormwater management basins;
and
(d) Around the perimeter of all parking lots or other similar
vehicle use areas (i.e., service stations and bank/fast-food
drive-through lanes).
(3) Width of buffers and screens.
(a) Where a nonresidential district or use is proposed to be
developed contiguous to a residential district or use, the
nonresidential user shall provide a planted buffer 75 feet in
width within the nonresidential district.
§ 203-68 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-69
198:814
(b) Where an industrial or manufacturing district or use is
contiguous to an office or commercial district or use, a buffer
25 feet in width shall be located within the district where the
development is taking place.
(c) Where a residential district or use is proposed to be developed
contiguous to a commercial or office district or use, a twentyfive-
foot buffer shall be provided within the residential district.
(d) Where a residential district or use is proposed to be developed
contiguous to an industrial district or use, a fifty-foot buffer
shall be provided within the residential district.
(e) Where a residential district or use is proposed to be developed
contiguous to a manufacturing district or use, a buffer 75 feet
in width shall be provided within the residential district.
(f) Where a residential district or use, other than single-family or
two-family residential, is proposed to be developed contiguous
to a residential district or use, a fifteen-foot buffer shall be
provided.
(g) Where a single-family or two-family residential use is proposed
to be developed contiguous to a non-single-family residential
district or use, a fifteen-foot buffer shall be provided in the
district where the development is taking place.
(h) Where a single-family residential use is proposed to be
developed contiguous to another single-family residential
district or use, no buffer is required.
(i) If a road should separate two districts or uses, a buffer 15 feet
in width shall be provided within the district where the
development is taking place.
(4) Buffer and screen widths shall be measured horizontally. If a
reduction in buffer width is granted by the approving authority,
then the minimum shrub planting requirements shall be doubled.
(5) Buffer and screen widths shall be in addition to the normal depth
and/or width of the lot required in a residential district. The area
included in the buffer or screen strip shall not be included in
calculating the minimum lot area as required by the specific
residential district in which the lot is located. This strip shall be
part of the development and shall be designated on the plan: “This
strip is reserved for buffering and/or screening. The placement of
any structure hereon is prohibited.”
C. General buffer and screen composition and planting standards.
(1) Buffer may be comprised of existing vegetation and natural
features, proposed new or transplanted vegetation, fences, walls
and/or berms. When berms are included in a buffer, a curvilinear or
§ 203-69 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-69
198:815
naturalistic arrangement is encouraged. Existing vegetation and
natural features may be used as a buffer or screen only at the
discretion of the Board, and only if such features meet the intent of
this section.
(2) No structure, activity, storage of materials or parking of vehicles
shall be permitted within a buffer or screen area.
(3) The location and design of buffers and screens shall consider the
use being screened, the distance between the use and the property
line, differences in elevations, the types of buffers or screens and
other combinations of man-made and natural features. The buffer
or screen shall be designed, planted, graded, landscaped and
developed with the general guidelines that the closer a use or
activity is to the property line, or the more intense the use, the
more effective the buffer or screen must be in obscuring light and
vision, and reducing noise beyond the lot.
(4) The following methods shall be used for the purpose of calculating
the amount of plant material required within a buffer or screen.
(a) A buffer length shall be measured at the property line or rightof-
way line and shall include all existing or proposed driveway
openings or easements.
(b) Where buffer areas overlap, as in the case of side and rear
tract boundaries, only the more stringent buffer shall apply in
the area of overlap. However, care shall be taken to avoid
unplanted gaps in what would be the area of overlap.
(c) The length of the perimeter of stormwater management basins
shall be measured along the center of the basin’s rim.
(5) All buffer and/or screen plantings along state highways shall
require a berm as an integral part of the landscaping.
(6) All plantings shall conform to the size and standards prescribed in
§ 203-68E(3).
(7) At least 50% of all shade trees and 25% of all shrubs shall be native
to the region.
(8) At least 50% of the shrubs shall be evergreen.
(9) Up to 50% of the required shade trees may be substituted with
ornamental trees at a ratio of two ornamental trees for each shade
tree.
(10)Up to 50% of the required shrubs may be substituted with
ornamental grasses, which will attain a minimum height of three
feet.
§ 203-69 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-69
198:816
(11) A minimum of 50% of the required buffer width must contain
required plantings.
(12) Plants shall be distributed throughout the entire length of buffers
and screens, but need not be evenly spaced. However, there shall
be no more than 100 feet between shade trees, 50 feet between
evergreen trees, and 50 feet between shrub clusters.
(13) Buffer and screen plantings shall be broken at points of vehicular
and pedestrian access, outside of clear sight triangles.
(14) The remainder of the buffer area shall be planted with ground
covers, including lawn grasses or meadow plantings, as
appropriate to the character of the site and adjacent lands.
D. Specific buffer and screen requirements.
(1) Buffers shall contain the following type and quantity of plant
material per 100 feet of buffer length and achieve 80% opacity
after five years' growth.
(a) Twenty-five- to fifty-foot wide buffers: two shade trees, four
evergreen trees, and 20 shrubs.
(b) Buffers up to 25 feet wide: two shade trees, two evergreen
trees, and 20 shrubs.
(2) Screens shall contain the following type and quantity of plant
material:
(a) Loading/storage areas and trash enclosures shall be screened
using evergreen trees and shrubs that will achieve 100%
opacity after three years growth.
[1] If a decorative wall or solid fence is proposed, then a low
screen may be used consisting of, at a minimum,
evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs a minimum of three
feet in height at time of planting.
[2] If no wall or fence is proposed and vegetation will act as
the only screen, then a high screen consisting of large
evergreen shrubs, spaced no more than four feet on center
or as needed to form a continuous screen of eight feet in
height after five years’ growth, or evergreen trees spaced
12 feet on center, with evergreen shrubs placed between
the evergreen trees, shall be planted.
(b) Stormwater management basins shall be screened based on
the following quantities of plant material and shall achieve
50% opacity after five years’ growth.
[1] One shade tree, plus two evergreen trees, plus 10 shrubs,
plus either 20 groundcover shrubs or 300 herbaceous
§ 203-69 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-69
198:817
§ 203-70. Fences.
groundcover plants or bulbs per 100 feet of basin
perimeter length.
[2] Up to 50% of the groundcover shrubs may be substituted
with perennials at a rate of two perennials per
groundcover shrub.
[3] Basin headwall and other structures shall be screened
with required plantings; however, plantings shall not
impede the basin’s function.
(c) Parking lots/vehicle use areas shall be screened based on the
following quantities of plant material and shall achieve 50%
opacity after five years’ growth.
[1] A low screen comprised of evergreen and/or dense
deciduous shrubs, capable of obscuring the glare of
automobile headlights, shall be evenly spaced to form a
contiguous screen or hedge throughout the year and shall
be a minimum height of three feet at time of planting.
(3) If a use is not listed, the screen most suited to the use shall be used.
A. General regulations.
(1) No fences shall be erected within the municipality without the
owner of the premises or his representative, authorized in writing
to make such application, first obtaining a zoning permit from the
Zoning Officer.
(2) Application for such fences shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Officer and shall set forth the following information:
(a) The owner and address of the premises where the fence is to
be erected.
(b) A description and specifications of the fence, including size,
height, dimensions, material and size and percentage of
openings.
(c) A sketch or plan of the fence.
(d) A certified plot plan or survey of the premises in question,
which shall show streets abutting and at the nearest
intersection and shall approximately indicate the location of
structures within 10 feet of the fence.
(3) The fee for such permit shall be as provided in the Township of
Woolwich fee schedule.123
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Fees.
§ 203-69 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-70
198:818
(4) Any existing deed restrictions are not be superseded by this
section.
(5) Fences accessory to farm operations are exempt from the
requirements of this section with respect to permit, fee,
construction or materials. This exemption shall not extend to that
percentage of farm property set aside for residential purposes as
delineated upon the property record cards of the Township.
B. Regulations for residential lots. Fences on residential lots may be
erected as hereinafter set forth:
(1) Fences shall be no closer than one foot to the Township road, street
and/or right-of-way.
(2) Fences not exceeding 48 inches in height above ground level may
be erected between the building line and the road, street and/or
right-of-way.
(3) Fences not exceeding six feet in height above the ground level may
be erected between the front building line to the side property lines
and to the rear of the property.
(4) Front fences on corner properties shall not be constructed of
materials that would block the view of vehicular traffic at the
intersection.
(5) Fences must be maintained by the owner and kept in alignment and
shall be maintained in a safe, sound and upright condition and in
accordance with the approved plan on file with the Construction
Official.
(6) In all cases where fencing is erected along or adjacent to a front
property line or between such a front property line and the actual
building line, or both, or along or adjacent to any property line
bordering on any street and the actual building line with respect to
such street, or both, said fencing shall not exceed a height of four
feet. Along other locations, the height limit is six feet. The
maximum height shall be measured from the natural grade of the
land. [Amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(7) No fence, wall or hedge shall contain spikes, sharp objects, barbed
wire, razor-ribbon or any other similarly dangerous material which
may be hazardous to persons or animals except as described below
in Subsection B(8). [Amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(8) The following fences and walls and construction materials related
thereto are specifically prohibited in all districts in the Township of
Woolwich: barbed wire, canvas, cloth, expandable and collapsible
fences and slat fences of any type. The ban on barbed wire shall not
apply to fences or walls located on and necessary to the operation
of a livestock farm which is in excess of five acres, or to barbed wire
§ 203-70 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-70
198:819
strands placed atop a security fence or wall constructed between
six feet and eight feet in height around a conforming commercial
or industrial use, provided that the fence or wall conforms to all
other conditions as described below in Subsection C(3), and that
no barbed wire be permitted in the front yard of nonfarm uses.
[Added 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(9) All fences must be installed with the side where the supporting
posts or poles are most visible facing the inside or towards the lot
the fence is erected on. The side where the supporting posts or
poles is least visible and is the most finished must face the outside
or adjoining lots or the public right-of-way. [Added 6-6-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-16]
(10) All fences must be erected within the property line, and no fence is
to be erected so as to encroach upon the public or private right-ofway,
easements, restrictions or declarations and covenants without
the request and issuance of an "encroachment permit." [Added
6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16; amended 4-17-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-10; 7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10]
C. Regulations for nonresidential lots.
(1) Fences shall be no closer than one foot to a Township road, street
and/or right-of-way.
(2) Fences shall not be less than four feet in height.
(3) Barbed wire fences are prohibited in all commercial areas except
as indicated below: [Added 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(a) The fences are needed to prevent entry into a hazardous area.
(b) The fences are needed to secure an area where materials,
equipment and/or machinery are stored.
(c) In such other situations where the Zoning Officer determines
that there are reasons justifying the construction of barbed
wire fencing.
(d) Where such fences are permitted, the fact that they are barbed
wire shall be clearly indicated on the fence at intervals of not
more than 75 feet.
D. Encroachment permits: [Added 7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10]
(1) Fences to be erected or replaced that are located in a public utility
easement require an encroachment permit from the Director of
Municipal Services.
(2) A fence of permitted height and design may be constructed along
or upon common property lines and across any utility easement so
as to allow maximum use of the area to be enclosed. Fences placed
§ 203-70 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-70
198:820
§ 203-71. Garbage and refuse disposal units.
on utility easements shall provide access to manholes, utility boxes,
cleanouts, or other apparatus that may be used from time to time
for maintenance of the utility.
(3) Fences in drainage easements shall require prior approval of the
Director of Municipal Services to allow for proper flow of water.
(a) All fence posts within drainage easements shall be set in sand
or stone only (concrete or like materials shall be prohibited)
(b) Fence panels shall have at minimum a two-inch space between
the ground and the lowest portion of the fence panel. Once
installed all fences within a drainage easement shall be
inspected for compliance.
(c) The required two-inch space between the fence panel and the
ground shall be maintained by the homeowner at his/her
expense without remuneration from the Township.
(4) When a fence is being installed it may not be installed across or on
top of a utility box, manhole, or other public apparatus for
maintaining utilities.
(5) When the positioning of a fence obstructs access to a utility box,
manhole, or other public apparatus for maintaining utilities, the
homeowner shall be required to remove such fence to allow access
by the Township at his/her sole expense without remuneration from
the Township.
(6) The Township shall not issue an "encroachment permit" for any
New Jersey Board of Public Utilities Easement. Homeowners may
contact the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities for further
assistance.
A. All trash enclosures shall be located so as to be hidden from passing
motorists.
B. All trash disposal units shall be enclosed by a decorative fence or
masonry wall a minimum height of six feet with either welded steel
panel or solid wooden gates.
C. Where refuse disposal units are used in townhouse or apartment
dwellings, the following requirements shall apply:
(1) No more than one disposal unit will be permitted for each 10
dwelling units.
(2) Refuse disposal units shall be conveniently located within a
minimum of 25 feet, but not more than 100 feet, of the building.
§ 203-70 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-72
198:821
§ 203-72. Open space and greenway lands. [Amended 8-1-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-25; 12-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-39; 10-27-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-19]
A. Intent. Protected farmland, open space and greenway lands (referred to
herein as "greenway lands") in all subdivisions shall meet the standards
below.
B. Uses permitted on greenway lands. The following uses are permitted on
greenway land areas:
(1) Conservation of open space in its natural state (for example,
woodland, fallow field, or managed meadow);
(2) Agricultural and horticultural uses. Such uses may include raising
crops or livestock; wholesale nurseries; associated buildings that
are specifically needed to support an active, viable agricultural or
horticultural operation;
(3) Pastureland for horses based on best management practices;
(4) Forestry, in keeping with established best management practices
for selective harvesting and sustained yield forestry;
(5) Neighborhood open spaces uses such as village greens, commons,
picnic areas, community gardens, trails, and similar low-impact
passive recreational uses, specifically excluding motorized off-road
vehicles, shooting ranges, and other uses similar in character and
potential impact as determined by the Joint Land Use Board;
(6) If greenway land becomes a public park; active noncommercial
recreation areas, such as playing fields, playgrounds, courts, and
bikeways, provided such areas do not consume more than half of
the minimum required greenway land. Playing fields, playgrounds,
and courts shall also be permitted, and they shall generally be
gravel-surfaced, properly drained, and provide safe ingress and
egress;
(7) Water supply systems and stormwater detention areas designed,
landscaped, and available for use as an integral part of the
greenway;
(8) Easements for drainage, access, sewer, or water lines, or other
public purposes; and
(9) Underground utility rights-of-way. Aboveground utility and street
rights-of-way may traverse conservation areas but shall not count
toward the minimum required greenway land.
C. Greenway design standards.
(1) Greenway lands shall, whenever possible, be laid out in general
accordance with the Township's greenways system and farmland
§ 203-72 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-72
198:822
preservation designed maps as included in the Woolwich Township
Open Space and Recreation Plan of 2004 to encourage the
development of an interconnected network of open space. The
required greenway land may consist of a mixture of primary
conservation areas (SCAs), which shall be included in the greenway
lands to the greatest extent possible. PCAs comprise floodplains,
wetlands, and slopes over 10%. SCAs include mapped areas
showing high groundwater recharge (11 inches to 14 inches per
year), natural heritage priority areas, and critical habitat areas
as designed by the landscape project, as well as other scenic,
natural and historic features such as viewsheds, natural swales,
and historic structures that may be unmapped but should be
incorporated into site plans or subdivisions during the site visit.
(2) In Option 1 subdivisions (as per §§ 203-40, 203-41, and 203-42), the
greenway land comprises a minimum of 50% of the gross tract
area. This land shall generally remain undivided and may be owned
and maintained by a homeowners' association, land trust, another
conservation organization reorganized by the Township, or by a
private individual (typically as part of the original farmhouse).
These ownership options may be combined so that different parts
of the greenway land may be owned by different entities.
D. Other requirements.
(1) No portion of any building lot may be used for meeting the
minimum required greenway land. Greenway land may be located
so as to meet any potential needs of the neighborhood. Active
agricultural land with farm buildings, excluding areas used for
residences, may be used to meet the minimum required greenway
land.
(2) Pedestrian and maintenance access, excluding those lands used for
agricultural or horticultural purposes in accordance with
Subsection B(2) herein, shall be provided to public greenway land
in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Each neighborhood shall provide one centrally located access
point per 15 lots, a minimum of 35 feet in width.
(b) Access to greenway land for agriculture may be appropriately
restricted for public safety to prevent interference with
agricultural operations, provided that access for farming
operations is permitted.
(3) All greenway land areas that are not public parks, or being farmed,
shall be left in a natural state. Greenway lands that are left in a
natural state, whether held as public or private land, shall be
exempt from the requirements of the Township Property
§ 203-72 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-72
198:823
Maintenance Ordinance,124 with the exception of a six-foot-wide
buffer from roads, sidewalks, and pathways.
E. Permanent greenway protection through conservation easements.
(1) In Option 1 subdivisions (as per §§ 203-40, 203-41, and 203-42), all
greenway land provided shall be subject to permanent
conservation easements prohibiting future development and
defining the range of permitted activities. For example, the clearing
of woodland habitat shall generally be prohibited, except as
necessary to create trails, active recreation facilities, and to install
subsurface septic disposal systems or spray irrigation facilities. A
list of permitted uses of greenway lands is contained in this section
in Subsections B and C.
(2) The Joint Land Use Board may require portions of fee simple lots to
be encumbered by conservation easements to protect valuable or
sensitive natural features or landscape features on such lots.
F. Ownership of greenway land and common facilities.
(1) Development restrictions. All greenway land shall be permanently
deed restricted from future subdivision and development. Under no
circumstances shall any development be permitted in the open
space at any time, except for those uses listed in Subsection B.
(2) Ownership options. The following methods may be used, either
individually or in combination, to own common facilities. Common
facilities shall not be transferred to another entity except for
transfer to another method of ownership permitted under this
section, and then only when there is no change in the common
facilities or in the open space ratio of the overall development.
Ownership methods shall conform to the following:
(a) Fee simple dedication to the Township. The Township may, but
shall not be required to, accept any portion of the common
facilities, provided that:
[1] There is no cost of acquisition to the Township; and
[2] The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such
facilities.
(b) Condominium association. Common facilities may be
controlled through the use of condominium agreements. Such
agreements shall be in accordance with relevant state law. All
open space and common facilities shall be held as "common
element."
(c) Homeowners' association. Common facilities may be held in
common ownership by a homeowners' association, subject to
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Property Maintenance.
§ 203-72 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-72
198:824
all of the provisions for homeowners' associations set forth
in state regulations and statutes. In addition, the following
regulations shall be met:
[1] The applicant shall provide the Township a description of
the organization of the proposed association, including its
bylaws, and all documents governing ownership,
maintenance, and use restrictions or common facilities.
[2] The proposed association shall be established by the
owner or applicant and shall be operating (with financial
subsidization by the owner or applicant, if necessary)
before the sale of any dwelling units in the development.
[3] Membership in the association shall be automatic
(mandatory) for all purchasers of dwelling units therein
and their successors in title.
[4] The association shall be responsible for maintenance and
insurance of common facilities.
[5] The bylaws shall confer legal authority on the association
to place a lien on the real property of any member who
falls delinquent in his dues. Such dues shall be paid with
the accrued interest before the lien may be lifted.
[6] Written notice of any proposed transfer of common
facilities by the association or the assumption of
maintenance for common facilities may be given to all
members of the association and to the Township no less
than 30 days prior to such event.
[7] The association shall have adequate staff to administer,
maintain, and operate such common facilities.
(d) Private conservation organization or the county. With
permission of the Township, an owner may transfer either fee
simple title of the open space or easements on the open space
to a private nonprofit conservation organization or to the
county, provided that:
[1] The conservation organization is acceptable to the
Township and is a bona fide conservation organization
intended to exist indefinitely;
[2] The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for
proper reversion or transfer of ownership in the event that
the organization or Gloucester County becomes unwilling
or unable to continue carrying out its functions;
[3] The greenway land is permanently restricted from future
development through a conservation easement and the
§ 203-72 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-72
198:825
Township is given the ability to enforce these restrictions;
and
[4] A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
established between the owner and the organization or
Gloucester County.
(e) Non-common private ownership. At the discretion of the Joint
Land Use Board, up to 100% of the required greenway land
may be included within one or more large "conservancy lots" of
at least 10 acres, provided the open space is permanently
restricted from future development through a conservation
easement, or farmland preservation except for those uses
listed in Subsection B, and that the Township is given the
ability to enforce these restrictions.
(3) Dedication of easements to the Township. The Township may, but
shall not be required to, accept easements for public use of any
portion of the common land or facilities. In such cases, the facility
remains in the ownership of the condominium association,
homeowners' association, or private conservation organization
while the easements are held by the Township. In addition, the
following regulations shall apply:
(a) There shall be no cost of acquisition to the Township;
(b) Any such easements for public use shall be accessible to the
residents of the Township; and
(c) A satisfactory maintenance agreement shall be reached
between the owner and the Township.
(4) Maintenance of greenway land and common facilities.
(a) Unless otherwise agreed to by the Joint Land Use Board, the
cost and responsibility of maintaining common facilities and
greenway land shall be borne by the property owner,
condominium association, homeowners' association, or
conservation organization.
(b) The applicant shall, at the time of preliminary plan
submissions, provide a plan for maintenance of greenway lands
and operation of common facilities in accordance with the
following requirements:
[1] The plan shall define ownership;
[2] The plan shall establish necessary regular and periodic
operation and maintenance responsibilities for the various
kinds of open space (i.e., lawns, meadow, pasture,
cropland, woodlands, etc.).
§ 203-72 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-72
198:826
§ 203-73. Cluster development.
[3] The plan shall estimate staffing needs, insurance
requirements, and associated costs, and define the means
for funding the maintenance of the greenway land and
operation of any common facilities on an ongoing basis.
Such funding plan shall include the means for funding
long-term capital improvements as well as regular yearly
operating and maintenance costs.
[4] The applicant may be required to escrow sufficient funds
for the maintenance and operation costs of common
facilities for up to one year, at the discretion of the
Township.
[5] Any changes to the maintenance plan shall be approved by
the Joint Land Use Board.
(c) In the event that the organization established to maintain the
greenway lands and the common facilities, or any successor
organization thereto, fails to maintain all or any portion thereof
in reasonable order and condition, the Township may assume
responsibility for maintenance, in which case any escrow funds
may be forfeited and any permits may be revoked or
suspended.
(d) The Township may enter the premises and take corrective
action, including extended maintenance. The costs of such
corrective action may be charged to the property owner,
condominium association, homeowners' association,
conservation organization, or individual property owners who
make up a condominium or homeowners' association and may
include administrative costs and penalties as stated in Article
XI, Remedies and Penalties, of this chapter. Such costs shall
become a lien on said properties. Notice of such lien shall be
filed by the Township with the County Clerk or County
Registrar.
A. Cluster development shall be permitted as part of any development
within an RLM or RMD Zone, provided that the parcel contains not less
than 25 contiguous acres of land, that public water and sewer are
available and further subject to the criteria hereinafter set forth. The
term "cluster development" shall mean a development of dwellings that
allows for a grouping of the structures which reduces the lot area and
yard requirements and incorporates the remaining areas as open space
owned as an appurtenance to ownership of the dwellings. [Amended
8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-25]
B. Permitted uses. The principal accessory and conditional uses set forth
in §§ 203-39, 203-40, 203-41 and 203-42 of this chapter shall be
permitted in a cluster development.
§ 203-72 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-73
198:827
C. Maximum density. The density of the development may be increased by
a factor of not more than 25% over the applicable limitations set forth in
§ 203-49 for such dwelling type and district. In the event public water
and sewer are not available to the development, no such increase in
density shall be permitted.
D. Area and yard requirements.
(1) Each lot shall meet the requirements set forth in § 203-49 for the
respective district with the exception that:
(a) The minimum lot area for an individual lot may be reduced by a
factor of not more than 25% of the minimum lot area set forth
in § 203-49 for such dwelling type and district.
(b) The front yard requirements may be reduced to 10 feet where
a dwelling unit fronts on a private street.
(c) The frontage requirements of up to 25% of lots for detached
dwelling units or two-family dwelling units within a cluster of
said units may be reduced to a minimum of 20 feet.
(2) Minimum yards for single-family attached dwellings shall be
measured from the front, side and rear of each building. The total
minimum distance between the buildings shall be the sum of the
two abutting yard areas. The minimum yards shall be 25 feet for
front yards on public streets and 15 feet for front yards on private
streets, 15 feet for side yards and 25 feet for rear yards.
(3) No portion of any building shall be closer to any portion of another
building than the combined distances of the abutting yard
requirements for each building as set forth below:
(a) Thirty feet from the side of any structure to any other
structure.
(b) The Planning or Zoning Board, after due consideration of
plans, testimony or other submission, may waive strict
compliance with this subsection to further the architectural
relationship of building groups.
(4) Minimum parking setbacks shall be 35 feet from any county rightof-
way and 20 feet from any municipal right-of-way or project
entrance drive.
E. Open space. Not less than 25% of the gross land area of the
development shall be deed-restricted from further residential
development set aside as open space. Not more than 50% of such open
space may be designated as wetlands as designated by the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service. For the purposes of this section, no
drainage structure, drainage basin or utility right-of-way shall be
considered open space. The open space shall be contiguous and to the
greatest extent possible centrally located to the residential uses. A
§ 203-73 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-73
198:828
§ 203-74. Model home, sales offices and spec homes. [Added
4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 93-3]
minimum of 200 contiguous feet of the open space shall front on a
municipal right-of-way, project entrance or internal collector street.
An open space organization shall be created pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-43 et seq., unless the open space is dedicated to and accepted
by the Township Committee or other qualified agency.
A. An applicant who has received final approval of a major subdivision of
10 or more lots may apply for permits to construct model homes or
sales offices. These model homes or sales offices shall be for the
purposes of marketing and may not be sold for residential purposes
until all other lots in the subdivision have been purchased by
perspective homeowners. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66, model
homes or sales offices shall not be considered a business use during the
period necessary for the sale of new homes within the subdivision.
Model homes or sales offices and homes constructed for speculative
purposes ("spec homes") shall be permitted, provided that the
requirements and conditions as noted herein are satisfied prior to
issuance of a zoning permit and/or construction permit.
B. The following conditions shall apply to model homes or sales offices and
spec homes, as noted herein:
(1) Model homes or sales offices shall meet all zoning requirements
which apply to the particular dwelling type and to the respective
zoning district in which the subdivision is located.
(2) There shall be a maximum of one model home or sales office or one
spec home for every five lots in the subdivision.
(3) Model homes or sales offices shall only be utilized a maximum of
two years from the date the zoning permit is issued, unless
extended by the Planning Board.
(4) Frontage on an existing public street shall be improved to
Township standards, or if it is a newly constructed street within the
subdivision, such street shall be improved with an all-weather
bituminous concrete surface meeting Township specifications.125
(5) Fencing and/or supplemental landscaping may be required for any
lot utilized for model home or sales office purposes.
C. A site plan which includes the following information for each lot
proposed for a model home or sales office shall be reviewed and
approved prior to issuance of either a zoning permit and/or a
construction permit:
(1) Grading plan.
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 203-73 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-74
198:829
§ 203-75. Use of mobile home as temporary shelter. [Added
4-5-1993 by Ord. No 93-3]
When fire or natural disaster has rendered a single-family residence unfit
for human habitation, the temporary use of a mobile home located on
the single-family lot during the rehabilitation of the original residence or
construction of a new replacement residence is permitted subject to the
following additional regulations:
(2) Landscaping and signage plan.
(3) Floor plan and building elevations.
(4) Parking plan.
(5) Utilities plan indicating methods of water supply, sewage disposal
and lighting.
(6) The architectural style and type of dwelling, i.e., single-family
detached, patio, townhouse, etc.
(7) A schedule indicating the length of time the model home or sales
office will be displayed for marketing purposes and the estimated
dates they will be offered for sale.
D. Sales offices may be located in a trailer for a major subdivision for
limited use in all zones, provided that the preceding and the following
conditions are met: A premanufactured office type model trailer may be
permitted upon review and approval by the Zoning Officer for a period
not to exceed two years unless renewed by the Planning Board. Permits
for such trailers shall be issued by the Zoning Officer upon payment of
the permit fee.
E. Construction trailers for use by general contractors and/or
subcontractors may be used on residential major subdivisions and
commercial/industrial subdivisions, provided that the following
conditions are met: A permit may be issued by the Construction Code
Official, provided that a site plan showing the location of the proposed
trailer has been approved by the Construction Code Official. Such
structures will be permitted only if they pose no threat to health or
safety; and provided, further, that the landowner agrees to remove and
to restore the land to its original condition following completion of
construction or at such time as may be determined by the Planning
Board. Payment of the required permit fee shall be required prior to
issuance of the permit.
A. Required potable water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided.
B. Maximum length of permit shall be six months. The permit may be
renewed for a period not to exceed 60 days in the event of
circumstances beyond the control of the owner. Applications for the
§ 203-74 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-75
198:830
§ 203-76. Accessory residential structures and enlargement of
residential structures. [Added 9-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-7]
The addition of a residential accessory use and/or enlargement of a
residential structure within the SOC, HC and LIO Districts shall be
permitted subject to the following special conditions:
§ 203-76.1. In-law suites. [Added 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
extension shall be made to the Planning Board at least 15 days prior to
the expiration of the original permit.
C. The mobile home shall be removed from the property within 48 hours of
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any rehabilitated or new
replacement residence. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
A. The subject lot shall be improved with a structure occupied for
residential purposes.
B. Existing residential structures shall be enlarged by not more than 50%
of the total floor area of the structure used for residential purposes on
November 30, 1992.
C. Accessory residential structures shall not be located within the front
yard and shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(2) Minimum rear yard: 5 feet.
(3) Maximum building length: 15 feet.
A. Introduction. This purpose of this section is to provide guidance with
clarifying zoning and building permit requirements for an in-law suite
in a home.
B. Definitions. The following adopted definitions are relevant, in addition
to the definitions sections under § 203-5 of the Woolwich Township
Code, in determining what type of additions or remodeling may be
authorized regarding "in-law suites":
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed for the occupancy,
cooking, and sleeping of one or more persons living as a family.
FAMILY/FAMILY MEMBER — An individual, or two or more persons
related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, occupying a
single dwelling unit. The term "family/family member" does not include
any organization or institutional group.
C. Zoning requirements. Based upon the above definitions and the
Township's overall Master Plan, this section does not allow dwelling
unit or apartment as an authorized use in single-family zoning districts
(R-1, R-2, R-3, 5A Five Acre Residential, PUD and all other approved
§ 203-75 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-76.1
198:831
residential zones). However, there is no prohibition in the construction
of an in-law suite, provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) Only family members shall reside in the in-law suite, and said
family member must be allowed unrestricted access to the common
areas of the dwelling unit (e.g., the kitchen, bathroom, living room,
etc.)
(2) The in-law suite shall not have separate gas and electric utilities
(more than one meter per utility would constitute a separate
dwelling unit and is prohibited).
(3) The in-law suite shall not be located in an accessory building (this
would constitute a separate dwelling unit) such as a unit over a
garage.
(4) The in-law suite shall be connected to the main heated living area
of the dwelling (the suite shall not be connected to the building by a
breezeway, as this would constitute a separate dwelling unit).
(5) The in-law suite shall have principal means of access to the outside
of the dwelling unit via the dwelling unit's main exterior doorways
(single access to the outside to the "suite" would constitute a
separate dwelling unit).
(6) The in-law suite may have a kitchen and bathroom as well as a
bedroom.
D. Appeals. Appeals from this section or their interpretation are decided
by the Joint Land Use Board in accordance with the "appeal of Zoning
Officer determination" process. The appellant should contact the Land
Use Department or the Zoning Officer in order to obtain additional
information regarding the appeals process.
E. Additional building permit application requirements. All permit
applications shall be accompanied by the following additional
information:
(1) Construction documents, including a floor plan acceptable to the
Construction Code Official, indicating the use of each room,
doorway locations and demonstrating compliance with Subsection
C of this section;
(2) A signed and notarized affidavit from the property owner stating
who will reside in the in-law suite and acknowledging that the inlaw
suite is prohibited from use as an apartment (change in owner
or occupant requires a new affidavit);
(3) A building addition location plan (if adding to the home);
(4) Any deviation from this section requires Joint Land Use Board
Approval;
§ 203-76.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-76.1
198:832
§ 203-76.2. Use and placement of portable storage units and pods.
[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-12]
(5) Nothing in this section is intended to supersede "the right to farm"
for temporary living for migrant workers.
F. Purpose. It is the express purpose of this section to provide an
economically feasible alternative to nursing home and boardinghome
care so that immediate elderly family members (55 years of age or
older), or disabled family members over the age of 18, can live with
family members while maintaining some degree of overall
independence. Additionally, this section attempts to halt the
proliferation of unauthorized conversions of single-family dwelling units
into two/multiple dwelling units in a single-family zone and/or
unauthorized rental units.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Any movable item or thing that is subject to
ownership.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT/POD — Any container designed for the
storage of personal property that is typically rented to owners or
occupants of property for their temporary use and which is customarily
delivered and removed by truck.
PUBLIC AREA — Includes any street, sidewalk, highway, public lane,
alley, right-of-way, easement, Township parking lot or other public place
in the Township.
TEMPORARY — Having a limited duration or use; not of permanent
nature.
B. Permit required (multifamily dwellings, detached single-family
residential and nonresidential). No person shall place or utilize a
portable storage unit/pod or permit a portable storage unit/pod to be
placed upon a property which a person owns, rents, occupies or
controls without first having obtained a permit from the Township
Zoning Officer. Any placement of a portable storage unit/pod on public
area shall first have written approval from the Township Police
Department and an approved permit from the Zoning Officer. The
placement of said portable storage unit/pod must be temporary; any
permanent storage unit must comply with the appropriate accessory
use controls contained in the applicable zoning district as per the
Woolwich Township Code.
C. Application for permit; fees; conditions of issuance.
(1) Application for a portable storage unit/pod shall be made by
submission of the following information to the Township Zoning
Officer;
§ 203-76.1 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-76.2
198:833
(a) Name and address of the applicant and the owner of the
property, if different.
(b) Street address where the portable storage unit/pod will be
placed.
(c) Size of the portable storage unit/pod and the proposed location
of the unit.
(d) Anticipated length of time the portable storage unit/pod will be
located on site.
(e) A sketch plot or plan of survey shall be provided to the Zoning
Officer designating the specific area where the portable
storage unit/pod shall be located.
(2) The application fee and any renewal fee are $30 each, payable at
the time of application.
(3) A multifamily dwelling unit permit shall be valid for a period of
three calendar days.
(4) A detached single-family residential permit shall be valid for a
period of 14 calendar days and may be renewed upon application to
the Zoning Officer for an additional 14 days, not to exceed a total
period of 28 days. Application for renewal shall be made prior to
the expiration of the existing permit. Renewal shall be at the
discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(5) A nonresidential permit shall be valid for a period of 30 calendar
days and may be renewed upon application to the Zoning Officer
for an additional 30 calendar days, not to exceed 60 calendar days.
Application for renewal shall be made prior to the expiration of the
existing permit. Renewal shall be at the discretion of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(6) A permit may be revoked at any time during its term if the
placement or use of the portable storage unit/pod constitutes a
hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the
Township or for any other reason that constitutes a nuisance.
(7) No permit shall be issued if the Police Department determines that
the issuance of a permit will constitute a danger to public safety or
an unwarranted interference with the efficient movement of traffic.
(8) Renewal shall not be unreasonably withheld by the Code
Enforcement Officer, and discretion may be utilized during
instances of true personal emergencies and/or acts of God.
(9) Only one permit per property, including all renewals of said permit,
shall be granted during a twelve-month period.
§ 203-76.2 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-76.2
198:834
D. Location, placement and condition of portable storage units/pods in
residential districts.
(1) Portable storage units/pods may be located in any detached singlefamily
residential zoning district. Except as provided herein, they
shall not be placed in a public area.
(2) Unit location must be immediately adjacent to or in the property
driveway at the furthest accessible point from the street. Final
placement shall be to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, taking
in consideration of existing setbacks, site lines, slope of the land,
aesthetics, other structures, safety issues and the like.
(3) Only one portable storage unit/pod may be placed on a singlefamily
residential property at one time.
(4) No portable storage unit/pod located at a single-family residential
property shall be used for the storage of construction debris,
business inventory, commercial goods or goods for property other
than the residential property where the unit is located. No material
of any kind may be placed or stored outside the unit at any time.
Upon reasonable notice to the applicant, the Township may inspect
the contents of any portable storage unit/pod for compliance with
this chapter.
E. Location, placement and conditions of portable storage units/pods in
nonresidential districts.
(1) Portable storage units/pods may be placed in nonresidential zoning
districts only at a designated location as approved by the Township
Zoning Officer. The allowable number of units shall be determined
by the Zoning Officer pending site characteristics, lot area and
location of unit/units.
(2) Applicants for portable storage units in nonresidential zoning
districts must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer
that the specific location/complex has sufficient space to place a
unit or units and continue to provide adequate parking and public
safety access and to comply with all health, safety and welfare
concerns.
(3) The unit/units shall be placed only in the rear or side portion of the
site. Under no circumstances shall a unit be placed in an area
fronting a street or road or in a grass/landscaped area or in the
front parking lot of a commercial establishment. The placement of
portable storage units/pods in fire lanes, passenger loading zones,
commercial loading zones or public rights-of-way shall be strictly
prohibited. Units shall not impede the flow of vehicle or pedestrian
traffic on said property and shall not interfere with the ingress to
and egress from said property. Final placement shall be to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer.
§ 203-76.2 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-76.2
198:835
(4) No portable storage unit/pod shall be used for the storage of
construction debris or any goods or materials other than that of the
commercial or industrial business where the unit is located. The
items contained in the temporary portable storage pod shall be,
including but not limited to: consistent with the products sold on
site, seasonally appropriate merchandise, holiday goods, or goods
that have become replaced inside the business for marketing
purposes. Upon reasonable notice to the applicant, the Township
may inspect the contents of any portable storage unit or pod for
compliance with this chapter.
(5) A separate permit is required for each portable storage unit/pod on
a nonresidential property.
F. General restrictions.
(1) No portable storage unit/pod shall exceed 20 feet in length.
(2) Portable storage units shall never be utilized as accessory
structures in any zone, as they are intended to be temporary
rentals. Any storage pods that are owned by the property owner
and/or contemplated to be on site for more than the time frames
specifically permitted in Subsection C(3), (4) or (5), as outlined
above, shall comply with the appropriate accessory use controls
contained in the applicable zoning district as per the Woolwich
Township Code.
(3) No hazardous material or organic waste shall be placed in a
portable storage unit/pod.
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the
portable storage unit/pod is maintained in a good condition, free
from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust,
ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks.
(5) Portable storage units/pods shall have no signage other than a
serial number identifying the unit and the name, address and
telephone number of the person or firm engaged in the business of
renting or otherwise placing the portable storage unit/pod.
(6) Any deviation from these statutory restrictions regarding time/
duration, location, and size of said portable storage pods shall
require a bulk variance from the Township's Joint Land Use Board.
G. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement Officer and/
or the Police Department and/or the Director of Public Works and/
or the Township Construction Official and their designated agents
to enforce all provisions of this chapter.
(2) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to the removal of the portable storage unit/pod at the
§ 203-76.2 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-76.2
198:836
§ 203-76.3. Breweries, distilleries and wineries. [Added 9-19-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-15]
expense of the applicant. Each day a portable storage unit/pod is
placed or utilized in violation of the terms of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense. Each offense hereunder is punishable
by a fine of not more than $100 per day.
H. Inconsistency. All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are
inconsistent with the terms of this section be and the same are hereby
repealed to the extent of their inconsistency.
I. Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon proper
passage, publication in accordance with law and after final adoption as
provided by law.
A. In those districts in which breweries, distilleries, and wineries may be
permitted as a conditional use, the following conditions shall apply:
(1) Breweries, distilleries and wineries may only be permitted on a
qualified farm.
(2) In no district shall a brewery, distillery, or winery be erected,
enlarged or established within 200 feet of:
(a) A public school or playground;
(b) A duly organized school giving regular instruction at least five
days a week for eight or more months a year;
(c) A hospital; or
(d) A church.
(3) Local base.
(a) The predominant crops grown on the premises shall be used in
the production of alcohol for the brewery, distillery, and/or
winery.
(b) A brewery, distillery, or winery must accomplish at least two of
the following four activities on site: crushing, fermentation/
extraction, bulk aging/storage, and bottling.
(4) Operations of establishment.
(a) No brewery, distillery, or winery shall exceed 10,000 square
feet of building area.
(b) No brewery, distillery, or winery shall produce more than
15,000 cases per year.
(c) Retail sales floor shall not exceed 15% of the gross floor area of
the structure.
§ 203-76.2 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-76.3
198:837
(d) Retail sales of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to alcoholic
beverages manufactured on-site in accordance with above.
(e) No special occasion events shall be permitted without a special
events permit.
(5) Minimum lot areas and bulk standards.
(a) All breweries, distilleries, and wineries shall conform to the
minimum lot area and other bulk standards of the zoning
district in which they are located.
(6) Landscaping:
(a) The first 25 feet of lot width adjacent to a public street shall be
landscaped in accordance with the provisions of §§ 203-68 and
203-69 (except for necessary drive aisles).
(b) Breweries, distilleries, and wineries adjacent to residential
uses and public or private open spaces shall be screened by
twenty-five-foot-wide evergreen screening buffer in
accordance with §§ 203-68 and 203-69, not less than six feet in
height and which shall be maintained in a safe and sightly
condition.
(7) Parking.
(a) The establishment shall comply with all applicable provisions
of § 203-81 (Off-street parking schedule). For the purposes of
calculating parking, the brewing, distilling and fermenting
areas shall be considered industrial manufacturing, the tasting
rooms shall be considered restaurant, sales areas shall be
considered retail, and the cold and warm storage shall be
considered warehousing.
§ 203-76.3 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-76.3
198:838
ARTICLE VIII
Signs
[Amended 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2; 6-6-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16; 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-09]
§ 203-77. Signs.
A. Intent and purpose. In order to preserve the Township as a desirable
community in which to live, farm and do business, a pleasing, visually
attractive environment is of foremost importance. The regulation of
signs within the Township is a highly contributive means by which to
achieve this desired end. These sign regulations are prepared with the
intent of enhancing the overall environment, specifically the aesthetic
values, and promoting the continued well-being of the Township. It is
the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable,
consistent and nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements.
These sign regulations are intended to:
(1) Enable the identification of places of residence and business.
(2) Allow for the communication of information necessary for the
conduct of commerce.
(3) Lessen hazardous situations, confusion and visual clutter caused by
proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation and
excessive height, area and bulk of signs which compete for the
attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(4) Enhance the attractiveness and economic well-being of the
Township as a place to live, farm and conduct business.
(5) Protect the public from the dangers of unsafe signs.
(6) Permit signs that are compatible with their surroundings and aid
orientation, and preclude placement of signs in a manner that
conceals or obstructs adjacent land uses or signs.
(7) Encourage signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in
which they are located and consistent with the category of use to
which they pertain.
(8) Curtail the size and number of signs and sign messages to the
minimum reasonably necessary to identify a residential or business
location and the nature of any such business.
(9) Establish sign size in relationship to the scale of the lot and
building on which the sign is to be placed or to which it pertains.
(10) Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of
the site or adjoining sites.
§ 203-77 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-77
198:839
(11) Regulate signs in a manner so as to not interfere with or obstruct
vision of or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians.
(12) Require signs to be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe
and satisfactory manner.
(13) Preserve and enhance the natural aesthetics and scenic
characteristics of this farming community.
B. Any sign, banner, billboard, or signboard hereafter erected or
maintained shall conform with the provisions of this chapter and any
other ordinances or regulations of the Township of Woolwich. A sign/
signboard is defined as "a display (as a lettered board or a configuration
of neon or lighted tubing) used to identify or advertise a place of
business or a product." A banner is defined as "a strip of cloth, canvas
or other flexible material which is durable and weather-resistant, on
which a sign or an advertisement graphic is painted or displayed." A
billboard is defined as "a large flat panel designed to carry outdoor
advertising."
C. The limitations on signs as set forth for the various zones by this
chapter shall not apply to any sign or directional device erected by the
federal, state, county or Township government, or agency thereof, nor
to any "no trespassing" sign erected in accordance with the applicable
statutes of the State of New Jersey.
D. The limitations on sign location and area as set forth by this chapter for
the business, commercial, professional and light industry zones shall
not apply to parking lot markers, directional signs and entrance and
exit signs which are erected on the premises, provided that each such
sign does not exceed two square feet in area and does not contain any
advertising of the use on the premises; and further provided that the
number and location of said signs are approved by the Joint Land Use
Board. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
E. Substitution clause. Subject to the landowner's consent, a
noncommercial message/copy of any type may be substituted for any
duly permitted or allowed commercial message/copy or any duly
permitted or allowed noncommercial message; provided that the sign
structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message
content. Such substitution of message may be made without any
additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more
specific provision to the contrary in this chapter and section. The
purpose of this substitution clause provision is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial
speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any
other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to
increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, nor does it affect the
requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly
permitted. This substitution clause provision does not allow for the
substitution of offsite commercial messages in place of onsite
§ 203-77 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-77
198:840
§ 203-78. Signs in residential zones.
The following types of signs, and none other, shall be permitted in
residential zones subject to the restrictions set forth in § 203-80 of this
chapter:
commercial messages. Additionally, this provision only allows for a
change of message as any change in structure must comply with all
relevant building codes and permit process.
F. Severability generally and specific to severability of prohibition on
billboards. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph,
sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this article and/or any other
code provisions and/or laws are declared invalid or unconstitutional by
the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the
declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the prohibition
on billboards as contained herein.
G. Other provisions of code regulating signs. This sign article does not
supercede the more specific regulations set forth as part of the zoning
and design standards enacted in connection with the Township's
Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Ordinance. The provisions
contained in the TDR ordinances will govern any signage related to any
comprehensive sign packages for development within the regional
centers.
A. Official traffic signs.
B. Professional accessory use or name signs indicating the name,
profession or activity of the occupant of a dwelling and trespassing
signs or indicating the private nature of a driveway or premises,
provided that the area on one side of any such sign shall not exceed two
square feet.
C. Identification signs for schools, churches, hospitals or similar
institutions, provided that the total area of one side of all such signs on
any one lot shall not exceed 32 square feet; and identification signs for
clubs, lodges, homeowner associations, estates or similar uses,
provided that the total area of one side of all such signs on any one lot
shall not exceed 12 square feet.
D. Real estate signs conforming to the requirements as indicated in
§ 203-80C.
E. Contractors, mechanics, painters, paperhangers and/or artisans may
post a temporary sign on the lot on which the contracting work is being
performed. Said sign may not be larger than six square feet nor more
than four feet high. One sign is permitted per lot and block. Upon
receiving a permit from the Zoning Officer, the applicant may post a
sign once work begins and maintain the sign as long as the site is an
active work site. The sign must be removed within seven days from
§ 203-77 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-78
198:841
§ 203-79. Signs in nonresidential zones.
The following types of signs, and none other, shall be permitted in
nonresidential zones:
completion of the work to which the sign relates. [Amended
11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
F. Signs identifying or advertising nonconforming commercial or
manufacturing uses conducted lawfully on the lot where the sign is
located, provided that the total area on one side of all such signs on any
one lot shall not exceed 32 square feet.
G. Billboards are specifically prohibited in all residential zones.
A. Any sign permitted in residential zones.
B. Number and types of signs for businesses.
(1) Each stand-alone business, which is the only occupant of the
nonresidential structure/building on the property, may have two
signs: one main business sign located on the principal frontage and
one located on the facade occupied by said business, provided that
such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet or 20% of the total facade
area, including windows and doors, whichever is less, and that any
sign placed against the facade shall not project more than two feet.
Where a nonresidential structure/building is located at the
intersection of two public streets, an additional sign may be
erected upon the side wall on the side street, provided that such
sign shall conform to the requirements of the sign permitted on the
facade or principal frontage. Height shall be in conformance with
§ 203-80E. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
(2) Where more than one business, but less than five businesses,
occupy the same nonresidential structure/building, only one
freestanding sign is permitted for the property, and said
freestanding sign shall not exceed 75 square feet nor a height of 20
feet. Each separate business shall be permitted one facade sign,
provided that such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet or 20% of
the total facade area, including windows and doors, whichever is
less, and that any sign placed against the facade shall not project
more than two feet, nor extend above the lowest point of the roof at
the building facade. Where a nonresidential structure/building is
located at the intersection of two public streets, an additional sign
may be erected upon the side wall on the side street, provided that
such sign shall conform to the requirements of the sign permitted
on the facade or principal frontage. Any request for additional
freestanding signs for each nonresidential use/business must be
made to the Zoning Board component of the Joint Land Use Board.
[Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
§ 203-78 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-79
198:842
C. Each shopping center consisting of five or more stores under one
ownership or each industrial use may have freestanding signs in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Each property having less than 300 feet of lot frontage shall be
permitted one freestanding sign. Such sign shall not be located
closer than 100 feet to any other freestanding sign on the same side
of the street or closer than 50 feet to any property boundary.
Individual properties may combine to meet the one-hundred-foot
minimum separation and thus erect one freestanding sign to serve
the combined properties. Such signs shall not exceed 100 square
feet per face nor a height of 30 feet.
(2) Each property having in excess of 300 feet of lot frontage shall be
permitted one additional freestanding sign of the same size and
height as in Subsection C(1) above; or in the alternative may elect
to increase the size of the freestanding sign allowed under
Subsection C(1) above to a maximum of 150 square feet per face.
D. Gasoline filling stations, in addition to the main business sign, may
display one freestanding sign advertising the name of the station or the
principal products sold on the premises, including any special company
or brand name, insignia or emblem, provided that such sign shall not
exceed 25 square feet in area on each side and shall be erected within
the property line and not less than 15 feet from any property line or
street line. Gasoline filling stations located on corner lots with
entrances from each street are allowed two signs. Such freestanding
sign shall not exceed a height of 30 feet. Additional signs relative to the
products sold or priced at the filling station shall be limited to three
signs, and each such sign shall not exceed 10 square feet in area nor a
height of 30 feet and shall not be less than 15 feet from any property
line or street lines. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
E. No business or industrial sign shall be placed to face abutting
residential districts.
F. Temporary signs/banners. "Coming soon" signs/banners shall be
permitted on nonresidential properties for 30 days prior to the opening
of the business/office. "Now open," or "grand opening" signs/banners
shall be permitted for 30 days following the opening of the business/
office. These temporary signs/banners shall not exceed 20 square feet
and shall not include any illumination, nor shall there be affixed thereon
any balloon, streamer or any other decorative accessory. A temporary
sign permit must be filed with the Zoning Officer for any new business,
new owner of an existing business, or business name change. Such
signs shall not exceed the building height. Refer to § 203-80A and B
regarding placement restrictions. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
§ 203-79 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-79
198:843
§ 203-80. General restrictions.
The following restrictions shall apply to all permitted sign uses throughout
the municipality and in all zones:
G. Billboards. Billboards are specifically prohibited in all nonresidential
zones, except they are specifically permitted in the Light Industrial
Office (LIO) Zone within 75 feet of the New Jersey Turnpike.
A. No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will cause danger to
traffic on a street by obscuring the view.
B. No sign other than official traffic signs shall be erected within the lines
of any street unless specifically authorized by other ordinances or
regulations of Woolwich Township.
C. No sign shall be placed on any tree, electric light or public utility pole,
another existing sign, or upon rocks or other nature features. [Added
11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
D. Temporary real estate directional open house signs or temporary off
premises subdivision locations signs for subdivisions or properties
outside the boundaries of the Township of Woolwich are not allowed.
Any such signs will be removed and are subject to fines as stated is
§ 203-80D(9). [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
(1) Temporary off-premises subdivision location signs.
(a) "Temporary off-premises subdivision location signs" shall be
defined as a removable, freestanding signs, to be placed on the
ground, not to exceed 24 inches in height and 24 inches in
width, and no higher than 36 inches above the existing grade,
and shall only indicate location or directions to a residential
subdivision within Woolwich Township by its approved name
and provided that a building permit has been issued for the
subdivision.
(b) No more than one temporary off-premises subdivision location
sign shall be installed on any one lot or in any right of way. The
maximum number of temporary off-premises subdivision
location signs shall not exceed 22 signs per approved Township
subdivision.
(c) Temporary off-premises subdivision location signs are only
permissible on the weekends, specifically from 4:30 p.m. on
Friday to 8:00 p.m. on Sunday.
(d) Temporary off-premises subdivision location signs shall not
include any illumination, nor shall there be affixed thereon any
balloons, streamers, or other decorative accessory.
(e) Temporary off-premises subdivision location signs require a
sign permit from the zoning office. Such sign permit shall be
§ 203-79 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-80
198:844
accompanied by a list of locations for the posting of said signs.
The fee is $10 per sign per posting.
(2) No more than one nonilluminated temporary sign may be installed
indicating the prospective or completed sale or rental of the
premises upon which it is located. This sign shall not exceed six
square feet in area and four feet in height for a residential use and
shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and six feet in height for a
commercial or industrial district. The sign shall be removed within
14 days after consummation of a lease or sales transaction.
(3) Not more than two temporary ground signs may be installed
advertising a subdivision which has been approved by the
Township, provided that each sign does not exceed 32 square feet
in area nor a height of six feet. In no case shall any such sign be
located closer than 20 feet to any street line. Temporary
subdivision signs shall not be permitted after residences have been
erected on 75% of the lots in the subdivision or after more than
75% of the lots have been sold by the developer.
(4) A sign indicating site development or construction by a builder
shall not exceed 32 square feet and shall be limited to one sign per
street frontage. Said sign shall not exceed a height of six feet. The
sign shall not be erected until final approvals are obtained from the
reviewing board. The sign may remain up until the project is
completed.
(5) The fee for each temporary sign/banner shall be $40 paid to the
Township of Woolwich, except as otherwise noted herein. The
Township of Woolwich shall make sure signs are removed by the
applicant by the expiration of the permit, and if not so removed, the
Township of Woolwich may remove the sign or signs and assess an
appropriate fine. The fee for all other sign permits is $60 paid to
the Township of Woolwich, except as otherwise noted herein.
(6) By permit from the Zoning Officer, a nonprofit group organized
solely for charitable, religious, educational, civic, fraternal or
athletic purposes or political organizations may place and maintain
temporary signs on land it does not own to advertise a single event
open to the public and held within the Township of Woolwich or the
Borough of Swedesboro. Also by permit from the Zoning Officer, a
nonprofit group organized solely for a charitable, religious,
educational, civic, fraternal or athletic purposes or political
organizations with a primary location, function or base within the
Township of Woolwich or the Borough of Swedesboro may place
and maintain temporary signs on land it does not own to advertise a
single event open to the public to be held at a location outside the
Township of Woolwich. Written consent signed by the owners of all
property on which the signs are erected must be made a part of the
permit application. The total area on one side of all such signs on
any one lot shall not exceed 32 square feet nor a height of six feet.
§ 203-80 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-80
198:845
Such signs may be erected and maintained no more than 14 days
before the public event advertised and must be removed within
seven days after the public event advertised. If they are placed
outside of these time frames, the Township of Woolwich may
remove the signs. There shall be no permit fee for signs qualifying
under this subsection. For temporary signs for a special event or
public purpose, said signs shall not conceal or obstruct adjacent
land uses or signs; not conflict with the principal permitted use
of the site or adjoining sites; not interfere with, obstruct vision
of, or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; be installed and
maintained in a safe manner and be compliant with all other
restrictions on size, height, and location.
(7) No sign shall be placed in a position that will cause danger to traffic
on a street or entering a street by obscuring the view of traffic on
either street. In no case shall any sign, other than an official
governmental sign or functional/direction sign, be erected within
the official right-of-way of any street unless specifically authorized
by ordinance or regulations of the Township.
(8) The applications for such sign permits under the foregoing
Subsections A, B and C of this § 203-80 shall each contain the
following statement signed by the owner or owners of the property
on which the sign is to be placed:
"We are the owners of the land on which the signs designated in
this application are to be placed, and we will be responsible for
their removal within the time period specified by the permit and
the Woolwich Township Zoning Ordinance. In the event that such
sign or signs are not removed within the time period so specified,
then we hereby grant permission to the Woolwich Township
Zoning Officer or his agent, or an officer of the Woolwich Township
Police Department, to enter upon our property and remove said
sign or signs and dispose of them as the Woolwich Township
Committee directs."
(9) Violations and penalties. A fine not to exceed $1,000 shall be
administered for any violation of the above, per sign, per day. Each
additional day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
E. No sign shall be located closer than 20 feet to any street line or to any
property boundary line. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
F. No sign shall exceed the height of 15 feet measured from the ground
beneath the sign to the highest point of such sign, except that signs
attached to or forming a part of the facade of a building used for
commercial or manufacturing purposes may exceed 15 feet in height,
provided that such signs shall not extend above the lowest point of the
roof at the facade of the building. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
§ 203-80 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-80
198:846
G. No sign shall be of a flashing, revolving, blinking, moving or animated
type, or have any moving parts. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
H. No sign shall have any lighting or control mechanism which may cause
radio or television interference. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
I. For the purposes of this chapter, a sign which is attached to or forms a
part of a building or structure, or on a trailer or vehicle parked on a lot,
the legend/content for which does not relate to the use or ownership of
the vehicle or trailer, shall be deemed to be on the lot on which such
building or structure is located. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
J. Outdoor loudspeakers, amplifiers, bullhorns or noisemakers, except as
used by fire and police authorities, shall not be permitted in any
residential, commercial or industrial zone. [Amended 11-17-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-15]
§ 203-80 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-80
198:847

ARTICLE IX
Parking and Loading
§ 203-81. Off-street parking schedule.
A. All uses permitted in this chapter or hereafter permitted in any of the
zones herein established shall provide as a minimum the number of offstreet
parking spaces specified in the following schedule:
(1) Residential:
(a) For single-family detached, single-family semidetached and
two-family dwellings: two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(b) For single-family attached and multifamily dwellings: 2 1/2
parking spaces per dwelling unit, except dwellings specifically
intended for the elderly, in which case one parking space per
dwelling unit.
(2) Hotels/motels:
(a) One parking space per sleeping or dwelling unit.
(b) If restaurant or convention services are included in the facility,
then parking requirements for these services must be met
according to this chapter in addition to those required for
hotel/motel units.
(3) Professional offices, general offices, banks: one parking space for
every 250 square feet of building area or major fraction thereof.
(4) Home professional office: minimum of three parking spaces per
dwelling and one additional parking space per employee.
(5) Retail and personal service stores and other service
establishments: one parking space for every 200 square feet of
building area or major fraction thereof, plus one space for every
two employees.
(6) Public garages, gasoline service stations, motor vehicle sales and
service:
(a) One parking space for every 300 square feet of building area or
major fraction thereof.
(b) Plus one per two employees.
(7) Restaurants, cafeterias, taverns, bars:
(a) Indoor service only: one space for every four seats for
customers; one per two employees.
(b) Drive-in: one space for every 25 square feet of building area,
plus one per two employees.
§ 203-81 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-81
198:849
(8) Auditoriums, churches, theaters, stadiums, assembly halls,
community centers, dance halls, roller skating rinks and other
places of public assembly: one parking space for every four persons
who may be legally admitted under the state fire prevention laws.
(9) Hospitals, nursing homes, similar institutional uses for the care of
the ill or aged:
(a) One parking space for every four beds.
(b) Plus one space for every two employees in the largest working
shift.
(10) Industrial manufacturing: one parking space for every two
employees in the largest working shift.
(11) Schools:
(a) Elementary and junior high school: one space for each vehicle
owned or operated by the school, plus three spaces for each
faculty member, plus one space for each five seats in the
auditorium or gymnasium.
(b) Senior high school: one space for each vehicle owned or
operated by the school, plus seven spaces for each faculty
member, plus one space for each administrative office.
(12) Recreational facilities, clubs and service organizations:
(a) Parks and other outdoor recreation sites: four parking spaces
for each gross acre of land up to 50 acres, and one parking
space per gross acre of land above 50 acres, except where it
can be demonstrated that the site is primarily intended for
pedestrian access, in which case these requirements may be
reduced accordingly.
(b) Recreation centers, clubs and service organizations, skating
rinks: one parking space for every 400 square feet of gross
floor area.
B. Design standards.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be designed to prevent maneuvering
or storage of vehicles within any portion of an entrance driveway
that is within the right-of-way line of any public street. Off-street
parking areas shall be so designed to permit all vehicles to turn
around on the site, thus preventing the necessity of any vehicle
backing onto a public street in the following cases:
(a) Where five or more off-street parking spaces are provided on a
lot fronting on a public street.
(b) Where off-street parking is provided on any lot fronting on an
arterial or major collector street.
§ 203-81 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-81
198:850
(2) No required off-street parking space, including adjacent parking
access lanes or maneuvering space, shall be located within the
existing or proposed right-of-way of any public street, including the
sidewalk area.
(3) Parking location. Location of parking areas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as specified in this
chapter and shall be provided with necessary driveways. All
such spaces shall be deemed to be required space on the lot on
which the same is situated unless otherwise stated and shall
not thereafter be encroached upon or reduced in any manner.
(b) No parking shall be permitted in any designated fire lanes,
streets, driveways, aisles, sidewalks or turning areas.
(c) Parking spaces for apartments/townhouses shall be within 100
feet of the building being served.
(d) No parking shall be permitted in any required buffer or screen
areas.
(e) No parking shall be permitted, and appropriate screening or
landscaping shall be required within the front yard according
to the following schedule:
District
Screen Width
(feet)
LIO 20
(f) Parking areas in all nonresidential districts shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet unless cross easements are provided, and
25 feet where adjacent to a residential district.
(g) Parking pads in front of detached and attached dwellings shall
be a minimum distance of five feet from any building line.
Ingress and egress to parking areas shall be a minimum of 10
feet in width.
(4) Lighting. [Amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(a) Illumination for all parking facilities, other than those required
for agricultural use and dwelling unit use, shall be provided
during nighttime operating hours. Direct illumination shall be
shielded from streets and adjoining properties, and adequate
provision shall be made to shield residential uses from the
glare of motor vehicles.
(b) The minimum level of lighting in any portion of the parking lot
shall be not less than 0.25 footcandles. The average horizontal
illumination level of lighting within the parking lot shall not be
§ 203-81 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-81
198:851
less than 0.5 footcandles nor greater than two footcandles.
The maximum level of lighting in any portion of the parking
lot shall not be greater than three footcandles, expect directly
under the light fixtures where a maximum of 10 footcandles is
permitted.
(c) The minimum level of lighting along any portion of walkway
not part of a parking lot shall not be less than 0.5 footcandles.
The maximum level of lighting along any portion of the
walkway not part of a parking lot shall be not greater than
three footcandles.
(d) Searchlights, strobe lights and laser lights used for advertising
or entertainment are not permitted.
(e) Light shields are to be used on all lights to control glare. At no
time shall the light source be visible from adjacent properties.
A maximum of 0.25 footcandles is permitted at any property
line and/or right-of-way line.
(f) The lighting plan should take into consideration the hours of
operation of the proposed use. The lights should be designed
so that they can be reduced or turned off when they are not
necessary. A timer maybe necessary to regulate the hours.
(g) All lighting shall be shielded to prevent glare for drivers or
pedestrians from light trespass beyond the property line.
(h) Emergency lighting by police, fire and rescue and other
authorities is exempt from this code.
(i) In addition, all lighting shall comply with the requirements of
Article V, § 149-37, of Chapter 149, Site Plan Review.
(5) Combined parking requirements. Collective provision of off-street
parking facilities by two or more buildings or uses located on
adjacent lots is permitted to allow for the sharing of parking for
commercial and multiple-use centers according to the following
schedule:
(a) For buildings or groups of uses of less than 10,000 square feet,
the total parking shall not be less than the sum of the
requirements for the various individual uses computed
separately.
(b) Where the total area of a nonresidential use is greater than
10,000 square feet, but less than 30,000 square feet, the total
number of parking spaces provided shall equal one car for
every 200 square feet of gross floor area. Additional parking
shall be provided for residential uses built in conjunction with
a multiple-use center of this size and shall equal at least 1.5
spaces for each dwelling unit.
§ 203-81 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-81
198:852
(c) Where the total nonresidential use is greater than 30,000
square feet, the number of off-street parking spaces provided
shall equal five for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
In commercial or multiple-use centers of this size, which, in
addition to retail shops and services, contain residential and/or
office spaces, additional parking shall be provided according to
the following:
[1] Residential: one parking space for each dwelling unit.
[2] Office: one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor
area which exceeds 20% of the total nonresidential use
floor area.
(6) Surfacing and curbing. All parking and loading facilities shall be
surfaced with an asphaltic, bituminous cement or other bound
pavement so as to provide a durable and dust-free surface and shall
be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water
accumulation within the area. Surface water drainage from any
parking, loading or other paved area shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 149, Site Plan Review, and Chapter 163,
Subdivision of Land. Parking areas required for single-family
detached or attached dwellings are excepted from the provisions of
this chapter.
(7) Landscaping of loading areas. All loading areas shall be landscaped
and screened sufficiently to obscure the view of the loading
platform or other loading facility from any public street, residential
use or zone and the front yards of adjacent commercial or
industrial use. Such screening may consist of fencing or walls in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter in combination
with landscaping.
(8) Shopping carts. Any establishment which furnishes carts or mobile
baskets as an adjunct to shopping shall provide definite areas
within the required parking space areas for storage of said carts.
Each designated storage area shall be curbed to delineate and
separate the parking area from the collected shopping carts and
shall be so designated as to not impede the vehicular or pedestrian
circulation pattern. Collection points shall have a minimum
capacity of 20 shopping carts and shall be so designated by no
more than one sign per area with two faces, pole-mounted.
(9) The following interior circulation, access and traffic control design
standards shall be applicable:
(a) All driveways, except residential driveways on major and minor
collector and local streets, to any public street or highway shall
be located at least 200 feet from the center line of the
intersection of any two street lines and shall be designed in
manner conducive to safe ingress and egress as determined by
the Planning Board or, where applicable, the Township
§ 203-81 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-81
198:853
Committee. Where practicable, exits shall be located on minor,
rather than major, streets or highways. Residential driveways
shall be not closer than 50 feet to the center line of the
intersection of any two street lines.
(b) No design shall be approved which is likely to create traffic
hazards endangering the public safety. Safety requirements
which may be imposed in such a review shall include traffic
control devices, acceleration or deceleration lanes, turning
lanes, traffic and lane markings and signs.
(c) Interior driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide where used
with ninety-degree angle parking and at least 18 feet wide
where used with forty-five-degree parking. Where there is no
parking, interior driveways shall be at least 15 feet wide for
one-way traffic movement and at least 22 feet wide for two-way
traffic movement.
(10) In the Light Industrial/Office District the following standards shall
apply:
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided to the rear of the front
building setback line. Parking and paving within the front
setback shall be limited to:
[1] Visitor designated parking.
[2] A dropoff area.
(b) Structured parking may be used to supply all or any portion of
the required off-street parking. The structured parking may be
attached, freestanding, underlying the building, or any
combination thereof.
(c) Parking areas shall be arranged so as to encourage through
traffic to separate parking areas serving other buildings or
developments.
(11) Driveway openings shall be a minimum of 24 feet but no more than
34 feet.
(12) Landscaping of parking areas. Each on-site parking facility shall be
designed to minimize the removal of any tree in excess of five
inches in caliper. Each facility shall have a minimum of 200 square
feet of contiguous landscaped area for each 30 spaces or portion
thereof consisting of shrubs with a mature height of not more than
three feet and deciduous trees with branches not less than seven
feet in height, but in no event shall there be less than the area
contained in the required traffic islands. Such space shall be
distributed throughout the parking bays in order to visually break
the view of long rows of parked cars in a manner not impairing
sight triangles. Parking areas in excess of 200 parking spaces shall
§ 203-81 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-81
198:854
§ 203-82. Off-street loading.
have landscaped berms, a minimum of two feet in height, above the
parking area grade between any public street and any accessway,
driveway, drive aisle, loading area or parking bay.
(13) Traffic islands. Traffic islands shall be provided to separate each
parking bay of double-stacked parking rows from any internal
collector drive. The minimum width of the traffic islands shall be
eight feet. For parking areas in excess of 250 cars, one traffic
island, a minimum width of 10 feet, separating the two rows of
parking in one parking bay, shall be provided for each four rows in
an alternating pattern. Each traffic island shall be landscaped in
accordance with Subsection B(9) of this section.
(14) Landscaping shall be provided as approved by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board within the site and around its perimeter to provide
shade, to designate entrances, to screen parking areas from the
road, to buffer services and utility areas and to provide aesthetic
interest throughout the year. Along Route 322, a berm with
plantings may be required as determined by the Township Planner
to screen parking areas from the road.
(15) Parking space dimensions. The following dimensions for parking
spaces shall apply:
(a) Residential uses: nine feet wide by 18 feet deep.
(b) Commercial uses: 10 feet by 20 feet deep.
(c) Office, industrial and government uses: a minimum of 50% of
all parking spaces shall be 10 feet wide by 20 feet deep, and
the remainder may be nine feet wide by 18 feet deep.
A. Loading area requirements for every building, structure or part thereof
having over 5,000 square feet of gross building area erected and
occupied for commerce, hotel, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, places of
public assembly, industry and other similar uses involved in the receipt
and distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there should
be provided and permanently maintained adequate space for standing,
loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference
with the public use of streets or alleys. Every building, structure or
addition thereto having a use which complies with the above definition
should be provided with at least one truck standing, loading and
unloading space on the premises not less than 12 feet in width and 35
feet in length and shall have a minimum clearance of 14 feet. One
additional truck space of these dimensions should be provided for every
additional 20,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross area in the
building.
B. Location of loading areas shall meet the following requirements:
§ 203-81 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-82
198:855
(1) No part of any loading or unloading space, or maneuvering space in
connection therewith, shall be located within the right-of-way of
any public street, including the sidewalk area.
(2) No part of any loading or unloading space shall be located in any
required front yard or so as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian
movement on any public right-of-way.
(3) No part of any loading or unloading space shall be located in any
required buffer or screen area.
§ 203-82 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-82
198:856
ARTICLE X
Administration
§ 203-83. Enforcement.
§ 203-84. Zoning permit required. [Amended 6-16-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-06]
A zoning permit issued by the Zoning Officer stating that the project
complies with Township ordinance requirements shall be required prior to
the erection or structural alteration of any building, structure or portion
thereof, and prior to the use or change in use of a building or land, and
prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use, and prior to the
erection, creation or alteration of a sign. Farm buildings situated 50 feet or
more from any street line or property line shall be exempt from the permit
requirements of this section, but all such farm buildings shall be erected
in conformity with the use, area and height regulations applicable to the
district in which such farm buildings are located.
§ 203-85. Application for permits.
Application for permits shall be in writing to the Zoning Administration
Officer on such forms as may be furnished by the Township. Such
application shall contain all information necessary for the Zoning
Administration Officer to ascertain whether the proposed erection,
alteration, use or change complies with the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Township Committee shall appoint a Zoning Administration Officer
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The term of appointment shall
be for one calendar year. It shall be the Zoning Officer's duty to examine
all applications for permits, issue permits only for construction and uses
which are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, Chapter
149, Site Plan Review, and Chapter 163, Subdivision of Land, record
and file applications for permits with any accompanying plans and
documents and make such reports as the Committee may require.
Permits for construction and uses which are a conditional use or
variance to requirements of this chapter shall be issued only upon order
of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board. Nothing herein contained
shall require any change in plans or construction of a lawful use, the
construction of which is completed within one year of the effective date
of this chapter.
B. The Township Committee shall also appoint a Deputy Zoning
Administration Officer who shall perform all of the duties of the Zoning
Officer during absences, disability or unavailability, or when so directed
by the Zoning Administration Officer. The terms of appointment shall be
for the calendar year.
§ 203-83 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-86
198:857
§ 203-86. Issuance of permits.
Permits shall be granted or refused within 10 days after the written
application has been filed with the Zoning Administration Officer. Upon
completion of the erection or alteration of any building or portion thereof
authorized by any permit and prior to occupancy or use, the holder of such
permit shall notify the Zoning Administration Officer of such completion.
No permit shall be considered complete or permanently effective until
the Zoning Administration Officer has certified that the work has been
inspected and approved as being in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and other applicable ordinances. All applications with
accompanying plans and documents shall become a public record.
§ 203-87. Fees.
A. Fees for permits shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by the Township Committee, and all such fees shall be paid into
the Township Treasury.126
B. Each applicant for an appeal, conditional use or variance shall at the
time of making application, pay a fee in accordance with the
aforementioned fee schedule, for the cost of advertising and mailing
notices as required by this and other Township ordinances and the rules
of the Zoning Board or Planning Board.
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Fees.
§ 203-86 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-87
198:858
ARTICLE XI
Remedies and Penalties
§ 203-88. Power to institute legal proceedings.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained, or any building or structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter or any regulations made pursuant thereto, the
Zoning Officer or other Township authorities, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such
violations, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land
or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in and about such
premises.
§ 203-89. Violations and penalties.
Any person, entity or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of the
following: by fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding
90 days; or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
Whenever such person, entity or corporation shall have been officially
notified by the Zoning Officer or by service of a summons in a prosecution,
or in any other official manner, that he or it is committing a violation, each
day's continuance of such violation after such notification shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty.
§ 203-88 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-89
198:859

ARTICLE XII
Affordable Housing
[Added 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 01-15]
§ 203-90. Findings and purpose.
§ 203-91. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. The Township Committee finds and declares that the creation and
preservation of affordable housing in the Township serves the public
interest. Maintaining and improving a stock of sound affordable
housing requires affirmative steps by local government working
cooperatively with public bodies at all levels and with the private sector.
The purpose of this article is to create in the Township of Woolwich a
trust fund from payment of development fees to assist in the marshaling
of public and private monies dedicated to affordable housing projects
and programs.
B. The New Jersey Supreme Court, in Holmdel Builder's Association v.
Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), determined that mandatory
development fees are both statutorily and constitutionally permissible.
The Court further anticipated that the Council on Affordable Housing
would promulgate appropriate development fee rules specifying,
among other things, the standards for these development fees. The
purpose of this article is to provide such rules in accordance with the
Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing Procedural and Substantive Regulations
contained in N.J.A.C. 5:91, 5:92 and 5:93 et seq.
C. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Contribution Ordinance is to
provide revenues with which to fund rehabilitation of housing units and
accessory apartments in Woolwich Township occupied by low- and
moderate-income households, to construct housing for low- and
moderate-income families in the Township and/or to fund any other
programs for low- and moderate-income housing in order for the
Township of Woolwich to meet its responsibility for providing affordable
housing pursuant to Mount Laurel II and the Fair Housing Act in any
later amendment to the housing plan element and fair share plan. The
funds collected pursuant to this article shall be used exclusively for the
production of low- and moderate-income housing and to offset
municipal expenses in developing and administering the program(s)
under which low- and moderate-income housing shall be produced to
meet the fair share need to the Township. No funds shall be expended
except as permitted by N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.15 or other approval of the
Court.
§ 203-90 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-91
198:861
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Any deed-restricted housing unit with an
acquisition price or rent level not exceeding the maximum resale or rent
level for low- and moderate-housing as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4.
COUNCIL or COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act of 1985. 127
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted in COAH rules and regulations.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by
the Township Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that all
property in the Township is assessed at the same assessment ratio or ratios
required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit may be obtained
by the Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final equalized
assessed value will be determined prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for each house or, in the case of commercial development, prior
to project completion, by the Municipal Tax Assessor.
JUDGMENT OF REPOSE — A judgment issued by the Superior Court
approving a municipality's plan to satisfy its fair share obligation.
§ 203-91.1. Municipal Housing Liaison. [Added 4-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-12]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the administrative
mechanisms needed for the execution of Woolwich Township's
responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant
to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering
the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing
program for Woolwich Township to ensure that the restricted units
under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as
applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the
governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for Woolwich Township.
C. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
(1) Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is
hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for
Woolwich Township.
127. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 203-91 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-91.1
198:862
(2) Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH), the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the
governing body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for Woolwich
Township, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(3)(f), which may be
contracted out:
(a) Serving as Woolwich Township's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Woolwich
Township's Fair Share Plan;
(c) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(f) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or
all of the restricted units in Woolwich Township as described in
Subsection C(6) below.
(4) Subject to approval by COAH, Woolwich Township may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any
agency charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of
Woolwich Township, except for those responsibilities which may
not be contracted out pursuant to Subsection C(3) above. If
Woolwich Township contracts with another entity to administer all
or any part of the affordable housing program, including the
affordability controls and Affirmative Marketing Plan, the
Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent.
(5) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body
at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
(6) Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal
Housing Liaison.
(a) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
§ 203-91.1 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-91.1
198:863
§ 203-92. Affordable housing development fee schedule. [Amended
3-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-08]
(b) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
A. Affordable housing development fees, when utilized, shall be paid by all
residential developers within all zoning districts and all nonresidential
developers within all zoning districts, other than developers of exempt
developments. Such fees shall consist of monies paid by an individual,
person, partnership, association, company, entity or corporation for the
improvement of property as permitted in COAH's rules. Affordable
housing development fees collected shall be used for the sole purpose
of providing low- and moderate-income housing.
B. Fees shall be based on the equalized assessed value which shall be the
value of a property determined by the Municipal Tax Assessor through a
process designed to ensure that all property in the municipality is
assessed at the same assessment ratio or ratios required by law.
Estimates at the time of building permit may be obtained by the Tax
Assessor utilizing estimates for the additional equalized assessed value;
final equalized assessed value will be determined prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for each house or, in the case of
commercial development, prior to project completion, by the Municipal
Tax Assessor.
(1) Residential development fees. Developers shall pay a development
fee of 1% of the equalized assessed value of any residential
development, provided no increase in density is permitted. Where
an increase in density is permitted through a use variance or a
rezoning which is adopted after the adoption date of this article,
developers shall pay a development fee of 6% of the equalized
assessed value of any additional housing units in addition to a fee of
1% on the number of units permitted prior to the variance or
rezoning.
(2) Nonresidential development fees.
(a) Developers shall pay a fee of 2% of equalized assessed value
for nonresidential development, provided no increase in floor
area is permitted. Where an increase in floor area is permitted
through a use variance or a rezoning which is adopted after the
adoption date of this article, the nonresidential developer shall
pay a fee of 2% of equalized assessed value for the floor area
ratio (FAR) the developer could previously construct prior to
receiving the variance or rezoning and an increased fee for the
additional FAR.
(b) The right of the Township to the increased fee and the right of
the nonresidential developer to enhanced development rights
§ 203-91.1 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-92
198:864
§ 203-93. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions.
shall depend upon the developer and the municipality entering
into an agreement concerning the increased fee; the fee
imposed bearing a reasonable relationship to the value of the
enhancement resulting from the zoning or variance; and the
court approving the fee. If a nonresidential developer realizes
enhanced development rights other than an increased FAR
pursuant to either a rezoning or variance, the same standards
set forth above shall apply.
A. Developers who have tax credits or other subsidies for the construction
for low- and moderate-income units shall be exempt from paying
development fees.
B. Developments that have received preliminary or final approval prior to
the imposition of a development fee shall be exempt from development
fees unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the approval;
for example, a substantial alteration in site layout, development density
or types of uses within the development.
C. All other major subdivisions and site plans which do not include
affordable housing shall be subject to housing impact fees as defined
herein.
D. Any project subject to a general development plan (GDP) that includes
any affordable housing shall be exempt only to the following extent. Any
portion of the GDP that has not received a preliminary or final approval
or has received a preliminary or final approval and undergone a
substantial change shall be subject to a fee of 0.5% of equalized
assessed value for residential development and 1% of equalized
assessed value for all nonresidential development. The total fee
anticipated from the GDP shall be adjusted by the amount resulting
from the following formula: number of affordable units required by the
GDP X $25,000 per unit. If the developer constructs affordable rental
housing, thereby generating a rental bonus pursuant to current COAH
standards, the number of affordable units generating the $25,000 per
unit credit shall be increased accordingly, provided that the total
number of units and rental bonus credits that shall be eligible for the
$25,000 per unit credit shall be capped at the Township's current fair
share as of the date the Township adopts this article and publishes
notice of said adoption. Developer's credit shall be applied against the
developer's low and moderate obligation under this article as
residential units or commercial developments are approved until the
total number of credits are utilized unless developer, at its option,
elects to designate any particular nonresidential approval as a
development subject to the payment of the fees.
E. Construction costs of $20,000 or less.
§ 203-92 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-93
198:865
§ 203-94. Collection of development fees.
§ 203-95. Housing Trust Fund.
(1) Residential building permits which involve construction costs of
$20,000 or less shall be exempt from paying development fees;
provided, however, if a residential property owner applies for two
or more building permits within a five-year period, the combined
cost of which exceeds $20,000, then the property owner shall pay a
development fee calculated by using the combined construction
costs. For third and subsequent applications within five years, the
development fee due would be based upon the combined
construction cost less the development fee already paid.
(2) As an example, if in Year I a homeowner constructs a residential
addition, the cost of which is $20,000 (which is exempt from the
payment of a fee), and in Year 3 the same homeowner seeks to
construct another addition, the cost of which is $15,000, the
homeowner, prior to obtaining a building permit in Year 3, would
have to pay a development fee based upon the combined cost. In
this case, the fee would be based on a cost of $35,000. If the same
property owner constructed another addition in Year 4, the cost of
which was $10,000, the development fee due in Year 4 would be
based on the combined construction cost of $45,000 less the
development fee already paid.
A. Developers shall pay 50% of the calculated development fee to
Woolwich Township at the issuance of building permits. The
development fee shall be estimated by the Tax Assessor prior to the
issuance of building permits.
B. Developers shall pay the remaining fee to Woolwich Township at the
issuance of certificates of occupancy. At the issuance of certificates of
occupancy, the Tax Assessor shall calculate the equalized assessed
value and the appropriate development fee. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at
certificate of occupancy and the amount paid at issuance of building
permit.
A. All development fees shall be deposited with the Chief Financial Officer
of the Township in a separate designated interest-bearing Housing
Trust Fund. The development fees placed in the Housing Trust Fund
shall be deemed "dedicated revenues," as such term is defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:4-36. In establishing the Housing Trust Fund, the Township
shall provide whatever express written authorization that may be
required by the bank utilized by the Township in order to permit the
court to direct the disbursement of development fees pursuant to
§ 203-99 of this article. No money shall be expended from the Housing
Trust Fund unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan
approved by the court.
§ 203-93 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-95
198:866
§ 203-96. Use of funds.
§ 203-97. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
B. If the court determines that the Township of Woolwich is not in
conformance with the court's approval or COAH's rules on development
fees, the court is authorized to direct the manner in which all
development fees collected pursuant to this article shall be expended.
Such authorization is pursuant to this article, the court's rules on
development fees, and the written authorization from the Township
Committee to the named bank or depository.
A. The Township shall use revenues collected from development fees for
any activity approved by the court for addressing the Township's fair
share obligation. The expenditures of all money shall conform to a
spending plan approved by the court.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township for housing
activities that preceded a judgment of repose.
C. No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expanded on administration costs necessary to develop, revise
or implement the housing plan element, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for Township employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a rehabilitation program, a new
construction program, a regional contribution agreement, a housing
element, and an affirmative marketing program. Administrative funds
may be used for income qualification of households, monitoring the
turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance with COAH's
monitoring requirements. Development fees shall not be used to defray
the costs of existing staff, except that the court or COAH may consider
permitting fees to defray the cost of staff whose sole responsibility is to
implement the housing element.
A. The Township shall collect information on each applicant for low- and
moderate-income housing on forms approved by COAH. Such report
shall include:
(1) Monitoring forms approved by COAH;
(2) An evaluation of the income and demographic characteristics of
each applicant of low- and moderate-income housing, as well as the
occupants of the units; and
(3) An evaluation of any necessary adjustments in the affirmative
marketing program as a result of the evaluation in Subsection A(1)
above.
B. The Township shall evaluate the results of its affirmative marketing
activities and file a report with COAH and the court by August 30th of
each year.
§ 203-95 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-98
198:867
§ 203-98. Spending plan.
The Township shall submit to the court a spending plan for the development
fees collected by it prior to the expiration of its judgment of repose. Plans
to spend development fees shall consist of the following information:
§ 203-99. Violations and penalties.
A. A projection of revenues anticipated from imposing fees on
development, based on historic activity;
B. A description of the administrative mechanism that the Township will
use to collect and distribute revenues;
C. A description of the anticipated use of all development fees;
D. A schedule for the creation or rehabilitation of housing units;
E. In the event the Township envisions being responsible for public sector
or nonprofit construction of housing, a proforma statement of the
anticipated costs and revenues associated with the development; and
F. The manner through which the Township will address any expected or
unexpected shortfall if the anticipated revenues from development fees
are not sufficient to implement the plan.
A. In the event that any of the conditions set forth in Subsection B below
occur, the court shall be authorized, on behalf of the Township, to direct
the manner in which all development fees collected pursuant to this
article shall be expended. Should any such conditions occur, such
revenues shall immediately become available for expenditure at the
direction of the court upon the Township Clerk's receipt of written
notification from the court that such a condition has occurred. In
furtherance of the foregoing, the Township shall, in establishing a bank
account pursuant to § 203-95 of this article, ensure that the Township
has provided whatever express written authorization may be required
by the bank to permit the court to direct disbursement of such revenues
from the account following the delivery to the bank of the
aforementioned written notification provided by the court to the
Township Clerk.
B. Occurrence of the following may result in the court taking an action
pursuant to Subsection A above:
(1) Failure to meet deadlines for information required by the court in
its review of this article, the Township's housing plan element or
spending plan;
(2) Failure to proceed through court's process toward the grant of a
judgment;
(3) Failure to address the court's conditions for a judgment of repose
within the deadlines imposed by the court;
§ 203-98 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-99
198:868
§ 203-100. Expiration of this article.
This section shall expire if:
§ 203-101. Provision of affordable housing pursuant to Cycle Three
growth share regulations. [Added 2-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-05128]
(4) Failure to submit accurate monitoring reports within the time limits
imposed by the court;
(5) Failure to implement the spending plan for development fees within
the time limits imposed by the court;
(6) Expenditure of development fees on activities not permitted by the
court;
(7) Revocation of the Township's judgment of repose;
(8) Other good cause demonstrating that the revenues are not being
used for the intended purpose.
A. The court dismisses or denies the Township's judgment of repose.
B. The court revokes the Township's judgment of repose.
C. The judgment of repose expires prior to the Township's filing an
adopted housing element with COAH or the court, seeking approval of
the housing element filed with COAH or the court, or receiving COAH's
or the court's approval of this article.
A. Quantification of affordable housing obligation for residential
developers. Except as otherwise provided below, in those
circumstances where an applicant seeks to develop land for residential
purposes and receives no right to increased density or other
compensatory bonus, said applicant shall produce and develop on site
one residential unit of housing affordable to low- and moderate-income
households for every eight market rate residential units constructed
(11.11%). In the event 11.11% of the total units should result in a
fraction equaling one half percent or greater, the affordable housing
obligation shall be rounded to the next higher number. Affordable
housing shall be as defined under the FHA and COAH's regulations.
Nothing herein shall relieve applicants seeking to develop projects of
eight or fewer units from the requirements of the Township's Mount
Laurel Development Fee Ordinance in its current form or any future
form.
B. Permissible manner of satisfaction of affordable housing obligation of
residential developers.
128. Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance provided that the legislative intent set forth in
the above preambles and recitals are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
herein as set forth herein at length.
§ 203-99 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-101
198:869
(1) For all residential development, an applicant shall satisfy its
affordable housing production obligation through on-site housing
production in connection with the residential project. which is one
of the mechanisms permitted pursuant to COAH's regulations.
(2) The other alternative mechanisms permitted under COAH's
regulations include the purchase of an existing market rate home
at another location in the community and its conversion to an
affordable price-restricted home in accordance with COAH's
criteria, regulations and policies; the funding of a regional
contribution agreement (RCA); participation in reconstruction and/
or buy-down/write-down, buy-down/rent-down programs; and/or
contributing to the Housing Trust Fund at a rate of 1% of the
equalized assessed value of the new construction of residential
development, An applicant shall only be entitled to satisfy its
affordable housing obligation via one or more of the alternative
mechanisms set forth above if the applicant demonstrates to the
Planning or Zoning Board that the requirement to construct one
affordable residential unit for every eight market rate residential
units on site constitutes a taking of the applicant's property without
just compensation pursuant the applicable legal standards.
(3) A condition of all preliminary subdivision or preliminary site plan
applications shall be that the applicant must secure written
permission from the Woolwich Township Planning or Zoning Board
as to the exact manner in which on-site production or alternative
mechanism(s) will be used to satisfy the affordable housing
obligation for the project.
(4) Full and complete satisfaction of compliance with the affordable
housing requirements of the development shall be a specific,
automatic, essential and nonseverable condition of all land use
approvals. Pursuant to this condition, the applicant must
demonstrate that it has satisfied the Planning or Zoning Board's
affordable housing condition of approval prior to obtaining the first
building permit, and compliance with the affordable housing
condition shall be a continuing condition of all Planning or Zoning
Board approvals for development.
C. Quantification of affordable housing obligation for nonresidential
developers. Except as otherwise provided below, in those
circumstances where an applicant seeks to develop land for
nonresidential purposes and receives no right to an increased floor area
ratio, as defined by Chapter 203, Article II, of the Township's Code, or
other compensatory bonus, the developer shall provide one non-agerestricted
affordable residential unit for every 25 jobs projected to be
created by its development. The calculation of the number of jobs and
employment opportunities shall be in accordance with Appendix E to
N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq. entitled "UCC Use Groups for Projecting and
Implementing Nonresidential Components of Growth Share."
§ 203-101 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-101
198:870
D. Permissible manner of satisfaction of affordable housing obligation of
nonresidential developers.
(1) For all nonresidential development, the applicant may satisfy its
affordable housing production obligation through the various
mechanisms COAH regulations authorize, including, on-site
housing production in connection with a residential component of
the project, the purchase of an existing market rate home at
another location in the community and its conversion to an
affordable price-restricted home in accordance with COAH's
criteria, regulations and policies, the funding of a regional
contribution agreement (RCA), participation in reconstruction and/
or buydown/write-down, buy-down/rent-down programs and/or
contributing to the Housing Trust Fund at a rate of 2% of equalized
assessed value of the new construction for commercial
development.
(2) The applicant shall present its planned method of compliance to the
Planning or Zoning Board at the time of application filing, and the
Board shall, in its sole discretion, advise the applicant whether the
proposed method of compliance is acceptable, or whether an
alternative technique or combination of techniques permitted by
COAH regulations would be acceptable.
(3) Full and complete satisfaction of compliance with the affordable
housing requirements of the development shall be a specific,
automatic, essential and nonseverable condition of all approvals.
Pursuant to this condition, the applicant must demonstrate that it
has satisfied the Planning or Zoning Board's affordable housing
condition of approval prior to obtaining the first building permit,
and compliance with the affordable housing condition shall be a
continuing condition of all approvals for development.
E. Permissible manner of satisfaction of affordable housing obligation of
mixed-use developers. For all projects which include a combination of
both residential and nonresidential development, the affordable
housing obligation created by the residential portion of the project is
set forth in Subsection A above. The permissible manner of satisfaction
of the affordable housing obligation for the residential component is set
forth in Subsection B above. The affordable housing obligation created
by the nonresidential portion of the project is set forth in Subsection C
above. The permissible manner of satisfaction of the affordable housing
obligation for the residential component is set forth in Subsection D
above.
F. Compliance with COAH's rules. The affordable unit(s) to be produced
pursuant to Paragraphs A, B, C, D and E above shall be available to a
low-income individual or household should only one affordable unit be
required. Thereafter, each of the affordable units shall be divided
evenly between low- and moderate-income individuals and households
except in the event the applicable formulas result in an odd number of
§ 203-101 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-101
198:871
affordable units; in which event the unit shall be a low-income
residential unit. All affordable units shall strictly comply with COAH's
regulations and policies, including, but not limited to, pricing, phasing,
bedroom distribution, controls on affordability, range of affordability,
affirmative marketing and income qualification. It shall be the
applicant's responsibility, at its sole cost and expense, to arrange for a
COAH and Township approved qualification service to ensure full COAH
compliance and to file such certifications, reports and/or monitoring
forms as may be required by COAH or the court to verify COAH
compliance of each affordable unit.
G. Exemptions.
(1) To the extent that the judgment of repose awarded to Woolwich in
December 2004 by the Superior Court of New Jersey specifies the
responsibilities associated with any given project, the developer
shall comply with the requirements associated therewith. To the
extent that the judgment of repose envisions that rights will be
determined in future proceedings, the agreements reached or
requirements imposed in the context of that litigation shall
determine the extent to which there shall be any relief from the
requirements of this section.
(2) (Reserved)129
(3) Nonprofit organizations which have received tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
providing current evidence of that status is submitted to the
Municipal Clerk, together with a certification that services of the
organization are provided at reduced rates to those who establish
an inability to pay existing charges.
(4) Federal, state, county and local governments.
(5) Public utilities under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Board of
Public Utilities to the extent that the construction for which
approval is sought is of a facility which shall house equipment only
and not to be occupied by any employees.
H. Right to greater set-aside if compensatory benefit. As to residential
developers, nothing herein shall affect the Township's ability to
generate more affordable housing than the one for eight standard set
forth above in the event that the developer secures a density bonus or
other compensatory benefit through zoning or through a use variance.
As to nonresidential developers, nothing herein shall affect the
Township's ability to generate more affordable housing than the one
affordable residential unit for every 25 job standard set forth above in
the event that the developer secures an increased FAR or other
compensatory benefit through zoning or through a use variance.
129. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(2), Construction costs of $20,000 or less for
residential development only, was repealed 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-11.
§ 203-101 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-101
198:872
ARTICLE XIII
Agricultural Buffers
[Added 5-1-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-12]
§ 203-102. Intent.
This article is intended to isolate and insulate residential uses from
agricultural uses. It is the intent of this article that a one-hundred-foot
buffer which shall include a six-foot black vinyl-coated chain link fence
and a twenty-five-foot vegetative fence is to be constructed at property
lines by the developer of a residential major or minor subdivision where
said residential major or minor subdivision shall adjoin active or preserved
farmland or agricultural land.
§ 203-103. Buffer required for residential subdivisions.
A one-hundred-foot buffer, including living and six-foot black vinyl-coated
chain link fencing as hereinafter provided shall be constructed for all
residential subdivisions in the Township of Woolwich where said residential
major and minor subdivisions adjoin any of the following:
§ 203-104. Terms defined.
Fencing pursuant to this article shall be defined as follows: six-foot black
vinyl-coated chain link fence to be constructed pursuant to the standards of
§ 203-70, Fences, and living fences as herein described under § 203-107 of
this article.
§ 203-105. Exceptions.
A. Active farmland.
B. Preserved farmland.
C. Agricultural land.
A. No fence shall be constructed of a six-foot black vinyl-coated chain link
fence or a living fence on the occurrence of any of the following:
(1) Where the current owner or owners of the adjoining lands at the
time of application which would otherwise require fencing shall
have waived the fence requirements in writing and at the discretion
of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment before
which the application is pending.
(2) Where the construction of a fence would pass into, through, or
upon any area described by the State of New Jersey as "wetlands"
and "transition areas."
(3) Where natural boundaries that would prevent the construction of
either fence, whether it be the chain link or living fence, including
actual waterways or a naturally existing forest with sufficient
§ 203-102 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-105
198:873
§ 203-106. Fence standards.
§ 203-107. Living fence defined.
density that would prohibit the construction of a fence, unless
said forest area were removed. The determination as to "sufficient
density" shall be within the discretion of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment before which the application is
pending.
(4) Depending on the feasibility of constructing a fence where a slope
exists, the requirement to construct a fence along steep slope areas
may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment before which the application is pending.
(5) Areas where the construction of a fence is likely to alter or modify
or restrict the flow of water or waters so as to create any damming
effect.
B. This article is intended to apply to a wide range of conditions which may
exist in the Township of Woolwich. Any part of this article may be
waived by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
whichever shall have jurisdiction, where such Board makes specific
findings of fact that the imposition of requirements of this article would
be detrimental to landowners, their use of property or to the Township
of Woolwich. No part of this article shall, however, be waived unless
good cause be found in findings of facts established by the Board having
jurisdiction.
A. A six-foot black vinyl-coated chain link fence of six feet in height shall
be required along the residential property line between the farm and
the residential major or minor subdivision. The standard to be applied
shall be § 203-70, Fences. The fence specification shall be applied as the
actual standards to be utilized in this article. A fence shall be provided
along with the living fence that will begin at the fence on the residential
property side and continue into the residential property and shall not be
in conflict with Ord. No. 2005-25," Ordinance to Amend Certain
Sections of Chapter 203 of the Code of the Township of Woolwich,
Entitled Zoning, Section 203-40.C.1.x.2.; Section 203-40.C.3.vi; Section
203-41.C.4.ix.2; Section 203-41.C.6.xiv.; Section 203-42.C.14.xxvi.; and
Section 203-42.C.15.xiv."130
B. No six-foot black vinyl-coated chain link fence shall be installed or
erected except in accordance with the provisions of this article.
A. A living fence shall be defined as follows:
LIVING FENCE — All plant varieties that are hardy and native to
southern New Jersey. There shall be a suggested list for all
developments, allowing for substitutions where circumstances merit.
130. Editor's Note: See §§ 203-40 through 203-42.
§ 203-105 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-107
198:874
All plantings are subject to § 203-68, Landscaping. The living fence
shall begin at the wood fence on the property line and not be less than
25 feet in depth from the fence.
Developers/applicants shall provide a suitable mixture of
recommended plants from the list below and shall include no less
than:
(a) Six deciduous, ornamental and evergreen tree varieties.
(b) Five shrub varieties.
(1)
All ground areas shall be planted with the seed mixture appropriate
for the soil type and location unless the area is a mowed sod area
or improved.
(2)
Plant units: For every 100 lineal feet of agricultural buffer,
developer shall include the following minimum plants:
(a) Three deciduous trees.
(b) Five ornamental trees.
(c) Six evergreen trees.
(d) Twenty-four shrubs.
(3)
Recommended plants:
Deciduous trees (three inches to 3.5 inches caliper).
[1] Celtis occidentalis - Common hackberry.
[2] Liquidambar styractiflua - Sweetgum.
[3] Nyssa sylvanica - Black gum.
[4] Quercus rubra - Red oak.
(a)
Ornamental trees (two inches caliper or 12 feet in height for
clump).
[1] Amelanchier laevis - Allegheny serviceberry.
[2] Cercis canadensis - Eastern redbud.
[3] Cornus florida - Flowering dogwood.
[4] Crataegus-crusgalli - Downy hawthorn.
(b)
Evergreen trees (five feet to six feet in height).
[1] Abies var. - White, balsam, or fraiser firs.
[2] Ilex opaca - American Holly.
[3] Juniperus virginiana - Eastern red cedar.
(c)
(4)
§ 203-107 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-107
198:875
§ 203-108. Standards and specifications; disclosure on application
plan.
[4] Picea var. - Spruce.
[5] Pinus var. - Pine (black, white, pitch).
[6] Thuja occidentalis - Arborvitae (var.).
Shrubs, deciduous and evergreen (three feet in height or
greater).
[1] Aronia arbutifolia - Red chokeberry.
[2] Clethra alnifolia - Summersweet.
[3] Hamamelis virgiana - Witchhazel.
[4] Ilex verticulata - Winterberry.
[5] Kalmia latifolia - Mountain laurel.
[6] Lindera benzioa - Spicebush.
[7] Myrica pennsylvanica - Bayberry.
[8] Rosa rugosa - Shrub rose.
[9] Viburnum (var) - Viburnum.
[10] Ilexx x merserveae - China boy and China girl holly.
(d)
B. The species provided for herein are intended to be utilized as
recommended examples of living plants ideally suited to grow into
fencing. Other plantings may possibly be substituted, depending on the
site, sunlight, soil and such other conditions as would apply to probable
growth of the planting.
A. No living fence shall be installed unless there shall be provided
specifications and standards for the plants to be utilized. The standards
and specifications shall be disclosed on the application plan, as follows:
(1) The plantings to be utilized.
(2) The size of the plants (minimum size shall be specified).
(3) Distance between plants.
(4) Proposed height of plants:
(a) No plants or plantings shall be installed of less than three-foot
initial feet in height, with that height being measured from the
ground level and not a furrow.
§ 203-107 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-108
198:876
§ 203-109. Responsibility for maintenance; removal prohibited.
§ 203-110. Maintenance standards.
(b) All plants or plantings shall be installed in order that, after
three years of growth, the plant or plantings shall have
reached a height of not less than five feet.
B. Any fence to be erected pursuant to this article and § 203-70, Fences,
and any amendments thereto, shall be constructed at the time or times
as hereinafter provided: Any fence required by this article and § 203-70,
Fences, shall be erected and completed as one of the first steps to be
taken in the course of development, at the time of infrastructure and
grading. A sign shall be posted by the developer at the one-hundredfoot
buffer line to notify potential home buyers of the restrictions within
the agricultural buffer, point of sale disclosures shall be made to
potential purchasers of the restriction and said restrictions shall be
included in each deed of conveyance. This article shall be applicable for
each subsequent section or phase sought to be developed.
A. Where the living and chain link fences shall have been installed in a
residential major or minor subdivision, the following parties shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the fences:
(1) The homeowners' association, where a homeowners' association
has been established.
(2) In the alternate where no homeowners' association shall have been
established, the individual homeowner where the fences shall be
situate.
(3) Appropriate disclosures regarding maintenance, repairs and/or
removal shall be included in the homeowner's association
documents.
B. No fence shall be removed by the homeowners' association or any
owner or by any other party.
A. Living and chain link fences shall be maintained applying the following
standards:
(1) Six-foot black vinyl-coated chain link fence shall at all times be
maintained until completely overtaken by vegetative fence so as to
be totally intact and to prevent trespassing except where a gate or
gates may be installed between one property and another, it being
the intent of the fence to prevent trespassing from one side to
another and to create a specific boundary area.
(2) The living fence shall be maintained in such a way as to create a
barrier the same as a six-foot black viny-lcoated chain link fence,
but of a living and green variety. The property owner and/or the
homeowners' association are responsible for the maintenance of
§ 203-108 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-110
198:877
§ 203-111. Deed restrictions.
§ 203-112. Diversion of water flow.
the living fence as set forth herein and shall at all times be
responsible for the continued upkeep, maintenance, replanting,
removal of debris and trash and to take those steps necessary
to ensure that the living fence shall be maintained in a safe and
aesthetic condition.
A. Wherever a fence shall be required under this article or any
amendments thereto, the applicant/developer shall establish deed
restrictions, which shall contain the following limitations, restrictions,
and standards:
(1) A deed restriction shall require that the fence shall not be removed
unless the adjoining property shall no longer be used for any of the
purposes established in § 203-103. The property owner or other
party shall notify the Township in advance of any effort to remove a
deed restriction or condition imposed.
(2) Homeowner is to maintain vegetative buffers and fence in
accordance with Woolwich Township Code § 203-110, Maintenance
standards.
(3) No living or chain link fence shall be modified which may result in
changes in drainage on adjacent property.
(4) Living fences shall not be altered in any fashion to change or
modify the purpose for which they were originally intended as a
barrier.
(5) Chain link and living fences at all times shall be maintained
pursuant to the deed restrictions so as to prohibit access to and
from adjoining properties by persons and machines.
(6) The deed restriction shall be recorded in the Gloucester County
Clerk's office and disclosed to any purchaser of lands being
developed.
(7) The deed restriction may be enforced by any party in the
development, the municipality, the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment of Woolwich Township or the adjoining
property owner which may be sought to be protected.
B. Deed restrictions shall be submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment of Woolwich Township for purposes of advanced
review and approval.
A. Chain link and living fences shall not be installed in any way so as to
interrupt the flow of waters across lands where water has previously
flowed naturally.
§ 203-110 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-112
198:878
§ 203-113. Enforcement.
This article may be enforced by a developer, any landowner, any adjoining
landowner, any person holding any prescriptive right, easement right, any
homeowners' association, the municipality or the Police Department of the
municipality or any other person as permitted by law. Enforcement resulting
in repairs will be at the cost of the homeowner and/or may result in a fine
imposed by the Township of Woolwich.
§ 203-114. Abandonment.
§ 203-115. Agreements for boundary line fences.
Nothing shall prevent any fence from being built on a boundary line in
accordance with the Township of Woolwich ordinance requirements with
the written consent of both parties (i.e., developer/owner and adjoining
landowner).
§ 203-116. Waivers.
Any part of this article may be waived by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment upon formal application of the Township of Woolwich
where such Board makes specific findings that the imposition of the
requirements pursuant to this article would be detrimental to landowners,
their uses of the property, or to the Township of Woolwich.
B. The contour of the land shall not be changed by more than 10% to
accommodate a fence so as not to modify or change the natural areas of
water flow across lands.
C. No fence shall be installed in such a manner that it would act as a dam
or diversion of waters to other areas.
D. Fences shall be installed so as to accept natural areas in the existing
condition both before and after the development as near as possible.
A. This article is intended to isolate and insulate residential uses from
agricultural uses. In carrying out the general intent of this article, the
responsibility for the maintenance, repair and replacement has been
established.
B. However, upon the abandonment or modification of the adjoining
agricultural use, wherein the purpose of the fence is thereafter no
longer required pursuant to this article, the fence or fencing may be
removed by the owner of the property on which the fence is situate
upon application to the Township or to the Planning/Zoning Board.
§ 203-112 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-116
198:879

Part 2
Woolwich Regional Center And Auburn Road Village Regulations
[Added 10A-n2d7 -D20es0i8gnB yStOarndd.a Nrdos. 2008-21]
ARTICLE XIV
General Provisions
§ 203-117. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to provide zoning regulations and design
standards that are to be used in combination with the open space and
circulation plans to promote the creation and sustainability of mixed-use
walkable communities and neighborhoods along the Route 322 Corridor and
within the Auburn Road area of Woolwich Township, New Jersey. The zoning
regulations and design standards address seven development sectors within
the Woolwich Regional Center and the Auburn Road Village. Sectors have
been identified and are designed to promote stability and sustainability to
the concept of the community of the 21st Century as they are designed
to accommodate the growth of both regional and local services, some
pedestrian-oriented, some automobile-oriented, and provide employment,
civic and residential choices for communities of up to 4,246 residential units
and roughly five million to six million square feet of retail/commercial space.
A. Subsectors.
(1) The Woolwich Regional Center:
(a) Woolwich Newtown (RC-1).
(b) Gateway Highway Service (RC-2).
(c) Large Format Retail (RC-3).
(d) Big Box Retail (RC-3).
(e) Regional Office and Hotel (RC-3).
§ 203-117 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-117
198:881
(f) Neo-Traditional Senior Community (RC-3).
(g) Gateway East (RC-4).
(2) The Auburn Road Village: Mixed Use Commercial/Residential
Walkable Neighborhood Center (AR-1).
B. The regulations and standards within this Part 2 address location,
mixture and intensities of permitted uses, as well as site planning and
architectural controls designed to promote vibrant urban form
consistent with the visioning process undertaken by Woolwich
Township officials, civic leaders and citizens.
C. This is not a document about architectural style. By style we mean such
descriptive terms as "colonial," "victorian," "modern," "post-modern,"
etc. While each of us may have a collective memory of a place or places
where such styles have elicited positive experiences of community, the
history of human settlement instructs us that basic design
considerations independent of "architectural style" are determinants of
successful human scale community building. Good design promotes
§ 203-117 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-117
198:882
healthy community of place. The tenets of good design expressed in this
document are based on seven principles:
(1) Scale: the visual arrangement and massing of buildings, voids and
landscape elements that promote walkability and other alternative
forms of transportation, a sense of place and a human scale rather
than auto-oriented suburban sprawl.
(2) Rhythm: a pattern of facade and streetscape elements that
discourages monotony and creates an inviting pedestrian
environment and visual compatibility with buildings and places.
(3) Edges: physical elements that define a place and provide transition
to adjacent areas.
(4) Colors and materials: the visible components of buildings and
streetscapes, including siding, trim, doors, windows, gutters,
downspouts, roofing and all other architectural and site elements.
They must be in context with their environment and must be
sustainable, low maintenance, durable and tactile.
(5) Density: the proximity at which a community lives, works and plays
together.
(6) Choice: the provision of housing, employment, retail, recreation
and other services for people of all ages and lifestyles.
(7) Diversity: a variation of scale, rhythm, materials, density and
choice that provides an array of options for all people.
D. The local visioning process has identified a series of goal statements, as
outlined below, which are to be considered in the review of all
development applications involving lands located within the mapped
Woolwich Regional Center and the Auburn Road Village. Requests for
variances, waivers and/or deviations from the ordinance provisions of
this code shall be evaluated in the context of the impact the same may
have on the following goal statements:
(1) Promote traditional neighborhood developments where the
physical, visual and spatial characteristics are established and
reinforced through the consistent use of compatible urban design
and architectural design elements. Such elements shall relate
characteristics of an individual structure or development to other
existing or planned structures or developments in a harmonious
manner, resulting in an overall development pattern and
streetscape.
(2) Encourage innovative mixed-use and multiple-use plans so that the
housing demand of varying age groups, families and income levels
may be met by greater variety of type, design and layout of
dwellings and by the construction and more efficient use of open
space. To that end, the goal is to create smaller lots than currently
§ 203-117 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-117
198:883
§ 203-118. Use of Part 2.
exist in Woolwich Township to accommodate a mixture of singlefamily
detached units, twins, townhouses, condominium flats and
apartment flats above commercial and office uses which are to be
integrated into the plan.
(3) Promote the creation of neighborhoods and districts that are
distinct and identifiable in landscape, architecture and public space
elements.
(4) Encourage the development of "sustainable" community identified
by economic and fiscal balance, social integration and
maximization of water and energy conservation through the use of
passive and active technologies.
(5) Encourage land development practices that will promote the public
health, safety, and welfare by creating neo-traditional land use
alternatives to conventional, use-segregated "suburban sprawl,"
such as larger-lot subdivisions and strip commercial developments.
(6) Discourage uses and design patterns that tend to contribute to
traffic congestion through the dependence on private automobiles.
(7) Establish a comprehensive street and path network based on the
principles of the grid to accommodate an integrated multimodal
transportation system with the intent of providing a safe pedestrian
environment and pedestrian paths.
(8) Alleviate undue traffic congestion by reducing excessive sprawl of
development and the segregation of land uses which result in the
inefficient use of land and which necessitate the use of private
vehicles.
(9) Encourage creative green technologies integrated into public
spaces and private development parcels to achieve flood control,
stormwater recharge and water filtration in an effort to preserve an
indispensable natural resource.
(10) Allow for the directing of additional development through transfer
of development rights (TDRs) in an effort to preserve the remaining
rural, historic and agricultural character of Woolwich Township.
A. This document outlines the purpose of the zoning regulations and
design standards and identifies the tenets of good design based upon
specific principles. It also contains a series of goal statements that must
be considered in the review of all development applications.
Specifically, this document acts as an enabling ordinance which
contains a development process section, phasing rules, general
standards and definitions, a listing of principal and accessory uses, bulk
and area regulations for all permitted uses, design standards and a
street regulating plan. Further detailed rules associated with street
§ 203-117 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-118
198:884
layout and design, stormwater management, and parking and open
space are found in other sections of this Part 2.
B. The zoning regulations and design standards are an interrelated set of
plans, diagrams, photographs, tables and text which specify the design
and intent of the Woolwich Regional Center and the Auburn Road
Village.
C. Steps for developing land.
(1) Step 1: Review sections related to the variance, waiver and/or
deviation process, phasing rules and general standards and
definitions.
(2) Step 2: Review enabling ordinance section, including specifics on
implementation. “Specifics on implementation” is the text which
explains how regulations that are specified within the document
will be implemented. This is the legal language that clarifies the
regulations.
(3) Step 3: Review total number and types of residential units,
densities and square footage of nonresidential uses.
(4) Step 4: Review bulk, area, and design regulations for each land use
and building type that specifically addresses the following
categories: town scale, block scale, site scale, public realm and
private realm in relationship to architecture and design, parking,
edges and buffers and the environment.
(a) The “town scale” shows the location of a particular permitted
use in the Route 322 Corridor and Auburn Road area and its
relationship to Center-wide features. The “block scale”
specifies tract and block dimensions, sidewalk and planting
strip widths, mid-block crossings, streetlighting and street
furniture, architectural elements, public space and right-ofway
considerations as well as issues of rhythm, scale and
building orientation.
(b) The “site scale” identifies typical area and bulk regulations
pertaining to lot area, width and depth, building and
§ 203-118 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-118
198:885
impervious coverage, building setbacks, fencing, open space
and stormwater considerations.
(c) The “public realm” identifies the outside features of the
architecture of buildings on each lot, including height,
elevations, window-to-eave offsets, facade fenestration, rhythm
breaks, porches, and other related matters.
(d) The “private realm” identifies building factors related to rear
deck and outdoor space areas, chimney materials, upper-floor
breezeways, stoops, awnings, solar screens, balconies and
permitted uses internal to the structure.
(5) Step 5: The Land Use Master Plan maps for both areas are the legal
maps which are part of this document. They are the regulating
§ 203-118 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-118
198:886
§ 203-119. Legislative intent.
plans for the design of both Centers. All regulations in this
document are derived from these maps. It reflects the location of
streets, avenues and boulevards, open space and parks, retail and
mixed-use buildings within both Centers.
A. This Part 2 is intended to create the standards and requirements for the
Woolwich Regional Center and the Auburn Road Village, which have
been contemplated in some form by the Township dating back three
years to 2003. The Township Committee seeks to create mixed-use, neotraditional
neighborhoods with public uses and open space areas
designed to serve as both passive and active amenities.
B. Both Centers are also intended to integrate themselves with newly
developed lands and with existing properties in and around the existing
Route 322 Corridor and Auburn Road area, some of which are presently
commercial and some of which are residential. It is intended that most
of these existing properties will eventually be converted to some form of
mixed uses or complementary stand-alone developments.
C. The Township Committee and Joint Land Use Board have promulgated a
series of policy statements as listed below, which are to be considered
in reviewing all development applications involving lands located in
both the Woolwich Regional Center and the Auburn Road Village.
(1) Develop new mixed-use communities, which reflect the traditional
character of this evolving rural Township.
(2) Require, whenever possible, the interconnection of existing and
proposed uses so as to create integrated neighborhoods and a
greater sense of community by using design techniques that
provide for modified grid patterns accentuated with special, more
grand avenues.
(3) Provide a layout of streets and open space edges which encourage
pedestrian interconnections to residential, civic and commercial
uses within a one-half-mile walking distance.
(4) Provide a clearly articulated and rationally designed open space
system which consists of both integrated and peripheral active and
passive parks.
(5) Extend greater opportunities for housing, commercial and
recreational facilities to all residents of the Township.
(6) Encourage a more efficient use of land and public services by
directing development in a pattern that resembles a traditional
mixed-use development with varied housing types.
(7) Provide an approval, which will require the development to relate
the type, design, and layout of residential development on any site
§ 203-118 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-119
198:887
§ 203-120. General provisions.
to the surrounding environs and context, and to the Township's
goal of encouraging mixed-use, neo-traditional development in a
manner sensitive to the preservation or enhancement of property
within existing residential areas.
(8) Establish policies and procedures intended to promote flexibility
for the marketability of dwelling unit types while requiring the
maintenance of the underlying integrity of the plan in an efficient
and expedient forum.
(9) Discourage generic, modern suburban development that bears no
relation to the historic development pattern of the Township and
Gloucester County while promoting the creation of new
neighborhoods and developments that exhibit the design features
of neo-traditional neighborhoods and small towns in the county.
(10) Promote the creation of places which are oriented to the
pedestrian, promote citizen security, and social interaction.
(11) Establish community plazas and squares which act as focal points
of activity and interaction for both commercial and residential
neighborhoods.
(12) Promote developments with visual and spatial characteristics as
expressed in the components of the regulating plan and site plan
and design standards.
(13) Incorporate a land use component specifically addressed to the
needs of senior citizens.
(14) Develop a plan that addresses the fiscal imbalance of current
zoning and provides a phasing of development in a fiscally
responsible manner.
(15) Accommodate both the need and desire for the automobile in
community planning.
A. This Part 2 supersedes any provisions of the Woolwich Township Site
Plan Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance or Zoning Ordinance131 as they
apply to the Township as a whole. The Regulating Plan, which includes
the Land Use Element, Circulation Plan Element, Public Spaces Plan
Element, Stormwater Element, and Zoning Regulations and Design
Standards Element, is incorporated as a companion document herein
by reference.132 [Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-17]
B. In the event of any inconsistencies or contradictions, this Part 2 shall be
deemed as controlling over those lands located in the two Centers. The
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Site Plan Review; Ch. 163, Subdivision of Land, and Part 1 of
this chapter, respectively.
132. Editor's Note: The Regulating Plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 203-119 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-120
198:888
§ 203-121. Phasing plan.
Regulating Plan shall be incorporated herein by reference as the design
basis for the lands included in the Woolwich Regional Center and
the Auburn Road Village. The Regulating Plan shall be governed in
its entirety by the provisions of this Part 2 with the exception that
those provisions of the Township Subdivision and Site Development
Ordinance133 and Zoning Ordinance specifically referenced within this
Part 2 shall also apply to the zone district.
C. The approval or disapproval of any portion of any Center development
shall be based on an interpretation of the effect of the proposed
development on the surrounding properties and the zone district if the
same deviates in any manner from the Regulating Plan incorporated
herein by reference. In the event of a deviation from the same, the
determination shall be evaluated based upon the following provisions:
(1) The Regulating Plan, as incorporated herein by reference, shall be
deemed to be the basic structure of both the Woolwich Regional
Center and the Auburn Road Village and cannot be modified
without approval of the Township Committee and/or the Joint Land
Use Board depending on the extent of the deviation from the
provisions of the Regulating Plan.
(2) The Regulating Plan is conceptual in nature in that it is not an
engineered plan and that the actual layout of the streets and alleys
shall be determined at the time of site plan and/or subdivision
approval. The general locations of streets and alleys will remain;
however, minor modifications may be permitted by the Joint Land
Use Board due to engineering and site plan considerations,
provided that the overall integrity of both the project scale and the
comprehensive nature of the interconnected grid and parallel
circulation/roadway system as illustrated in the conceptual
drawings of this document are maintained.
(3) The regulations in this Part 2 shall be deemed to be the minimum
standards applicable for the Woolwich Regional Center and the
Auburn Road Village. In the event of any requests for deviation
from standards for any section of proposed development or any
portion of any section of either Center, Township Planner or Center
Subcommittee or the Joint Land Use Board, depending upon the
extent of the deviation, may require more stringent standards
based on the proposed effect of the deviation on the overall Center
plan or on specific areas of either development which may be
impacted by the proposed deviation, in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township and the overall
integrity of the plan.
133. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 149, Site Plan Review.
§ 203-120 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-121
198:889
§ 203-122. Township Planner and/or Center Subcommittee.
A. Any applicant seeking to develop properties located within the
Woolwich Center or Auburn Road Village shall be required to provide a
phasing schedule, which phasing schedule shall be subject to the
review of and approval by the Joint Land Use Board. The intent of the
phasing schedule shall be to establish parameters within which
permitted housing stock shall be constructed in conjunction with the
construction of land-use-related infrastructure components.
B. The Joint Land Use Board shall have the discretion to develop a suitable
mechanism to ensure a balanced development so as to minimize and
moderate fiscal impacts on the Township which may otherwise be
created by the construction of housing.
C. A methodology may be established based upon ratio of dwelling units to
nonresidential floor area or any other suitable calculation which the
Joint Land Use Board deems to be appropriate in light of the intended
goal of minimizing and moderating fiscal impacts.
A. The Township Committee can choose to use the professional services of
the Township Planner and/or establish a Center Subcommittee to
review applications for development of lands within both the Woolwich
Regional Center and the Auburn Road Village. For purposes of this Part
2 and Regulating Plan, the reviewer shall be referred to as the
“Township Planner.” The Township Planner is hereby established and
acknowledged, the purpose of which shall be to review all plans for
development as well as variances, waivers and/or deviations from the
Regulating Plan as incorporated in this Part 2 by reference. The
Township Planner shall be responsible for reviewing and providing
recommendations to the Joint Land Use Board for its approval or denial
for deviations from any of the aforesaid design standards set forth in
the Regulating Plan and this Part 2.
B. In those matters involving variances, waivers and/or deviations, the
applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating to the Joint Land Use
Board the nature of the variances, waivers and/or deviations sought,
the amount of land or building lots affected, the impact of the variances,
waivers and/or deviations on the immediately surrounding area of the
Woolwich Regional Center and the Auburn Road Village and, if
applicable, the effect on the overall district or subdistrict based upon
the extent of the variances, waivers and/or deviations requested.
C. The Township Planner shall have the right to prepare and require the
submission of an application checklist, provided the same is adopted by
the Township Committee by ordinance.
D. The Woolwich Regional Center and the Auburn Road Village plans and
the land uses of its subsections shall be considered as permitted uses
with conditions, those conditions being those established in the
Regulating Plan, incorporated herein by reference. In the event any
§ 203-121 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-122
198:890
§ 203-123. Variances, waivers and/or deviations from Regulating
Plan.
single property owner or consortium of property owners owns
properties consisting of 15 acres or more, he/she or it may apply to
the Joint Land Use Board for General Development Plan (GDP) approval
for its portions of either Center and shall be subject to the provision of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 et seq. regarding GDP review and approvals. Both
property owners or consortiums of property owners who obtain GDP
approval and those who do not obtain a GDP approval for their property
shall be required to obtain site plan and/or subdivision approval as may
be required by law in addition to complying with the conditions of the
within Part 2.
E. The street pattern as incorporated in the Circulation Plan Element shall
be deemed to be fixed, and any application for deviation from the street
pattern as established in this Part 2 shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Joint Land Use Board unless said deviation is due to onsite
engineering conditions certified by the Township Engineer and
results only in a minor relocation of a proposed roadway as set forth in
the Circulation Plan Element. In the event of such certification by the
Township Engineer, the applicant shall only be required to submit the
proposed deviation to the Township Planner as set forth above for its
review and recommendation and potential action by the Joint Land Use
Board.
F. All applications for development of any subsection of either the
Woolwich Regional Center or Auburn Road Village shall be required to
submit a phasing schedule unless said application is for a single
property of two acres or less. In the event the application consists of
approval for a site consisting of property exceeding said two acres, and
the plan pertaining to said area consists of both residential and
nonresidential uses, the phasing schedule shall incorporate the specific
mechanism for residential applicable site so as to ensure the balanced
development of the property for both residential and nonresidential
purposes.
G. This Part 2 shall not be construed to alleviate the necessity of any
applicant from obtaining any and all other approvals which may be
required from outside agencies, whether municipal, county or state
agencies which would otherwise have jurisdiction over the application.
H. The Center Subcommittee and/or Township Planner shall be
responsible for the review of architectural building style, including all
materials and colors.
A. Any application seeking variances, waivers and/or deviations from the
provisions of this Part 2 may be subject to conditions at the time of
approval by the Township Joint Land Use Board. All applications for
such deviations must be evaluated in terms of the goals and policy
statements articulated and established in this Part 2 and the reasons for
§ 203-122 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-123
198:891
§ 203-124. Interpretation of development standards and guidelines.
said deviation shall be established in any determination made by the
Joint Land Use Board.
B. Proposed deviations shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the
Joint Land Use Board based upon the following criteria:
(1) The design and improvement shall be in harmony with the purpose
and intent of this Part 2.
(2) The design and improvement shall generally enhance the street
and/or building regulating plans, or in any case not have on adverse
impact on its physical, visual, or spatial characteristics.
(3) The design and improvement shall generally enhance the
streetscape and neighborhood, or in any case not have an adverse
impact on the streetscape and neighborhood.
(4) The modification shall not result in configurations of lots or street
systems which shall be impractical or detract from the appearance
of the Center or the ability of adjacent properties to develop per the
Regulating Plan.
(5) The proposed modification shall not result in any danger to the
public health, safety, or welfare by making access to the dwellings
by emergency vehicles more difficult, by depriving adjoining
properties of adequate light and air, or by violating the other
purposes for which zoning ordinances are to be enacted.
(6) Landscaping and other methods shall be used to ensure compliance
with the design standards and guidelines of this Part 2.
(7) The minimum lot size of any lot to be created shall only be reduced
below the requirements of this Part 2 by approval of the Joint Land
Use Board.
(8) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed modification will
allow for equal or better results and represents the minimum
modification necessary.
(9) In the event of the granting of a deviation, the Joint Land Use Board
may impose such conditions it deems necessary to permit the
deviation while ensuring the integrity of the overall Town Center
plan.
A. The development standards contained in the Regulating Plan and
design vocabulary contained therein are both written and illustrated.
The illustrations and written text are intended to be complementary;
and wherever an apparent inconsistency exists, an applicant may apply
to the Joint Land Use Board for interpretation of the ordinance
regarding such standard. Any interpretation made by the Joint Land
§ 203-123 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-124
198:892
Use Board shall be made in conjunction with the overall intent and
character of the plan as codified in the Regulating Plan.
B. The development standards as contained in the ordinance set forth
specific requirements for development guidelines which are to be
strictly construed. The design vocabulary shall be interpreted with the
maximum degree of flexibility to promote consistency in design, taking
into account exceptional situations which may require unique
interpretation.
§ 203-124 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-124
198:893

ARTICLE XV
District Designations and Uses
§ 203-125. Center subsection delineation.
A. Delineation.
(1) The Woolwich Regional Center shall be comprised of three
individual subsections which have been planned and designed
based upon their respective locations from existing roads and
utilities and existing buildings and features so as to promote a
contiguous integrated Regional Center. The zone districts as
proposed are set forth on the attached zone identification map
which is appended hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
Those districts are the RC-1, RC-2, RC-3 and RC-4 Zones.
(2) The Auburn Road Village shall be comprised of one zone sector, the
AR-1 Zone.
B. Permitted and prohibited uses.
§ 203-125 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-125
198:895
§ 203-126. Methods for increasing Center density.
(1) The permitted uses for each section of the proposed Woolwich
Regional Center and Auburn Road Village are set forth in this Part
2, and the design standards as applicable to each section of the
Regional Center are set forth in the Regulating Plan incorporated
herein by reference.
(2) Unless expressly permitted, all other uses are deemed to be
prohibited. The outdoor storage of commercial trucks, tractor
trailers, recreation vehicles, tractors, campers and boats is
prohibited in all subsections of the Woolwich Regional Center and
Auburn Road Village unless approved as part of a site plan.
A. The transfer of units from another site located within the Township,
which units to be transferred shall be incorporated into the density for
the applicable portion of the Woolwich Regional Center and the Auburn
Road Village of the Township, shall be based upon the TDR
Ordinance.134
B. The acquisition of development rights which may be acquired from
another site located within the Township, which units if not owned by
the applicant shall only be added to the base density upon evidence of
the acquisition of same. The agreement shall set forth the reduction on
the sending site and the proportionate increase on the receiving site
and shall be binding upon all parties both as to acquisition and
reduction in density. The Township Committee shall incorporate a
reference to the retirement of specific areas of land in the agreement.
C. The Township Committee and Joint Land Use Board may approve the
inclusion of low- and moderate-income affordable housing units
previously not planned for by the Township and not previously
incorporated in its Housing Element and Affordable Housing Plan, in
order to increase density based upon this provision. The proposal to
provide affordable housing units must also be approved by either the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) or the court as an
amendment to the Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
Any increase in density to be based upon this section of this Part 2 shall
be determined based upon the established guidelines by either COAH
or the court and ratified by the Township. The precise location and
distribution of the affordable housing units, if any, and the phasing to
the development of same shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Township Committee and Joint Land Use Board.
D. Transferred units shall be allocated to designated receiving districts
within the Center. The actual construction of transferred units shall,
however, only occur after a site plan and/or subdivision has been the
subject of final approval for that section of the Center to which the units
are to be transferred.
134. Editor's Note: See Part 1, Art. VI, Voluntary TDR Program, of this chapter.
§ 203-125 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-126
198:896
§ 203-127. (Reserved)135
§ 203-128. Land uses in Auburn Road Village Center.
The following uses are permitted in the Auburn Road Village Center subject
to the applicable development standards requirements as set forth in the
accompanying Regulating Plan incorporated herein by reference:
E. No transfer of previously approved units located within a Center shall
be permitted to be made into any other designated receiving district.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Residential uses, including:
(a) Single-family detached.
(b) Single-family detached with alley.
(c) Twin.
(d) Twin with alley.
(e) Townhouse.
(2) Civic uses, including:
(a) Civic green, plaza and squares.
(b) Day-care establishments for children and adults.
(c) Parks and recreation facilities, including but not limited to tot
lots, public playgrounds, conservation areas, tennis,
basketball, football, soccer, hockey and ice skating.
(d) Civic buildings, including but not limited to post office,
community center, fire emergency and police station facilities.
(3) Nonresidential uses, including:
(a) Art galleries.
(b) Bakeries, confectioners.
(c) Bed-and-breakfasts and inns.
(d) Business and household service uses, including repair shops
for business equipment, appliances and the shops of
tradesmen such as plumbers and electricians.
(e) Delicatessen/Carry-out.
(f) Farm and open-air markets.
135. Editor's Note: Former § 203-127, Land Uses in Route 322 Regional Center, was repealed
8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13.
§ 203-126 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-128
198:897
(g) Medical and dental clinics.
(h) Mixed use with residential.
(i) Mixed use without residential.
(j) Offices for administrative, executive, professional, business
sales, government offices and similar uses, the normal
attributes of which do not involve the storage, exchange or
delivery of merchandise to the general public.
(k) Office of banks and savings and loan associations not having
drive-through facilities for the transaction of business from
motor vehicles.
(l) Office of banks and savings and loan associations having drivethrough
facilities for the transaction of business from motor
vehicles.
(m) Outpatient medical, rehabilitation or dental facilities.
(n) Personal service businesses, including hair salons, tanning
salons, nail salons, dry-cleaning outlets, dressmaking or tailor
shops, shoe repair shops and related uses except for tattoo
studios and body piercing establishments.
(o) Public transportation and shelters.
(p) Restaurants, full-service or fast-food freestanding, no drivethrough.
(q) Restaurants, full-service or fast-food freestanding or in
multitenant buildings, with drive-through or drive-through
only.
(r) Restaurants, full-service or fast-food in multitenant building,
no drive-through.
(s) Retail sales and services, including newspapers, gifts,
novelties, tobacco products, drugs, food, clothing, spirits,
confections, florist items, books and specially merchandise,
including convenience stores.
(t) Sidewalk cafes.
B. Accessory uses. Customary accessory uses and accessory buildings
incidental to the above permitted principal uses (unless otherwise
indicated), including:
(1) Flagpoles; clock towers.
(2) Home occupations and home professional offices.
(3) Kiosks and street vending carts.
§ 203-128 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-128
198:898
(4) Parking structures.
(5) Temporary buildings or yards for construction materials or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
immediate area.
(6) Temporary construction trailers.
(7) Temporary offices or model homes, both incidental and necessary
for the sale or rental of real property in the immediate area.
(8) Tool sheds and noncommercial greenhouses.
(9) Surface parking lots.
(10) Swimming pools on individual lots.
(11)Walls and fences.
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses, including:
(1) Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer, electricity and
gas.
(2) Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas located entirely
within an existing building or on the roof or side of a building or
attached to an existing structure.
§ 203-128 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-128
198:899

ARTICLE XVI
Definitions
§ 203-129. Terms defined.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the purposes of this
Part 2, have the meaning herein indicated. Any word used in this Part 2
which is not defined herein and which is defined in other articles of the
Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance136 shall, for the
purpose of this Part 2, have the meaning defined herein.
ALLEE — Regularly spaced and aligned row of trees usually planted along
a street or pedestrian path.
Allee
ARBOR — An open framework structure that forms a shelter, gateway
framework or bower. Its primary purpose is to be a semi-architectural place
for climbing plants to grow, while providing shaded seating, directional
form to frame a view or to create a private out-of-doors area. An arbor can
be arched or square-topped. It differs from a gazebo in that its roof area
is open to the elements, while a gazebo traditionally has a solid roof that
protects those seated beneath it from the elements.
Arbor
ARTISANAL WORKSHOP — Shops of special trade, including the
manufacturing, compounding, assembly, processing, packaging or similar
treatment of such products as baked goods, candy, ceramics, pottery, china,
weaving and other textile arts, painting, cooperage, woodworking, and
other artistic endeavors and similar trades. Retail sales of products made
on the premises are encouraged.
AWNING — An ancillary lightweight structure usually of canvas,
cantilevered from a facade providing shade to the fenestration and spatial
containment to the pedestrian. Awnings, to be an effective adjunct to a shop
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-129 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-129
198:901
front, must thoroughly overlap the sidewalk and should be no higher than
10 feet at the front edge of the sidewalk.
BALCONY — A platform that projects from the wall of a building and is
surrounded by a railing or balustrade.
BIOSWALE — Landscape element designed to remove silt and pollution
from surface runoff water. It consists of a swaled drainage course with
gently sloped sides and filled with vegetation, compost and/or riprap. The
water's flow path, along with the wide and shallow ditch, are designed to
maximize the time water spends in the swale, which aids in the trapping of
pollutants and silt.
Bioswale
BLOCK — The aggregate of private lots, passages, rear lanes and alleys,
circumscribed by public streets.
BREEZEWAY — A covered passage one story in height connecting a main
structure and an accessory building.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The height of a building or portion of a building
shall be measured from the average established grade at the street lot line
or from the average natural ground level, if higher, or, if no street grade
had been established, to the deck line of mansard roofs; and the cornice or
eaves line for hip and gable roofs. In measuring the height of a building, the
following structures shall be excluded: chimneys, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio and television towers,
ornamental cupolas, domes, or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding four
feet in height.
BUS RAPID TRANSIT (BRT) — A mode of public transportation that
combines the quality of rail transit and the flexibility of buses. It can operate
on exclusive transitways, high-occupancy-vehicle (HOV) lanes, expressways
or ordinary streets. A BRT system combines intelligent transportation
systems technology, priority for transit, rapid and convenient fare collection
and integration with land use policy in order to substantially upgrade bus
system performance.
Bus Rapid Transit (BRT)
§ 203-129 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-129
198:902
BUS STOP SHELTER/TRANSIT SHELTER — A freestanding structure,
located on a bus transit route, which is designed to accommodate
embarking and disembarking bus transit passengers.
CIVIC — The term defining not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts,
culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking.
CIVIC BUILDING — A building designed specifically for a civic function.
CIVIC GREEN OR PLAZA OR SQUARE — Public spaces located within the
Township and its neighborhoods A plaza or square may contain a civic
building or space located within a primarily unpaved, formally configured,
small public lawn or park. Portions may be linear in shape. Both types
should be surrounded by canopy street trees. Situated at prominent
locations and often dedicated to important events and/or citizens, plazas
and squares may contain water features, an amphitheater, farmers' markets
and in some instances play equipment and courts, but shall not include ball
fields.
CIVIC SPACE — An outdoor area dedicated for public use. Civic space types
are defined by the combination of certain physical constraints, including the
relationship between their intended use, their size, their landscaping and
the building(s) defining the space.
COLONNADE — A roof or building structure, extending over the sidewalk,
open to the street and sidewalk except for supporting columns or piers.
COMMUNITY GARDEN — A parcel of land used for the growing of
vegetables, flowers, etc. used for human consumption but not for
commercial sales. The garden area shall include but not be limited to a
greenhouse, an accessory storage building, benches, a watering system and
fencing.
CORNICE — The topmost element composed of moldings for an entablature
in formal architecture orders or used alone at the roofline or ceilings.
Cornice
COURT — An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two sides by
the walls of the building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by
the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one side open to a street,
alley, yard, or other permanently open space.
COURT TOWNHOUSE — A side-by-side attached group of single-family
units having a minimum of three units per building. Entrances to a unit shall
be from a paved courtyard area located in front of the unit. Front-loaded
garages shall be provided with no alleys. The courtyard area shall include
some landscaping and be constructed with one or combination of pavement
materials, including, but not limited to, decorative paving.
§ 203-129 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-129
198:903
DECORATIVE PAVING — Paving that is made up of solid, precise, modular
units, stamped concrete, seeded concrete, colored concrete or any
combination of the above.
DOG PARK — An enclosed outdoor area intended for the exercising and/or
containment of dogs and similar animals.
DORMER — A projecting vertical structure on the slope of a roof, which
provides light and headroom to the interior space.
Dormer
EAVE — The junction of a wall of a building and an overhanging roof. In
order to encourage pitched roofs, the designated maximum building height
may be measured to the eave, not to the top of the roof.
ENTABLATURE — Originally was an elaborated beam supported by
columns. It now generally refers to an elaborated horizontal band along the
exterior of a building. Used primarily just beneath the roofline; sometimes
used on the facade between floors.
FACADE — A building face or wall.
FASCIA — A projecting flat horizontal member or molding, also part of a
classical entablature.
Fascia
FENESTRATION — Window and other openings on a building facade.
FLATS or LOFTS — A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy
by three or more families living independently in which they share common
entrances and other spaces and individual units may be owned as
condominiums or offered for rent.
§ 203-129 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-129
198:904
FLOOR-AREA-RATIO (FAR) — The sum of the area of all the floors of
buildings or structures compared to the total area of the site.
FRIEZE — Used as one of the ornamentation elements of particular Greek
and then Roman design. Applied to the top of a horizontal segment of a
mantelpiece, which assumes temple format with side supports serving as
pilasters.
FRONT YARD FENCE — The wood picket, wrought iron or masonry fence
required along the street frontage of all private lots and along common lot
lines to no more than 10 feet back from the street right-of-way line.
GABLE — The part of the end wall of a building between the eaves and a
pitched or gambrel roof. The gable orientation shows the vertical triangular
plane rather than the slope side of the roof. A gable facing towards a
frontage individualizes a building more strongly than its alignment parallel
to a frontage.
Gable
GARDEN CENTER — An establishment for retail sales of live plant material,
fertilizers, pesticides, landscape materials, plant containers, seasonal sales
of flowers, produce and holiday items, including Christmas trees, both live
and artificial, lawn ornaments, garden furniture and similar material.
GREENWAY — An open space corridor in largely natural conditions which
may include trails for bicycles and pedestrians.
Greenway/Passive Park
LANDSCAPE BUFFER — A combination of physical space and vertical
elements such as plants, berms, fences, or walls, the purpose of which is to
separate and screen incompatible land uses from each other.
LANDSCAPED OPEN AREA or LANDSCAPED AREA — Any combination of
living plants (such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees)
and nonliving landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch,
walls, fences or decorative paving materials).
LINTEL — The topmost horizontal member over an opening, which helps
carry the weight of the vertical structure above it.
§ 203-129 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-129
198:905
Lintel
LIVE/WORK — A dwelling unit that contains, to a limited extent, a
commercial component. A live/work unit is a fee-simple unit on its own lot,
with the commercial component limited to the ground level.
LIVING AREA — That portion of the dwelling unit utilized for living
purposes within the exterior walls of the structure and does not include
porches, breezeways, garages, carports, bay windows and decks.
MASSING — The three-dimensional bulk of a structure: height, width and
depth.
PARAPET — A low wall encircling the perimeter of a flat building roof,
generally used to screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment.
Parapet
PARK — Any public or private land available for recreational, educational,
cultural, or aesthetic use. A park includes the following types:
PARK-AND-RIDE — A parking lot designed for drivers to leave their cars
and use mass transit facilities beginning, terminating, or stopping within
immediate walking distance of the park-and-ride facility.
PEDIMENT — A crowning triangular element at the face of a roof or above
a door opening.
Adult park: A park that is typically developed with active recreational
facilities such as field games, court games, picnicking and space for
quiet/passive activities.
A.
Children's park: A park that is primarily oriented to children, that
includes tot lots, play areas, picnic tables and other recreational
facilities.
B.
Passive park: A park featuring passive recreation pursuits, such as
interpretive programs and trail systems that take advantage of
geological, biological, or scenic resources, located within the park not
including recreational facilities.
C.
§ 203-129 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-129
198:906
PERGOLA — Similar to arbors, which include an open framework structure
that forms a shelter. However, pergolas are commonly used to provide
directional form over walkways or to create a private outdoor seating or
patio area.
PILASTER — A thin segment of a square column attached on a wall, which
matches in details accompanying freestanding columns or on corners of
buildings.
PLANTER — The element of the public streetscape which accommodates
street trees. Planters may be continuous or individual.
PORCH — A covered but unenclosed projection from the main wall of a
building that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for
structural purposes.
PORTE COCHERE — A covered roof extending off the building facade which
allows a vehicle to park under and passengers to access the house via a side
stair.
Porte Cochere
PORTICO — An open-sided structure attached to a building sheltering an
entrance or serving as a semienclosed space.
Portico
PRIVACY FENCE — Fences and hedges along alleys and common lot lines
(behind the front wall of the building), which may be as high as eight feet
above the adjacent ground. A wire fence (with wooden framework) shall
have a hardy species of hedge or climbing vine planted along it.
PUBLIC SPACE — Property (streets, alleys, civic greens and parks) within
the public domain and physically within a town or neighborhood within
which citizens may exercise their rights. At its most ideal level, public space
and public buildings can be characterized as being of, for, and by the people.
§ 203-129 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-129
198:907
RAIN GARDEN — A planted depression that is designed to take as much
as possible of the excess rainwater run-off from a house or other building
and its associated landscape. The plants, a selection of wetland-edged
vegetation, such as sedges, rushes, ferns, shrubs and trees, absorb the
excess water and then, through the process of transpiration, return water
vapor into the atmosphere.
Rain Garden
REAR ALLEY — A vehicular street or driveway located to the rear of
lots providing access to service areas and parking, and containing utility
easements. Alleys should be paved from building face to building face, with
drainage by inverted crown at the center or with curbs at the edges.
REGULATING PLAN — The "master plan" for the Woolwich Regional Center
and the Auburn Road Village that provides specific information for the
disposition of each property or lot. The Regulating Plan specifies the
building placement standard for each lot and shows how each building
contributes to the larger Center, neighborhood and village and shows the
arrangement of the public space in relation to private space.
SOLAR SCREEN — A device attached to a building to provide shading for
glazed areas thereof.
Solar Screen
STOOP — A ground-floor entry platform at the front and/or street side of
a building. Stoops, where required, may be roofed but they shall not be
enclosed.
§ 203-129 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-129
198:908
Stoop
STREET, STREET FRONTAGE, and SIDE STREET —
STREETSCAPE — The design element that establishes the major part of
the public realm. The streetscape is composed of streets (travel lanes for
vehicles and bicycles, parking lanes for cars, and sidewalks or paths for
pedestrians) as well as the visible private frontages (building facades and
elevations, porches, yards, fences, awnings, etc.), and the amenities of the
public frontages (street trees and plantings, benches, streetlights, etc.).
Streetscape
STREET SCREEN — A freestanding wall built along the frontage line, or
coplanar with the facade, often for the purpose of masking a parking lot
from the street. Street screens should be between 3 1/2 and eight feet
in height and constructed of a material matching the adjacent building
facade. The street screen may be a hedge or fence. Street screens shall have
openings no larger than are necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian
access. In addition, all street screens over four feet high should be thirtypercent
permeable or articulated to avoid blank walls.
STREET — Includes all public space (streets, civic greens, and parks),
but not alleys.
A.
STREET FRONTAGE — Refers to the lot line that coincides with the
greater street right-of-way and generally the shorter lot dimensions.
B.
SIDE STREET — The street of the lesser right-of-way, generally with the
longer lot line along it.
C.
§ 203-129 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-129
198:909
Street Screen
SUBURBAN SPRAWL — The name given to development designed
according to segregated use zoning standards, and auto-dependent criteria
concerning access and parking. The resultant development provides for
a low-density landscape of independently designed uses connected by a
system of hierarchical streets, which do not provide through access. A
majority of the land in this model is relegated to street and parking
surfaces, and although the building density and population may be low, the
amount of usable open space is minimal to none, and traffic congestion is
common.
Suburban Sprawl
SUSTAINABLE — Having the ability to accommodate and maintain
population growth and economic expansion through intelligent design.
TEXTURE — The exterior finish of a surface, ranging from smooth to coarse.
TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance,
attached horizontally in a linear arrangement, being located on a separate
lot, and being separated from an adjoining dwelling unit by an approved
wall extending from the foundation through the roof and structurally
independent of the corresponding wall of the adjoining unit and having
a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light and
ventilation.
TRADITIONAL AND NEO-TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOODS —
Neo-traditional neighborhoods Incorporate design principles that
produce compact, mixed-use, pedestrian-scaled communities. The
following conventions are generally employed in the design of
traditional neighborhoods.
The neighborhood is limited in area to that which can be traversed
in a ten- to fifteen-minute walk.
(1)
A.
§ 203-129 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-129
198:910
TRANSOM — A horizontal window above a door or window, usually
rectangular in shape.
Transom
TRELLIS — Lightweight elements used for controlling the shape or to
support climbing and other plants. In most instances, it is usually
constructed on a flat plane, in a two-dimensional way, unlike an arbor, which
is frequently a three-dimensional structure.
Residences, shops, workplaces, and civic buildings are located in
close proximity.
(2)
A well-defined and detailed system of interconnected streets serves
the needs of the pedestrian and the car equally, providing multiple
routes to all parts of the neighborhood.
(3)
Physically defined open spaces in the form of plazas, squares, and
parks, in addition to finely detailed public streets, provide places
for formal and informal social activity and recreation.
(4)
Private buildings form a clear edge, delineating the private from
the public realm.
(5)
Civic buildings reinforce the identity of the neighborhood,
providing places of assembly for social, cultural, and religious
activities.
(6)
Traditional neighborhoods pursue certain objectives through their
design:
Independence of movement for the elderly and young by bringing
many activities of daily living within walking distance.
(1)
Reduced traffic congestion and road construction costs by reducing
the number and length of car trips.
(2)
Use or preparation for future use of alternative forms of
transportation by organizing appropriate building densities.
(3)
Improved security of public spaces organized to stimulate informal
surveillance by residents and business operators.
(4)
Enhanced sense of community and improved security through
provision of a range of housing types and workplaces in proximity
to one another.
(5)
Accessible places for public assembly and civic engagement by
identification of suitable sites for civic buildings.
(6)
B.
§ 203-129 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-129
198:911
Trellis
TWIN — A one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, attached
horizontally in a linear arrangement to one other dwelling unit, each located
on a separate lot, and being separated from each other by an approved
wall extending from the foundation through the roof and structurally
independent of the corresponding wall of the adjoining unit and having
a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light and
ventilation.
VERNACULAR — A regional adaptation of an architectural style or styles;
usage has intrinsically resolved the architectural response to climate,
construction technique, and, to some extent, social mores.
§ 203-129 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-129
198:912
ARTICLE XVII
Residential Receiving (RR)
[Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 203-130. Residential Receiving (RR).
A. Goal: to provide a mixture of unit types to address the needs and
desires of those at various stages of life.
B. Permitted uses:
(1) Residential uses.
(a) Single-family detached with or without alleys.
(b) Twin with or without alleys.
(c) Townhouse.
(d) Court townhouse.
(2) Civic green, square.
(3) Day-care establishments for children and adults.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities, including but not limited to tot lots,
public playgrounds, conservation areas, tennis, basketball, football,
soccer, hockey and ice skating.
(5) Public and private elementary, middle and high schools subject to
the requirements of the minimum lot sizes as established by the
New Jersey State Department of Education for school facilities.
(6) Civic buildings, including but not limited to post office, schools,
community center, fire, emergency and police station facilities,
public libraries and museums.
(7) Farm and open-air markets.
(8) Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer, electricity and
gas.
(9) Wireless telecommunications towers and antenna located entirely
within an existing building or on the roof or side of a building or
attached to an existing structure.
(10) Independent living units for occupancy by residents of age 55 or
over, including community centers and community gardens.
C. Accessory uses. Customary accessory uses and accessory buildings
incidental to the above permitted principal uses.
(1) Flag poles.
(2) Home occupations and home professional offices.
§ 203-130 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-130
198:913
§ 203-131. Townhouse units, court townhouses.
(3) Temporary building or yards for construction materials or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
immediate area.
(4) Temporary construction trailers.
(5) Temporary office or model home both incidental and necessary for
the sale or rental of real property in the immediate area.
(6) Tool sheds and noncommercial greenhouses.
(7) Surface parking lots.
(8) Swimming pools on individual lots.
(9) Decks and patios.
(10)Walls and fences.
A. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the townhouse unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Bay windows work to provide street rhythm and to break down
the horizontal scale.
(b) Small private front yard planting softens street environment.
(c) Windows on side facade enliven corner buildings.
(d) Stoop provides public/private transition.
(e) Front door accentuated in scale.
(f) Durable materials stand up to the test of time.
(2) Photo 2.
§ 203-130 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-131
198:914
(a) On a case-by-case basis, townhouses may be arranged in a
courtyard configuration with front doors and garages facing a
landscaped parking/multipurpose court.
(b) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
rules of rhythm, scale and material choice are respected.
(c) Low garden walls define courtyard edges.
(d) High-quality landscaping and surface materials such as pavers
are required in courtyards.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Slight variations in dormer design reduces monotony in
otherwise identical units.
(b) Low front yard garden walls provide appropriate public/private
transition.
(c) Large mansard roof elements accentuates horizontal break to
respect human scale at sidewalk level.
(d) Generous windows on front facade provide internal light while
animating street and promoting safety.
(e) Roof gardens and decks provide necessary outdoor private
space.
§ 203-131 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-131
198:915
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Vertical and horizontal architectural offsets and material
changes reinforce human scale at street level.
(b) Window sturning corner of building acknowledge special
location at street intersection.
(c) Solar screens provided reduce unit energy loads and provide
horizontal break.
(d) Variations in window dimensions provide interest to the street
and address scale and rhythm issues.
(e) Affordable housing requirement: residential development fee
of 1.5% of equalized assessed value.
B. Size and scope.
(1) Minimum density: 4.5 d.u./ac. with TDR credits.
(2) Maximum density: 6.0 d.u./ac. with TDR credits.
(3) Unit type percentage: 30% minimum to 50% maximum.
(4) Townhouses are encouraged to provide architectural edges to open
space.
(5) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(6) No front yard parking.
(7) All vehicle access via alleys.
(8) On-street parking.
C. The block.
§ 203-131 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-131
198:916
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Special architectural features at corners.
[2] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,150 feet 1,800 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15 feet 20 feet
Path width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative
streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
§ 203-131 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-131
198:917
Minimum Maximum
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking provided through alley-loaded driveways
and garages.
(b) On-street parking provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum 36 feet.
[2] Maximum 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens encouraged for on-street
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees encouraged to lower summer cooling
load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
D. The site.
§ 203-131 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-131
198:918
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] No more than eight units built in a row.
[2] Provide common mid-block crossing through building to
rear alley if eight units are built.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 1,500 square feet 2,625 square feet
Lot width 20 feet 30 feet
Corner lot 20 feet 35 feet
Lot depth — 75 feet
Building coverage — 60%
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback 5 feet 15 feet
Side yard setback 0 feet 15 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 2 —
Driveway length 2 —
Driveway width 8 feet 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
§ 203-131 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-131
198:919
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(c) Foundation plantings.
(d) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(e) Parking planting.
(f) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(g) Pergolas.
(h) Trellises.
(i) Arbors.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Long-life trees encouraged to maximize green infrastructure
funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species encouraged to minimize water
needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material encouraged to aid in reducing stormwater
runoff.
E. The public realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
§ 203-131 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-131
198:920
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnade.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Usable open or covered stoops.
[12] Porticos.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
First floor elevation 2 feet 5 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
Window-to-eave
offset
1 foot —
Front facade
fenestration
30% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
20% —
Building face or
roof offset
2 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Rear-loaded attached garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Deck setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of 10
feet.
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
§ 203-131 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-131
198:921
(c) Pools are not permitted.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
F. The private realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, stucco, or similar
masonry material.
[2] Synthetic trim board is permitted as an accent material.
[3] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles,
tiles or similar material.
[4] Roof types shall be flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped,
salt box or combinations thereof.
[5] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
§ 203-131 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-131
198:922
[6] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[7] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Stoop — 8 feet
Bay window — 4 feet
Awning — 4 feet
Solar screen — 4 feet
Balcony/balconette — 4 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment design recommendations.
§ 203-131 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-131
198:923
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
G. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade. A
front door required on a public street.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically align windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of window opening on wide and rear facades:
20%.
(3) Vertical breaks: two-foot building offsets every 60 feet minimum.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material changes, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
(b) A minimum of one horizontal break is required.
(5) Roofline.
(a) Flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are
permitted.
(b) A minimum two-foot offset is required every 60 feet for
multiple units.
(6) (Reserved)
(7) Building materials permitted.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
§ 203-131 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-131
198:924
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials permitted.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Stoops are required.
(b) Balconies are encouraged.
(c) Rear decks are required, with a minimum area of 160 square
feet.
(10) The public realm.
(a) Front of building set back from sidewalk.
(b) Front doors must face public street.
(11) The semipublic realm.
(a) Front of building (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or
groundcover.
(b) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(c) Front stoops are encouraged as public space transition.
(12) The private realm.
(a) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(b) Pools are not permitted.
(c) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(13) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(b) Walls, fences, and hedges in front yards are prohibited.
(c) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
§ 203-131 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-131
198:925
§ 203-132. Twin units, with or without alley.
(d) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
(14) Amenity design guidelines.
(a) Custom mailboxes.
(b) Foundation plantings required.
(c) On-lot sidewalks.
(15) Parking amenities/access notes.
(a) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(b) Vehicle access from alley only.
(c) No parking in front yard.
A. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the twin unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Front porches provide entry features and a sitting area to
converse and interact with passers-by.
(b) Roof offsets combined with porches help to provide
appropriate scale and rhythm.
(c) Small front yards provide adequate privacy.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
rules of rhythm, scale and material choice are respected.
(b) Generous window dimensions animate the facade and help
provide appropriate vertical and horizontal scale and rhythm.
§ 203-131 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-132
198:926
(c) Two-foot vertical offsets conform to rules of vertical offsets.
(d) Garden wall and front garden serve as public/private
transition.
(e) Material change provides vertical breaks.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) When appropriately scaled, twins can serve as transition units
between townhouses and single-family detached units.
(b) Twins need not be identical.
(c) First-and second-floor porches and terraces provide necessary
"eyes" on the street and private outdoor space.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Simple architecture following basic rules can be attractive.
(b) Wraparound porch can add unique architectural element.
(c) Low front yard fence provides appropriate public/private
transition.
(d) Water table element provides horizontal offset.
(e) Affordable housing requirement: residential development fee
of 1.5% of equalized assessed value.
B. Size and scope.
(1) Minimum density: 4.5 d.u./ac. with TDR credits.
(2) Maximum density: 6.0 d.u./ac. with TDR credits.
(3) Unit type percentage: 10% minimum to 20% maximum.
(4) Twins are found in less dense areas of neighborhoods acting as a
transition between flats/townhouses and single-family detached
units.
§ 203-132 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-132
198:927
(5) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(6) No front yard parking.
(7) Vehicle access via alley.
(8) On-street parking.
C. The block.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Specifications; zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,160 feet 1,850 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 6 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15 feet 20 feet
Path width 5 feet 10 feet
§ 203-132 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-132
198:928
Minimum Maximum
Decorative
streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking provided through alley-loaded driveways
and garages.
(b) On-street parking provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens encouraged for on-street
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees encouraged to lower summer cooling
load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
D. The site.
§ 203-132 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-132
198:929
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Required break at party wall with adjacent twin.
[2] Vertical blocks with window treatment encouraged
including bays, projections, and recesses.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 3,000 square feet 6,250 square feet
Lot width 40 feet —
Corner lot 40 feet —
Lot depth 75 feet 125 feet
Building coverage — 60%
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback 15 feet 30 feet
Side yard setback 10 feet 15 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
Accessory structure
setbacks
Rear and side
yards
2 feet 5 feet
Principal building 10 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
§ 203-132 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-132
198:930
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 1.5 2.5
Driveway length 20 feet —
Driveway width 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks, or porous pavement.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Front yard fence height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(c) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(d) Foundation plantings.
(e) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(f) Parking planting.
(g) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(h) Pergolas.
(i) Trellises.
(j) Arbors.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Long-life trees encouraged to maximize green infrastructure
funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species encouraged to minimize water
needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material encouraged to aid in reducing stormwater
runoff.
E. The public realm.
§ 203-132 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-132
198:931
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnade.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Front porches.
[12] Usable open or covered stoops.
[13] Porticos.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
First floor elevation 2 feet 5 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
§ 203-132 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-132
198:932
Minimum Maximum
Window-to-eave
offset
1 foot —
Front facade
fenestration
30% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
20% —
Building face or
roof offset
2 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Rear-loaded garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) In-ground pools are permitted. Pool and deck setback from side
and rear property lines: minimum of 10 feet.
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(c) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(d) Gutters shall be architectural compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
F. The private realm.
§ 203-132 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-132
198:933
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, wood and simulated clapboard or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles or
similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped, salt
box or combinations thereof.
[4] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco. Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[5] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 16 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Front porch — 8 feet
Stoop — 8 feet
Bay window — 4 feet
Awning — 4 feet
Solar screen — 4 feet
§ 203-132 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-132
198:934
Minimum Maximum
Balcony/balconette — 4 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone, or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
G. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade. A
front door required on a public street.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
§ 203-132 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-132
198:935
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically align windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of window opening on wide and rear facades:
20%.
(3) Vertical breaks:
(a) Required offset at party wall with adjacent twin: two-foot
minimum.
(b) Vertical breaks with window treatments, such as bays,
projections and recesses, are encouraged.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material changes, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
(b) A minimum of one horizontal break is required.
(5) Roofline.
(a) Flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are
permitted.
(b) Required offset at party wall with adjacent twin: two-foot
minimum.
(6) Building materials permitted.
(a) Wood and simulated clapboard.
(b) Brick.
(c) Stone.
(d) Stucco.
(e) Synthetic trim boards.
(7) Roof materials permitted.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
§ 203-132 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-132
198:936
(8) Accessory structures.
(a) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(b) Sheds are permitted, with a maximum floor area of 120 square
feet and height of eight feet tall.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Front porches are required with a minimum dimension of eight
feet by 10 feet.
(b) Bay windows are encouraged.
(c) Rear decks are required, with a minimum area of 160 square
feet.
(10) The semipublic realm.
(a) All yards must be fully appointed with landscaping of trees,
shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(b) Semipublic space must be separated from public space by
either a low garden wall, decorative fence, hedge or
combination of the three. Fences in front yards shall have a
maximum height of three feet. Fences in side and rear yards
shall have a maximum height of six feet high.
(c) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(d) Usable open or covered stoops are encouraged as public space
transitions.
(11) The private realm.
(a) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(b) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(12) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(b) Maximum edge height for front yard: three feet.
(c) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(d) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
(13) Amenity design guidelines.
(a) Custom mailboxes.
§ 203-132 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-132
198:937
§ 203-133. Single-family detached units with or without alley.
(b) Foundation plantings required.
(c) On-lot sidewalks.
(14) Parking amenities/access notes.
(a) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(b) Vehicle access from alley only.
(c) No parking in front yard.
A. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the single-family detached unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Bays, vertical elements, window dimensions and window
locations work together to break down the scale of an
otherwise large house.
(b) Special consideration to front door design.
(c) Sensitive use of varied materials reduces monotony and helps
provide a human scale.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Porches and terraces provide necessary "eyes" on the street
and private outdoor space-appropriate public/private
transition.
(b) Durable materials stand the test of time.
(c) Single-family still functions very well with small front yard
setbacks.
§ 203-132 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-133
198:938
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Where outlined in the zoning plan, driveway access from street
is permitted.
(b) Parking and garage locations limited to backyards only.
(c) Porous pavement provides stormwater benefit.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Variety of architecture along street frontage provides personal
identity and makes the journey for pedestrians more enjoyable.
(b) Small gable ends facing the street help to reduce the scale of
the house mass.
(c) Horizontal banding helps reduce the perception of the vertical
massing of the house.
(d) Affordable housing requirement: residential development fee
of 1.5% of equalized assessed value.
§ 203-133 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-133
198:939
B. Size and scope.
(1) Minimum density: 4.5 d.u./ac. with TDR credits. Maximum density:
6.0 d.u./ac. with TDR credits.
(2) Unit type percentage 30% minimum to 60% maximum.
(3) Single-family dwellings are the lowest density typology.
(4) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(5) Vehicle access via alley or driveway to street depending on unit
location plan.
C. The block.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
§ 203-133 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-133
198:940
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,150 feet 1,800 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15 feet 20 feet
Path width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative
streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking provided through driveways to street.
(b) On-street parking provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
§ 203-133 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-133
198:941
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
D. The site.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Vertical breaks are encouraged.
[2] Material change, window lines and pediments are required
as horizontal breaks.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 7,000 square feet 12,000 square feet
Lot width 50 feet 110 feet
Corner lot 50 feet 110 feet
Lot depth 75 feet 125 feet
Building coverage — 50%
Impervious coverage — 60%
Front yard setback 10 feet 30 feet
Side yard setback 5 feet 10 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
§ 203-133 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-133
198:942
Minimum Maximum
Accessory structure
setbacks
Rear and side
yards
2 feet 5 feet
Principal building 10 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 1.5 2.5
Driveway length 40 feet —
Driveway width 8 feet 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(b) Garages in rear yard only.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Front yard fence height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(c) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of five feet.
(d) Foundation plantings.
(e) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(f) Parking planting.
(g) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(h) Pergolas.
(i) Trellises.
(j) Arbors.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Long-life trees encouraged to maximize green infrastructure
funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species encouraged to minimize water
needs.
§ 203-133 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-133
198:943
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
E. The public realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnades.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Front porches.
[12] Porticos.
(b) Zoning requirements.
§ 203-133 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-133
198:944
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
First floor elevation 3 feet 8 feet
Eave height 18 feet 28 feet
Window-to-eave
offset
6 inches —
Front facade
fenestration
30% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
20% —
Building face or
roof offset
16 inches —
Window trim offset 4 inches —
(2) Parking.
(a) Rear yard garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Pool and deck setback from side and rear property lines:
minimum of 10 feet.
(b) In-ground pools are permitted.
(c) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
F. The private realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
§ 203-133 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-133
198:945
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, wood and simulated clapboard or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles,
tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped, salt
box or combinations thereof.
[4] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
[5] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[6] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Front porch — 8 feet
Bay window — 4 feet
Awning — 4 feet
Solar screen — 4 feet
Balcony/balconette — 4 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(3) Edge and buffer recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
§ 203-133 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-133
198:946
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
G. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade. A
front door required on a public street.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically align windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of window opening on wide and rear facades:
20%.
(3) Vertical breaks:
(a) Vertical breaks are required.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Use of material change, window lines and pediments is
required.
(5) Roofline.
(a) Gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are permitted.
(b) Maximum length of roofline: 40 feet.
§ 203-133 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-133
198:947
(6) Building materials permitted.
(a) Wood and simulated clapboard.
(b) Brick.
(c) Stone.
(d) Stucco.
(e) Synthetic trim boards.
(7) Roof materials permitted.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(8) Accessory structures.
(a) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(b) Sheds are permitted, with a maximum floor area of 120 square
feet and height of eight feet tall.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
(9) The public realm.
(a) Front of building set back from sidewalk.
(b) Front doors on public street.
(10) The semipublic realm.
(a) All yards must be fully appointed with landscaping of trees,
shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(b) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(c) Front porches and walks are encouraged as public space
transition.
(11) The private realm.
(a) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(b) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(12) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
§ 203-133 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-133
198:948
§ 203-134. through § 203-136. (Reserved)
(b) Maximum edge height for front yard: three feet.
(c) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(d) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
(13) Amenity design guidelines.
(a) Custom mailboxes.
(b) Foundation plantings required.
(c) On-lot sidewalks.
(14) Parking amenities/access notes.
(a) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(b) No parking in front yard.
§ 203-133 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-134
198:949

ARTICLE XVIII
Corridor Commercial (CC)
[Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 203-137. Corridor Commercial District.
A. Goal: to provide locations for sales and services necessary to sustain
the regional community with commercial and office locations that are
auto-dependent, that are single- and multiuse buildings, and that may
or may not be on individual lots.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Daycare establishments for children and adults.
(2) Anchor or magnet stores, shopping centers, supermarkets,
wholesale clubs, lumber, hardware and garden centers.
(3) Bakeries, confectioners.
(4) Breweries, wineries and distilleries.
(5) Business and household service uses including repair shops for
business equipment, appliances and the shops of tradesmen such
as plumbers and electricians.
(6) Delicatessen/carryout.
(7) Funeral homes and mortuaries.
(8) Greenhouses, including retail sales.
(9) Florists.
(10) Health and fitness centers; dance and exercise studios.
(11) Light industrial and assembly operations which do not have
characteristics which are noxious, injurious, offensive or hazardous
to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(12) Mechanical car wash.
(13) Offices for administrative, executive, professional, business sales,
government offices and similar uses, the normal attributes of which
do not involve the storage, exchange or delivery of merchandise to
the general public.
(14)Office of banks and loan associations not having drive-through
facilities for the transaction of business from motor vehicles.
(15)Office of banks and savings and loan associations having drivethrough
facilities for the transaction of business from motor
vehicles.
(16) Office furniture and supplies, auto and rental equipment.
§ 203-137 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-137
198:951
(17) Outpatient medical, rehabilitation or dental facilities.
(18) Personal service businesses including hair salons, tanning salons,
nail salons, dry cleaning outlets, dressmaking or tailor shops, shoe
repair shops and related uses except for tattoo studios and body
piercing establishments.
(19) Public transportation stations and shelters.
(20) Recreational and sport facility, indoor and outdoor, commercial.
(21) Rental halls for meetings and social occasions.
(22) Repair and maintenance of equipment and machines normally
utilized in any of the uses permitted in this district.
(23) Restaurant, full service or fast food freestanding, no drive-through.
(24) Restaurant, full service or fast food freestanding or in multitenant
buildings, with drive-through or drive-through only.
(25) Restaurant, full service or fast food in multitenant building, no
drive-through.
(26) Brewpubs.
(27) Retail sales and services, including newspapers, gifts, novelties,
tobacco products, drugs, food, clothing, spirits, confections, florist
items, books and specialty merchandise, automotive supplies and
services (exclusive of service stations and repair garages),
including convenience stores.
(28) Research, experimental or testing laboratories.
(29) Veterinarian office and animal hospital.
(30)Warehouse and distribution of goods and products, provided that
no goods are sold at retail from the premises.
(31) Automobile dealerships for new cars and trucks.
(32) Public and commercial garages.
(33) Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer, electricity and
gas.
(34)Wireless telecommunications towers and antenna located entirely
within an existing building or on the roof or side of a building or
attached to an existing structure.
C. Customary accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the
above permitted principal uses in the NC Zone, including:
(1) Flag poles; clock towers.
(2) Parking structures.
§ 203-137 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-137
198:952
(3) Temporary building or yards for construction materials or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
immediate area.
(4) Temporary construction trailers.
(5) Surface parking lots.
(6) Walls and fences.
(7) Signage.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Service stations and repair garages subject to the special
requirements of § 203-66.
E. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the gateway highway commercial service unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Commercial buildings should be clean, simple and inviting.
(b) Signage should be integrated into architecture.
(c) Modern materials are acceptable if they respect wellestablished
rules of scale and rhythm.
(d) So far, 21st-century suburban communities require
automobiles and they must be serviced.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Communities must meet convenience needs that often rely on
the automobile.
(b) Small parking courts are permitted in front of establishments.
(c) Signage should be integrated into architecture.
§ 203-137 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-137
198:953
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Generous landscape buffers provide the setting for single-use
commercial establishments.
(b) Driveways directly accessing Route 322 are prohibited. Access
shall be provided via a secondary road system.
(c) Pedestrian walkways remain important even in a more autodependent
environment.
(d) 21st-century suburban communities continue to rely on the
automobile, which typically requires gas.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Modern materials are acceptable, provided they respect
established rules of rhythm and scale and that they are durable
and are not an imitation of another material.
(b) Fenestration can be used effectively to provide a rhythm of
solid and void.
(c) Individual or multitenant flex space is a typical need of growing
communities.
§ 203-137 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-137
198:954
F. Size and scope.
(1) FAR 0.30 maximum.
(2) Generally located along Route 322 west of Oak Grove Road and
east to the municipal boundary.
(3) The zone is intended to provide locations for a mixture of service
retail and office space.
(4) May be single- or multi-tenant buildings.
(5) Buildings are permitted to be 45 feet tall or three stories.
(6) Front yard parking is permitted.
(7) On-street parking on Route 322 is not permitted.
G. The site.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
§ 203-137 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-137
198:955
[4] Off-street parking shall be located to the side or rear.
[5] Drive-through windows shall be located to the side or rear.
[6] Bus shelters.
(b) Commercial and Office Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Buffer/Pedestrian
zone
Front 50 feet —
Rear 75 feet —
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Decorative street
lighting (distance on
center)
50 feet 75 feet
Lot area 200 feet —
Lot width 200 feet —
Corner lot 200 feet —
Lot depth 250 feet —
Impervious coverage — 75%
Front yard setback 75 feet —
Side yard setback 25 feet —
Rear yard setback 50 feet —
(c) Light Industrial Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Buffer/Pedestrian
zone
Front 100 feet —
Rear 100 feet —
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Decorative street
lighting (distance on
center)
50 feet 75 feet
Lot area 200 feet —
Lot width 200 feet —
Corner lot 200 feet —
Lot depth 250 feet —
§ 203-137 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-137
198:956
Minimum Maximum
Impervious coverage — 75%
Front yard setback 100 feet —
Side yard setback 100 feet —
Rear yard setback 100 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Off-street parking provided through driveways.
(b) Porous pavement.
(c) Belgian block curbing.
(d) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(e) Retail/office parking to be provided at a ratio of four spots per
1,000 square feet.
(f) Shared parking is conditionally permitted.
(g) No loading bays shall be visible from Route 322 or adjacent
residential uses or zones.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center):
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 30 feet.
(b) Side and rear yard fence height:
[1] Maximum: six feet.
(c) Planting buffers.
(d) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(e) Custom mailboxes.
(f) Tree grates.
(g) Foundation plantings.
(h) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(i) Parking planting.
(j) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(k) Planters.
§ 203-137 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-137
198:957
(l) Potted plants.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for parking
areas.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
(d) Long-life trees encouraged to maximize green infrastructure
funds.
(e) Xeriscape.
(f) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(g) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
(5) Tree protection requirement.
(a) A black cherry tree, Prunes seratina, is located in the U.S.
Route 322 corridor receiving zone toward the western end and
north of U.S. Route 322. To maximize opportunities for its longterm
survival, the following procedures will be adhered to by
all applicants for development on these parcels:
[1] An area the size of the tree's dripline will be designated as
a tree protection zone and fenced off prior to construction
activities. No material storage, equipment parking,
excavation, benching, equipment clean-outs or soil
compaction shall occur within this area. Signage
identifying the area as off-limits shall be posted on the
fence.
[2] The existing grade of the area surrounding the tree
protection zone shall be maintained. Black cherry as a
species is listed as sensitive to drainage changes that raise
the natural water level in the soil.
[3] Dead wood pruning or crown cleaning of the tree should
be performed by a New Jersey certified tree expert (CTE)
hired by the applicant.
[4] To the extent that grade changes do not raise the water
level around the tree, a layer not to exceed three inches in
depth shall be applied to the soil within the tree protection
zone.
§ 203-137 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-137
198:958
H. The public realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Decorative cornices.
[8] First-floor colonnades.
[9] Porte cocheres.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Porches.
[12] Porticos.
[13] Arcades.
[14] Terraces.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
Eave height 18 feet 23 feet
Window-to-eave
offset
6 inches —
Front facade
fenestration of
office and retail
uses
60% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
of office and retail
uses
30% —
Building face or
roof offset
5 feet —
(2) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
§ 203-137 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-137
198:959
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(c) For light industrial uses, no structures, including parking lots,
shall be located within 100 feet of any lot line.
(3) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
I. The private realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be A-frame, flat, mansard or combinations
thereof.
[4] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
[5] Building facades shall be parallel to frontage property
lines.
(b) Zoning requirements.
§ 203-137 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-137
198:960
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
Office and retail 10 feet 15 feet
Light industrial 10 feet 45 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Bay window — 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette — 8 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
Terrace 8 feet 8 feet
Patio 8 feet 10 feet
(2) Parking requirements:
(a) Office: four spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area.
(b) Commercial: four spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area.
(c) Light industrial: four spaces per 3,000 square feet of floor
area.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
§ 203-137 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-137
198:961
J. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade. A
front door required on a public street.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades of office
and retail uses: 60%.
(c) Vertically align windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of window opening on wide and rear facades of
office and retail uses: 30%.
(3) Vertical breaks:
(a) Two-foot building offsets every 100 feet minimum are required.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Use of material change, window lines and pediments is
required.
(b) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(5) Roofline.
(a) A-frame, mansard, and flat are permitted.
(b) Minimum two-foot offset required every 100 feet.
(6) Building materials permitted.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(7) Roof materials permitted.
§ 203-137 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-137
198:962
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(8) Appurtenances.
(a) Solar screens, awnings, and arcades shall be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture should reflect the difference between public
versus private doors and entries.
(9) The public realm.
(a) Front of building set back from sidewalk.
(b) Front doors shall be on public streets or internal parking
courts.
(10) The semipublic realm.
(a) Fronts of buildings (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground
cover.
(b) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(c) Front stoops are encouraged as public space transition.
(d) Parking lots shall be fully landscaped to break down scale,
provide user comfort and to modulate microclimate.
(11) The private realm.
(a) Storage space is required.
(b) Outdoor patio space is permitted.
(12) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(b) Maximum edge height for front yard: 3 1/2 feet.
(c) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet (exclusive of
trees).
(d) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet (exclusive of
trees).
(e) Buffers must be provided on all external property edges.
(f) Minimum front yard buffer width: 30 feet.
§ 203-137 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-137
198:963
§ 203-138. (Reserved)
(g) Minimum side yard buffer width: 30 feet.
(h) Minimum rear yard buffer width: 50 feet.
(i) Minimum buffer adjacent to residential neighborhoods: 75
feet.
(13) Amenity design guidelines.
(a) Multipurpose path within buffer.
(b) A pedestrian system within parking court defined by textured
pavement is required.
(c) Minimum ten-foot-wide sidewalks adjacent to buildings.
(14) Parking amenities/access notes.
(a) Porous pavement in parking courts and drive aisles is
permitted to address stormwater.
(b) Parking in front yard is permitted.
§ 203-137 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-138
198:964
ARTICLE XIX
Large-Format Retail, Big Box Retail, Office and Hotel, Neo-
Traditional Senior Community (RC-3) Overlay District
[Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 203-139. Large-format retail.
A. Goal: to provide locations for regional commercial uses that include
lifestyle commercial and office locations that are quasi-auto-dependent
and that are single- or multi-use buildings and that may or may not be
on individual lots.
B. Definition: single- or multi-use buildings that address a multitude of
regional commercial needs in a walkable lifestyle commercial
configuration.
C. Zoning Map.
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the large-format retail unit:
(1) Photo 1.
§ 203-139 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-139
198:965
(a) Attractive one-story retail main streets work well when the
architecture is accentuated vertically to provide a sense of
enclosure on the street.
(b) Large glass storefronts provide an inviting image to shoppers.
(c) Arcades provide user comfort and help to modulate the
architectural rhythm, relating it to the human scale.
(d) Photo 2.
(e) Second-story office use is encouraged. It provides on-site users
of the first floor retail.
(f) Most national chains now have architecture that will fit into a
main street setting.
(g) Solar screens and awnings provide shade to lower floors.
(h) Creative use of projecting bays, fenestration and materials
provides architectural interest to the street and may serve as a
reference to a special place in the community.
(2) Photo 3.
(a) Sidewalks should be designed with a generous width to
encourage walking and outdoor dining.
§ 203-139 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-139
198:966
(b) Signage should be artfully incorporated into the building
facade; less is sometimes more.
(c) Appropriate levels of lighting are important to provide user
comfort in evening hours; decorative lighting fixtures add to
the design of the environment.
(3) Photo 4.
(a) Public or semipublic plazas or greens are important to provide
context to the land plan; provide gathering places on a daily
basis; and to provide a place for special events.
(b) The use of landscaping, walkways, fountains and architectural
follies helps to provide context to public and semipublic open
space.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zone acreage: subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement Agreement.
(2) FAR: 0.25 or approximately 1,100,000 square feet.
(3) The purpose of the zone is to provide the opportunity for a
regionally based, walkable commercial main street that is
attractive to national chain stores, small boutiques and offices.
§ 203-139 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-139
198:967
(4) Building configurations are to follow the street regulating plan,
with key streets fully accessible to the public on a full-time basis.
(5) Buildings should be built to the sidewalk edge.
(6) Buildings shall be built out to perimeter county streets to establish
a strong architecture street edge.
(7) Maximum building height: 60 feet.
(8) On-street parking is permitted on interior roads.
F. Site.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
[4] Plazas.
[5] Bus shelters.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Sidewalk width 5 feet 20 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
§ 203-139 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-139
198:968
Minimum Maximum
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
Lot area 25 acres —
Lot width 200 feet —
Corner lot 200 feet —
Lot depth 250 feet —
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback* 35 feet —
Side yard setback* 35 feet —
Building separation 30 feet —
NOTE:
* Front and side yard setbacks from Kings Highway and
Pancoast Road are 25 feet (minimum) without on-street
parking and zero feet (minimum) with on-street parking.
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW (where appropriate) 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking stalls shall be nine feet by 18 feet and, where
practical, applicants may provide up 10% of required parking
inventory in the form of compact parking stalls measuring 8 1/
2 feet by 18 feet. Projects associated with single-use home
improvement stores in excess of 75,000 square feet must
provide 10% of required parking inventory as contractors'
parking with stalls measuring a minimum of 9 1/2 feet by 18
feet. Parking spaces shall not be utilized for outdoor display
and/or sales of retail products.
(b) Off-street parking provided through alley-loaded driveways.
(c) On-street parking provided through parallel stalls.
(d) Colored asphalt, scored concrete, decorative paving or porous
pavement is encouraged.
§ 203-139 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-139
198:969
(e) Belgian block curbing or concrete curbing is permitted.
(f) Retail/office parking shall be provided at a ratio of four spots
per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area, excluding outdoor
garden centers up to 24,000 square feet or those that do not
exceed 20% in size of the primary building, whichever is less.
(g) Shared parking is conditionally permitted.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(b) Masonry walls and fences associated with the screening of
trash equipment and dumpsters may not exceed eight feet in
height. This is the only specific area where fencing in excess of
six feet is permitted.
(c) Street trees shall be provided at a quantity equal to one street
tree per 30 linear feet of street edge (i.e., typically two edges
per street). Spacing of trees shall be determined at time of site
plan.
(d) Planting buffers.
(e) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(f) Custom mailboxes.
(g) Tree grates.
(h) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(i) Parking planting.
(j) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(k) Planters.
(l) Potted plants.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for parking
areas.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
(d) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(e) Xeriscape.
§ 203-139 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-139
198:970
(f) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(g) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
G. Public realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Permitted design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Decorative cornices.
[8] First-floor colonnade.
[9] Porte cocheres.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Porches.
[12] Porticos.
[13] Arcades.
[14] Terraces.
(b) Specifications.
§ 203-139 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-139
198:971
Minimum Maximum
Building height 20 feet 60 feet
Front facade fenestration
(average)
70% —
Side and rear facade
fenestration (average)
30% —
Building face or roof offset 16 inches —
Window trim offset 16 inches 4 feet
(2) Parking.
(a) Carports are permitted.
(b) Structured parking is permitted.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Gutters shall be architecturally comparable with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) Solar screens are permitted.
(b) Solar panels are permitted.
(c) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
H. Private realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, decorative CMU, or similar material.
§ 203-139 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-139
198:972
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be flat, pitched or combinations thereof.
[4] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
[5] Building facades shall be parallel to frontage property
lines (where appropriate).
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side encroachments
Terrace 8 feet —
Patio 8 feet 10 feet
Bay window — 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette — 8 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes are permitted.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens are permitted.
(d) Green roofs are permitted.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood, masonry, metal (excluding woven wire) or similar
material.
(3) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
I. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
§ 203-139 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-139
198:973
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street where appropriate,
with primary pedestrian access points directly accessing the
street facade. Front doors are required on streets with public
easements.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) A minimum of 150 feet of each building shall be built to the
required minimum setback line from the cartway of Kings
Highway, Pancoast Road and Route 322.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 60 feet.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 70%
(buildings 20,000 square feet or less).
(c) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%
(buildings 20,000 square feet or greater).
(d) Vertically line up windows.
(e) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(f) Minimum area of windows on side or rear facades: 30%.
(4) Vertical breaks: two-foot building offsets every 60 feet minimum.
(5) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Use of material change, horizontal banding, window lines,
pediments and offsets, etc., or a combination thereof, is
required.
(b) Required at a minimum of one per every 16 feet of vertical
height.
(6) Roofline.
(a) Flat and pitched, or a combination thereof, are permitted.
(b) A minimum two-foot offset is required every 60 feet when there
are multiple units.
(7) Building materials.
(a) Brick.
(b) Metal panels of a high quality.
(c) Stone.
§ 203-139 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-139
198:974
(d) Glass or spandrel glass.
(e) Stucco.
(f) Decorative CMU.
(g) Synthetic trim boards.
(h) Similar material.
(8) Roof materials (pitched roofs).
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) State.
(e) Similar material.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades are permitted in
conjunction with trees to provide user comfort, energy
conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture shall reflect the difference between public versus
private doors and entries.
(c) Balconies are encouraged on upper floors.
(10) Accessory structures.
(a) Structured parking is permitted.
(b) Carports are permitted.
J. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be constructed to sidewalks with public
easements.
(2) Front doors on public streets with public easements.
(3) Public sidewalks shall be a minimum of 15 feet across building
frontages and a minimum of 10 feet wide in pedestrian areas (with
a minimum eight-foot-wide sidewalk) along parking lots.
(4) Screening of loading, service and trash storage areas is required.
K. Semipublic space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or groundcover.
§ 203-139 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-139
198:975
§ 203-140. Big box retail.
(2) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted to address stormwater.
(3) Pedestrian sidewalks shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, except
along the perimeter of the property; where on-street parking is not
permitted, a minimum of five feet is permitted.
(4) Parking courts shall be fully landscaped to break down scale,
provide user comfort and to modulate microclimate.
(5) A minimum of 10% of a parking area shall be landscaping (applies
only to parking areas with 40 or more spaces).
L. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, or hedges.
(2) Minimum front yard wall, fence and hedges height: three feet.
(3) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(4) Maximum edge height for rear yards: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(5) Buffers must be provided on all external property edges.
(6) Minimum front yard buffer width: 35 feet (for Route 322 only, from
perimeter roadway except where on-street parking is permitted).
(7) Minimum side yard buffer width: 35 feet (for Route 322 only, from
perimeter roadway except where on-street parking is permitted).
M. Amenity notes.
(1) Multipurpose path within buffer.
(2) Pedestrian system within parking courts shall be comprehensive
and articulated with textured pavement.
N. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement parking courts and isles are permitted to address
stormwater.
(2) Vehicle access shall be from an alley or secondary street system.
(3) No parking in front yard.
A. Goal: to provide locations for regional big box retail commercial uses
that are auto-dependent, that are single- or multi-use buildings and that
may or may not be on individual lots.
B. Definition: single- or multi-use buildings that address a multitude of big
box and commercial pad site needs.
C. Zoning Map.
§ 203-139 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-140
198:976
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the big box retail unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) The addition of amenities such as fountains, squares and
plazas provides site identity as well as focal points for
customer use. The elements also act to reduce the harshness of
large parking lots often associated with big box retail.
(b) Scale of otherwise large buildings can be broken down through
the use of offsets in facades and rooflines, materials use and
arcades and other sheltered walkways.
(c) Signage should be integrated into the facade design.
(2) Photo 2.
§ 203-140 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-140
198:977
(a) The playful use of signage can serve to break down the scale of
otherwise large buildings when integrated into the entire
architectural design of the building and used in conjunction
with vertical and horizontal building offsets, material changes
and orientation of horizontal and vertical elements.
(b) Over-scaled objects can serve as both whimsical sculpture and
safety bollards to protect pedestrians. The objects further
provide a playful dialogue on scale within the public and
semipublic spaces.
(c) Public entry points should be distinguished in the architecture.
(d) It is important to use architectural techniques to reduce the
perception that big box stores are horizontal buildings with
large blank walls. Creative use of materials offsets and glass
will be required.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Pad sites present the opportunities to establish a strong
architectural edge along Route 322.
(b) All vehicle circulation is internal to the site.
§ 203-140 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-140
198:978
(c) Pedestrian pathways woven into the landscape are a key
design requirement.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Parking lots constitute the largest public or semipublic space
in a big box center. Details associated with the use of
landscaping, textured pavement, wide sidewalks, textured
crosswalks, lighting and street furniture all serve to control
automobile speeds and to provide a safe and attractive
pedestrian environment.
(b) Arrangement of buildings into small courtyards helps to reduce
the scale perception of big box buildings and makes parking
proximate to front doors of multiple tenants.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zone acreage; subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement Agreement.
(2) FAR: 0.2 or approximately 900,000 square feet.
(3) The purpose of the zone is to provide the opportunity for a largeformat,
regionally based retail center that is attractive to national
chains and large anchor stores.
§ 203-140 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-140
198:979
(4) Buildings are to be arranged in a manner that reinforces the Route
322 street edge while allowing for large parking fields.
(5) Maximum building height: 60 feet.
(6) On-street parking is not permitted on Route 322.
(7) Front yard parking is permitted.
F. Site.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
[4] Plazas.
[5] Bus shelters.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Sidewalk width 5 feet 25 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
§ 203-140 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-140
198:980
Minimum Maximum
Decorative streetlighting
(distances on center)
50 feet 75 feet
Lot area 25 acres —
Lot width 200 feet —
Corner lot 200 feet —
Lot depth 250 feet —
Impervious coverage 30%
Front yard setback* 25 feet —
Side yard setback* 25 feet —
Rear yard setback 50 feet —
NOTE:
* From exterior roads only/Route 322
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW (where appropriate) 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking stalls shall be nine feet by 18 feet and, where
practical, applicants may provide up 10% of required parking
inventory in the form of compact parking stalls measuring 8 1/
2 feet by 18 feet. Projects associated with single-use home
improvement stores in excess of 75,000 square feet must
provide 10% of required parking inventory as contractors'
parking with stalls measuring a minimum of 9 1/2 feet by 18
feet. Parking spaces shall not be utilized for outdoor display
and/or sales of retail products.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided through driveways.
(c) Belgian block curbing or concrete curbing is permitted.
(d) Retail/office parking shall be provided at a ratio of four spots
per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area, excluding outdoor
garden centers up to 24,000 square feet or those that do not
exceed 20% of the size of the primary building, whichever is
less.
§ 203-140 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-140
198:981
(e) Shared parking is conditionally permitted.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(b) Street trees shall be provided at a quantity equal to one street
tree per 30 linear feet of street edge (i.e., typically two edges
per street). Spacing of trees shall be determined at time of site
plan.
(c) Planting buffers.
(d) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(e) Custom mailboxes.
(f) Tree grates.
(g) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(h) Parking planting.
(i) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(j) Planters.
(k) Potted plants.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain garden are encouraged for parking
areas.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
(d) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(e) Xeriscape.
(f) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(g) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material is encouraged to aid in reducing stormwater
runoff.
G. Public realm.
§ 203-140 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-140
198:982
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Permitted design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Decorative cornices.
[8] First-floor colonnades.
[9] Porte cocheres.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Porches.
[12] Porticos.
[13] Arcades.
[14] Terraces.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 20 feet 60 feet
Front facade fenestration (per
building)
15% —
§ 203-140 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-140
198:983
Minimum Maximum
Side and rear facade
fenestration (per building)
10% —
(2) Parking: Structured parking is permitted.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) Solar screens are permitted.
(b) Solar panels are permitted.
(c) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
H. Private realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, decorative CMU or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be "A" frame, flat, pitched or combinations
thereof.
[4] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
§ 203-140 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-140
198:984
[5] Building facades shall be parallel to frontage property
lines (where appropriate).
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side yard
encroachments
Terrace 8 feet —
Patio 8 feet 10 feet
Bay window — 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette — 8 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes are permitted.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens are permitted.
(d) Green roofs are permitted.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood, masonry, metal (excluding woven wire) or similar
material.
(3) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
I. Architectural notes.
(1) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 60 feet.
(2) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 7.5%.
§ 203-140 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-140
198:985
(c) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(d) Side and rear building facades facing US Route 322 shall not
be required to have window openings; however, blank walls are
prohibited and architectural detailing is required.
(3) Vertical breaks.
(a) Five-foot building offsets every 100 feet minimum.
(b) Maximum facade length: 500 feet.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material change, horizontal banding, window lines, pediments
and offsets are required.
(b) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(5) Roofline.
(a) "A" frame, pitched and flat or combinations thereof are
permitted.
(b) Minimum five-foot offset required every 100 feet.
(6) Building materials.
(a) Brick.
(b) Metal panels of high quality.
(c) Stone.
(d) Glass or spandrel glass.
(e) Stucco.
(f) Decorative CMU.
(g) Synthetic trim boards.
(h) Similar materials.
(7) Roof materials (pitched roofs).
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Similar materials.
§ 203-140 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-140
198:986
(8) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades may be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture shall reflect the difference between public versus
private doors and entries.
(9) Accessory structures.
(a) Drive-through windows facing public streets are discouraged.
(b) Parking structures are permitted.
J. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
(2) Front doors shall be on a public street or interval parking court.
(3) Except as stipulated below, public sidewalks shall be provided at a
minimum width of 10 feet along all building frontages and adjacent
to parking lots.
(a) Along all single-use buildings greater than 75,000 square feet,
a minimum of 70% of the building's frontage shall have a curbto-
building facade dimension of 15 feet, and a maximum of 30%
of the building's front facade may have a curb-to-building
facade dimension of 10 feet. A minimum of 10 feet of
pedestrian area (with minimum eight-foot-wide sidewalks)
must be kept clean and devoid of sidewalk displays, cart
storage, etc., at all times and shall be expressly reserved for
pedestrian use only.
(b) For all other buildings, those under 75,000 square feet and
those of multiple tenants, a minimum fifteen-foot-wide
sidewalk along building frontages is required.
K. Semipublic space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or groundcover.
(2) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted to address stormwater.
(3) Parking courts shall be fully landscaped to break down scale,
provide user comfort and to modulate microclimate.
(4) A minimum of 10% of a parking area shall be landscaping (applies
to parking areas with 60 or more spaces).
L. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
§ 203-140 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-140
198:987
§ 203-141. Regional hotel/office units.
(2) Minimum front yard wall, fence and hedge height: three feet high.
(3) Maximum side yard edge height: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(4) Maximum rear yard edge height: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(5) Buffers must be provided on all external property edges.
Residential buffers are only required where directly abutting a
residential property.
(6) Minimum front yard buffer width: 25 feet (from exterior roads/
Route 322).
(7) Minimum side yard buffer width: 25 feet (from exterior roads/Route
322).
(8) Minimum rear yard buffer width: 50 feet.
(9) Minimum buffer width where directly abutting a residential
property: 75 feet.
M. Amenity notes.
(1) Multipurpose path within buffer.
(2) Pedestrian system within parking court shall be comprehensive and
articulated with textured pavement.
N. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement parking courts and isles permitted to address
stormwater.
(2) Vehicle access from alley or secondary street system.
(3) No parking in front yard.
A. Goal: to provide locations for everyday services necessary to sustain a
mixed-use regional community with general commercial and general
office locations that are quasi-auto-dependent, that are single-use
buildings and that may or may not be on individual lots.
B. Definition: single-use buildings that address a multitude of regional
hotel and office needs for a mixed-use community.
C. Zoning Map.
§ 203-140 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-141
198:988
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the regional hotel/office unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Single-use hotel and office buildings sit in a parklike setting
where the quality of landscape features is a critical design
element.
(b) While largely auto-dependent, the size of parking courts should
be kept small and integrated into the total landscape concept.
(c) The oversize portico matches the building scale and is
appropriate for the grand scale of the regional hotel and office.
(d) Vertical scale is broken by two layers of horizontal banding.
(2) Photo 2.
§ 203-141 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-141
198:989
(a) Stormwater features can be designed as an amenity such as a
lake and provide a community park setting to the wider
residents of the Township.
(b) The sophisticated use of materials such as glass and masonry
helps to mitigate the large massing of the building.
Approximately 60% of the facade is glass.
(c) The building is further broken down in scale by sitting the
building in an "L" shape with a glass corridor connection. The
"L" shape is an organizing element that helps provide context
to the public space, like a public square.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) The vertical scale of the building is broken by the use of three
layers of horizontal banding. The three alternating layers of
masonry, glass and masonry help define the base, the body and
the top of the building.
(b) Two-foot to ten-foot vertical and horizontal offsets further
mitigate the perception of a large monolithic building.
(c) Front yard parking is absent.
(4) Photo 4.
§ 203-141 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-141
198:990
(a) Corner elements and roofline offsets provide architectural
interest and identify the location of the "front" door.
(b) The building facade is approximately 60% glass.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zone acreage: subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement Agreement.
(2) FAR: 0.25 or approximately 1,000,000 square feet.
(3) The purpose of the zone is to provide for a hotel/office park.
(4) Buildings are to be arranged in a manner that reinforces street
edges.
(5) Maximum building height: 60 feet.
(6) On-street parking is not permitted on Route 322.
(7) Front yard parking is prohibited.
F. Site.
§ 203-141 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-141
198:991
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private-outdoor spaces are accessible and
visible to the public.
[4] Plazas.
[5] Bus shelters.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
Lot area 400 feet —
Lot width 200 feet —
Corner lot 200 feet —
Lot depth 250 feet —
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback 35 feet —
§ 203-141 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-141
198:992
Minimum Maximum
Side yard setback 25 feet —
Rear yard setback 35 feet —
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through driveways.
(b) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving or porous pavement.
(c) Belgian block curbing.
(d) Hotel/office parking shall be provided at a ration of four spots
per 1,000 square feet conditionally permitted.
(3) Edges and buffers.
Minimum Maximum
Street tree spacing (distance
on center)
36 feet 50 feet
Side and rear yard fence
height
— 5 feet
(a) Planning buffers.
(b) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(c) Custom mailboxes.
(d) Tree garages.
(e) Foundation plantings.
(f) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(g) Parking planting.
(h) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(i) Planters.
§ 203-141 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-141
198:993
(j) Potted plants.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for parking
areas.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
(d) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(e) Xeriscape.
(f) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(g) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
G. Public realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
§ 203-141 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-141
198:994
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Decorative cornices.
[8] First-floor colonnades.
[9] Porte cocheres.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Porches.
[12] Porticos.
[13] Arcades.
[14] Terraces.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 45 feet 60 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
Window to eave offset 6 inches —
Front facade fenestration 60% —
Side and rear facade
fenestration
30% —
Building face or roof offset 16 inches —
Window trim offset 2 feet —
(2) Parking.
(a) Carports.
(b) Structured parking.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
§ 203-141 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-141
198:995
H. Private realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be "A" frame, flat, mansard or
combinations thereof.
[4] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
[5] Building facades shall be parallel to frontage property
lines.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side yard
encroachments
Terrace 8 feet —
Patio 8 feet 10 feet
Bay window — 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette — 8 feet
§ 203-141 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-141
198:996
Minimum Maximum
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roof.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(3) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
I. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 60 feet.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 60%.
(c) Minimum area of windows on side and rear facades: 30%.
(4) Vertical breaks. Five-foot building offsets every 100 feet minimum.
(5) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material change, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
§ 203-141 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-141
198:997
(b) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(6) Roofline.
(a) Flat and mansard are permitted.
(b) Minimum five-foot offset required every 100 feet.
(7) Building materials.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades shall be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture shall reflect the difference between public versus
private doors and entries.
(c) Balconies and balconettes are encouraged.
(10) Accessory structures.
(a) Structural parking is permitted.
(b) Carports are permitted.
J. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
(2) Front doors shall be on public streets or interval parking courts.
K. Semipublic space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or groundcover.
§ 203-141 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-141
198:998
§ 203-142. Townhouse units.
(2) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted to address stormwater.
(3) Parking courts shall be fully landscaped to break down scale,
provide user comfort and to modulate microclimate.
(4) A minimum of 15% of the interior of parking courts shall be
landscaping.
L. Private space notes.
(1) Storage space is required.
(2) Outdoor patio space is required.
M. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(2) Minimum front yard wall, fence and hedge height: 3 1/2 feet high.
(3) Maximum side yard edge height: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(4) Maximum rear yard edge height: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(5) Buffers must be provided on all external property edges.
(6) Minimum front yard buffer width: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum side yard buffer width: 30 feet.
(8) Minimum rear yard buffer width: 50 feet.
(9) Minimum buffer width adjacent to residential neighborhood: 75
feet.
N. Amenity notes.
(1) Multipurpose path within buffer.
(2) Pedestrian system within parking court shall be designed with
textured pavement; required.
(3) Minimum ten-foot-wide sidewalks adjacent to buildings.
O. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement parking courts and isles are permitted to address
stormwater.
(2) Vehicle access shall be from an alley or secondary street system.
(3) No parking in front yards.
§ 203-141 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-142
198:999
A. Goal: to provide a mixture of unit sizes to address the needs and desires
of seniors who wish to live in densities associated with townhouse
living.
B. Definition: a one-family dwelling unit with a private entrance, attached
horizontally in a linear arrangement, being located on a separate lot,
and being separated from an adjoining dwelling unit by an approved
wall extending from the foundation through the roof and structurally
independent of the corresponding wall of the adjoining unit and having
a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light and
ventilation.
C. Zoning Map.
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the townhouse unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Bay windows work to provide street rhythm and to break down
the horizontal scale.
§ 203-142 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-142
198:1000
(b) Small, private front yard planting softens the street
environment.
(c) Windows on the side facade enliven corner buildings.
(d) A stoop provides public/private transition.
(e) The front door is accentuated in scale.
(f) Durable materials stand up to the test of time.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) On a case-by-case basis, townhouses may be arranged in a
courtyard configuration with front doors and garages facing a
landscaped parking/multipurpose court.
(b) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
roles of rhythm, scale and material choice are respected.
(c) Low garden walls define courtyard edges.
(d) High-quality landscaping and surface materials such as pavers
are required in courtyards.
(3) Photo 3.
§ 203-142 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-142
198:1001
(a) Slight variations in dormer design reduce monotony in
otherwise identical units.
(b) Low front yard garden walls provide appropriate public/private
transition.
(c) The large mansard roof element accentuates horizontal break
to respect human scale at sidewalk level.
(d) Generous windows on the front facade provide internal light
while animating the street and promoting safety.
(e) Roof gardens and decks provide necessary outdoor private
space.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Vertical and horizontal architectural offsets and material
changes reinforce human scale at street level.
(b) Windows turning corner of building acknowledge special
location at street intersection.
(c) Solar screens provide reduced unit energy loads and provide
horizontal breaks.
(d) Variations in window dimensions provide interest to the street
and address scale and rhythm issues.
E. Size and scope.
§ 203-142 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-142
198:1002
(1) Zoning acreage: subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement Agreement.
(2) Maximum number of units: subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement
Agreement.
(3) It is intended that a mix of housing types be provided.
(4) This zone is found in each of the residential neighborhoods.
(5) Townhouses are encouraged to provide architectural edges to open
space.
(6) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(7) No front yard parking.
(8) All vehicle access via alleys.
(9) On-street parking.
F. Blocks.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
§ 203-142 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-142
198:1003
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,150 feet 1,800 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15 feet 20 feet
Path width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 13 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through alley-loaded
driveways and garages.
(b) On-street parking shall be provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center):
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
§ 203-142 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-142
198:1004
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
G. Site.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] No more than eight units built in a row.
[2] Provide common mid-block crossing through building to
rear alley if eight units are built.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 1,600 square
feet
2,625 square
feet
Lot width 20 feet 30 feet
Corner lot 20 feet 35 feet
Lot depth — 75 feet
Building coverage — 60%
Impervious coverage — 80%
§ 203-142 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-142
198:1005
Minimum Maximum
Front yard setback 5 feet 16 feet
Side yard setback 0 feet 16 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 2.5 —
Driveway length 20 feet —
Driveway width 8 feet 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(c) Foundation plantings.
(d) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(e) Parking planting.
(f) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(g) Pergolas.
(h) Trellises.
(i) Arbors.
(4) Environment.
(a) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
H. Public realm.
§ 203-142 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-142
198:1006
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First floor colonnades.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Usable open or covered stoops.
[12] Porticos.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
First floor elevation 2 feet 5 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
Window-to-eave offset 1 foot —
Front facade fenestration 30% —
§ 203-142 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-142
198:1007
Minimum Maximum
Side and rear facade
fenestration
20% —
Building face or roof offset 2 feet —
(2) Parking.
(a) Rear-loaded attached garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Deck setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of 10
feet.
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(c) Pools are not permitted.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
I. Private realm.
§ 203-142 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-142
198:1008
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, stucco or similar
material.
[2] Synthetic trim board.
[3] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles,
tiles or similar material.
[4] Roof types shall be flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped,
salt box or combinations thereof.
[5] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
[6] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[7] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side encroachments
Stoop — 8 feet
Bay window — 4 feet
Awning — 4 feet
Solar screen — 4 feet
Balcony/balconette — 4 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
§ 203-142 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-142
198:1009
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
J. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
Front doors are required to be on public streets.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 45 feet.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically line up windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of windows on side and rear facades: 20%.
(4) Vertical breaks: two-foot building offsets every 60 feet minimum.
(5) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material changes, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
(b) A minimum of one break is required.
(6) Roofline.
§ 203-142 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-142
198:1010
(a) Flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are
permitted.
(b) A minimum two-foot offset is required every 60 feet for
multiple units.
(7) Building materials.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Stoops are required.
(b) Balconies are encouraged.
(c) Decks are required at a minimum area of 160 square feet.
(10) Accessory structure: none.
K. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
(2) Front doors shall be on public streets.
L. Semipublic space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(2) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(3) Front stoops are encouraged as public space transition.
M. Private space notes.
(1) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
§ 203-142 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-142
198:1011
§ 203-143. Twin units with alleys.
(2) Pools are not permitted.
(3) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
N. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(2) Walls, fences, and hedges in front yards are prohibited.
(3) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(4) Maximum edge height for rear yards: six feet.
O. Amenity notes.
(1) Custom mailboxes.
(2) Foundation plantings are required.
(3) On-lot sidewalks.
P. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(2) Vehicle access from alley only.
(3) No parking in front yard.
A. Goal: to provide a mixture of unit sizes to address the needs and desires
of seniors who wish to live in densities associated with twin living.
B. Definition: a one-family dwelling unit with a private entrance, attached
horizontally in a linear arrangement to one other dwelling unit, each
located on a separate lot, and being separated from each other by an
approved wall extending from the foundation through the roof and
structurally independent of the corresponding wall of the adjoining unit
and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access,
light and ventilation.
C. Zoning Map.
§ 203-142 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-143
198:1012
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the twin unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Front porches provide entry features and a sitting area to
converse and interact with passers-by.
(b) Roof offsets combined with porches help to provide
appropriate scale and rhythm.
(c) Small front yards provide adequate privacy.
(2) Photo 2.
§ 203-143 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-143
198:1013
(a) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
rules of rhythm, scale and material choice are respected.
(b) Generous window dimensions animate the facade and help
provide appropriate vertical and horizontal scale and rhythm.
(c) Two-foot vertical offsets conform to rules of vertical offsets.
(d) A garden wall and front garden serve as public/private
transition.
(e) Material change provides vertical breaks.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) When appropriately scaled, twins can serve as transition units
between townhouses and single-family detached units.
(b) Twins need not be identical.
(c) First- and second-floor porches and terraces provide necessary
"eyes" on the street and private outdoor space.
(4) Photo 4.
§ 203-143 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-143
198:1014
(a) Simple architecture following basic rules can be attractive.
(b) Wraparound porches can add a unique architectural element.
(c) A low front yard fence provides appropriate public/private
transition.
(d) Water table element provides horizontal offset.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zoning acreage: subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement Agreement.
(2) Maximum number of units: subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement
Agreement.
(3) It is intended that a mix of housing types be provided.
(4) Twins are found in less dense areas of neighborhoods acting as a
transition between flats/townhouses and single-family detached
units.
(5) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(6) No front yard parking.
(7) Vehicle access via alleys.
§ 203-143 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-143
198:1015
(8) On-street parking.
F. Blocks.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,150 feet 1,850 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15 feet 20 feet
Path width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
§ 203-143 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-143
198:1016
Minimum Maximum
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through alley-loaded
driveways and garages.
(b) On-street parking shall be provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center):
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
G. Site.
§ 203-143 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-143
198:1017
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Required break at party wall with adjacent twin.
[2] Vertical breaks with window treatment are encouraged:
bays, projections or recesses.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 3,000 square
feet
6,250 square
feet
Lot width 40 feet —
Corner lot 40 feet —
Lot depth 75 feet 125 feet
Building coverage — 60%
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback 15 feet 30 feet
Side yard setback 10 feet 15 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
Accessory structure setbacks
Rear and side yard 2 feet 5 feet
Principal building 10 feet —
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 1.5 2.5
Driveway length 20 feet —
§ 203-143 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-143
198:1018
Minimum Maximum
Driveway width 8 feet 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Front yard fence height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(c) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(d) Foundation plantings.
(e) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(f) Parking planting.
(g) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(h) Pergolas.
(i) Trellises.
(j) Arbors.
(4) Environment.
(a) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
H. Public realm.
§ 203-143 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-143
198:1019
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnades.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Front porches.
[12] Usable open or covered stoops.
[13] Porticos.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
First floor elevation 2 feet 5 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
Window-to-eave offset 1 foot —
§ 203-143 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-143
198:1020
Minimum Maximum
Front facade fenestration 30% —
Side and rear facade
fenestration
20% —
Building face or roof offset 2 feet —
(2) Parking.
(a) Rear-loaded garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Pool and deck setback from side and rear property lines:
minimum of 10 feet.
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
I. Private realm.
§ 203-143 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-143
198:1021
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, wood and stimulated clapboard or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles or
similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped, salt
box or combinations thereof.
[4] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
[5] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[6] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch 9/12
Front and side encroachments
Front porch — 8 feet
Stoop — 8 feet
Bay window — 4 feet
Awning — 4 feet
Solar screen — 4 feet
Balcony/balconette (not
identified)
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
§ 203-143 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-143
198:1022
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
J. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
Front doors are required to be on public streets.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 45 feet.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically line up windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of windows on side and rear facades: 20%.
(4) Vertical breaks.
(a) Required offset at party wall with adjacent twin: two-foot
minimum.
(b) Vertical breaks with window treatment, such as bays,
projections and recesses, are encouraged.
(5) Horizontal breaks.
§ 203-143 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-143
198:1023
(a) Material changes, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
(b) Required number of breaks: one minimum.
(6) Roofline.
(a) Flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are
permitted.
(b) Required break at party wall with adjacent twin: minimum twofoot
offset.
(7) Building materials.
(a) Wood and simulated clapboard.
(b) Brick.
(c) Stone.
(d) Stucco.
(e) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Front porches are required with a minimum dimension of eight
feet by 10 feet.
(b) Bay windows are encouraged.
(c) Rear decks are required at a minimum area of 160 square feet.
(10) Accessory structures.
(a) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(b) Sheds are permitted at a maximum area of 120 square feet and
height of eight feet.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
K. Public space notes.
§ 203-143 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-143
198:1024
§ 203-144. Single-family detached units with alleys.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
(2) Front doors shall be on public streets.
L. Semipublic space notes.
(1) All yards must be fully appointed with landscaping of trees, shrubs,
ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(2) Semipublic space must be separated from public space by either a
low garden wall, decorative fence, hedge or combination of the
three. Fences in front yards shall have a maximum height of three
feet. Fences in side and rear yards shall have a maximum height of
six feet high.
(3) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(4) Usable open or covered stoops are encouraged as public space
transition.
M. Private space notes.
(1) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(2) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
N. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(2) Maximum edge height for front yard: three feet.
(3) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(4) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
O. Amenity notes.
(1) Custom mailboxes.
(2) Foundation plantings are required.
(3) On-lot sidewalks.
P. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(2) Vehicle access from alleys or secondary streets only.
(3) No parking in front yard.
§ 203-143 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-144
198:1025
A. Goal: to provide a mixture of unit sizes to address the needs and desires
of seniors who wish to live in a walkable community with densities
associated with single-family detached units on small individual lots.
B. Definitions: a detached single dwelling unit on its own lot designed for
or used exclusively by one family.
C. Zoning Map.
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the single-family detached unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Bays, vertical elements, window dimensions and window
locations work together to break down the scale of an
otherwise large house.
(b) Special consideration given to front door design.
(c) Sensitive use of varied materials reduces monotony and helps
provide a human scale.
§ 203-144 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-144
198:1026
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Porches and terraces provide necessary "eyes" on the street
and private outdoor space; appropriate public/private
transition.
(b) Durable materials stand the test of time.
(c) Single-family still functions very well with small front yard
setbacks.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Where outlined in the zoning plan, driveway access from
streets is permitted.
(b) Parking and garage locations are limited to backyards only.
(c) Porous pavement provides stormwater benefits.
(4) Photo 4.
§ 203-144 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-144
198:1027
(a) Variety of architecture along street frontage provides personal
identity and makes the journey for pedestrians more enjoyable.
(b) Small gable ends facing the street help to reduce the scale of
the house mass.
(c) Horizontal banding helps reduce the perception of the vertical
massing of the house.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zoning acreage: subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement Agreement.
(2) Maximum number of units: subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement
Agreement.
(3) Single-family dwellings are the lowest density typology.
(4) Found as transition between the northern portion of the regional
center and the adjacent residential environs.
(5) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(6) On-street parking.
(7) Vehicle access via alleys.
F. Blocks.
§ 203-144 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-144
198:1028
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,150 feet 1,800 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15 feet 20 feet
Path width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center) 50 feet 25 feet
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
§ 203-144 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-144
198:1029
Minimum Maximum
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through alley-loaded
driveways and garages.
(b) On-street parking shall be provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center):
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
G. Site.
§ 203-144 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-144
198:1030
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Vertical breaks are encouraged.
[2] Material change, window lines and pediments are required
as horizontal breaks.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 5,000 square
feet
10,000 square
feet
Lot width 50 feet 105 feet
Corner lot 50 feet 105 feet
Lot depth 90 feet 115 feet
Building coverage 50%
Impervious coverage — 60%
Front yard setback 15 feet 16 feet
Side yard setback 5 feet 15 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
Accessory structure setbacks
Rear and side yard 2 feet 5 feet
Principal building 10 feet —
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 1.5 2.5
Driveway length 20 feet —
§ 203-144 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-144
198:1031
Minimum Maximum
Driveway width 8 feet 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Front yard fence height: three feet.
(b) Front yard hedge height: three feet.
(c) Side and rear yard fence height: five feet.
(d) Foundation plantings.
(e) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(f) Parking planting.
(g) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(h) Pergolas.
(i) Trellises.
(j) Arbors.
(4) Environment.
(a) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
H. Public realm.
§ 203-144 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-144
198:1032
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnades.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Front porches.
[12] Porticos.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
First floor elevation 3 feet 8 feet
Eave height 18 feet 28 feet
Window-to-eave offset 6 feet —
Front facade fenestration 30% —
§ 203-144 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-144
198:1033
Minimum Maximum
Side and rear facade
fenestration
20% —
Building face or roof offset 16 inches —
Window trim offset 4 inches —
(2) Parking.
(a) Rear-loaded garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Pool and deck setback from side and rear property lines:
minimum of 10 feet.
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
I. Private realm.
§ 203-144 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-144
198:1034
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, wood and simulated clapboard or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles,
tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped, salt
box or combinations thereof.
[4] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
[5] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[6] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side encroachments
Front porch — 8 feet
Bay window — 4 feet
Awning — 4 feet
Solar screen — 4 feet
Balcony/balconette — 4 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
§ 203-144 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-144
198:1035
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
J. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
Front doors are required to be on public streets.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet or 2 1/2
stories.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically line up windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of windows on side and rear facades: 20%.
(4) Vertical breaks are required.
(5) Horizontal breaks. Use of material change, window lines and
pediments is required.
(6) Roofline.
(a) Gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are permitted.
(b) Maximum length of roofline: 40 feet.
(7) Building materials.
§ 203-144 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-144
198:1036
(a) Wood and simulated clapboard.
(b) Brick.
(c) Stone.
(d) Stucco.
(e) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Front porches are required with minimum dimensions of eight
feet by 10 feet.
(b) Rear decks are required at a minimum area of 160 square feet.
(10) Accessory structures.
(a) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(b) Sheds permitted are permitted at a maximum area of 120
square feet and height of eight feet.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
K. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
(2) Larger setback for units on Swedesboro-Paulsboro Road.
(3) Front doors shall be on public streets.
L. Semipublic space notes.
(1) All yards must be fully appointed with landscaping of trees, shrubs,
ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(2) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(3) Front porches and walks are encouraged as public space transition.
M. Private space notes.
§ 203-144 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-144
198:1037
§ 203-145. Flats.
(1) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(2) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
N. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(2) Maximum edge height for front yard: three feet.
(3) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(4) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
O. Amenity notes.
(1) Custom mailboxes.
(2) Foundation plantings are required.
(3) On-lot sidewalks.
P. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(2) No parking in front yard.
A. Goal: to provide a mixture of unit sizes to address the needs and desires
of seniors who wish to live in a walkable community with densities
associated with single-family detached units on small individual lots.
B. Definition: a building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by
three or more families living independently in which they share
common entrances and other spaces and individual units may be owned
as condominiums or offered for rent.
C. Zoning Map.
§ 203-144 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-145
198:1038
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the flat unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Prominent architectural features at key corners provide visual
reference points in the town fabric.
(b) Terraces and balconies provide necessary outdoor space and
an opportunity to modulate the scale of the architecture with
vertical and horizontal breaks.
(c) Small private green spaces provide public/private transition.
(d) Cornice lines serve as horizontal breaks.
(e) The first floor height is differentiated from upper floor heights.
(2) Photo 2.
§ 203-145 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-145
198:1039
(a) Large windows serve to provide scale to the building as well as
interior light for units.
(b) Bay windows provide design interest to the street facade.
(c) Balconies provide outdoor space for individual units while
providing solar screens for lower-level windows.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Flats reflect smaller family lifestyle choices.
(b) Large areas of units are devoted to entertaining space.
(c) Floor plans often emphasize the dramatic that takes advantage
of town views.
(d) Typical loft units.
(4) Photo 4.
§ 203-145 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-145
198:1040
(a) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
rules of scale, rhythm and materials choice are respected.
(b) Use of large windows and glass elements provides interest to
the street elevation.
(c) Varying roof heights reduce the monotony of large buildings.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zoning acreage: subject to Woolwich Adult Settlement Agreement.
(2) Maximum number of residential flats: subject to Woolwich Adult
Settlement Agreement.
(3) It is intended that a mix of housing types be provided.
(4) Buildings are permitted to be a maximum of 60 feet tall or five
stories for buildings longer than 150 feet.
(5) No front yard parking.
(6) All vehicle access shall be via alleys or secondary streets.
(7) On-street parking, where permitted in the circulation plan.
F. Blocks.
§ 203-145 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-145
198:1041
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
[4] Plazas.
[5] Mid-block pedestrian connections to respond to street
grid.
[6] Bus shelters.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 300 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,400 feet 1,800 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block — 3
ROW width 20 feet —
Path width 10 feet —
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking.
§ 203-145 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-145
198:1042
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through alley-loaded
driveways and garages.
(b) On-street parking shall be provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(e) Tree grates.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
G. Site.
§ 203-145 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-145
198:1043
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Bike racks.
[2] Water features/fountains.
[3] Decorative pedestrian lighting.
[4] Litter containers.
[5] Architectural lighting.
[6] Benches.
[7] Clock towers.
[8] Kiosks.
[9] Public art.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 20,000
square feet
—
Lot width 100 feet —
Corner lot 100 feet —
Lot depth 150 feet —
Impervious coverage — 85%
Front yard setback 10 feet 30 feet
Side yard setback — 10 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
Building separation 20 feet —
§ 203-145 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-145
198:1044
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 0.8 1.3
Driveway length 20 feet —
Driveway width 8 feet 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(b) Foundation plantings.
(c) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(d) Parking planting.
(e) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(f) Planters.
(g) Potted plants.
(4) Environment.
(a) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
H. Public realm.
§ 203-145 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-145
198:1045
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/balconette.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnades.
[10] Porte cocheres.
[11] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[12] Porches.
[13] Porticos.
[14] Arcades.
[15] Terraces.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 45 feet 60 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
§ 203-145 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-145
198:1046
Minimum Maximum
Window-to-eave offset 2 feet —
Upper front facade
fenestration
30% —
Lower front facade
fenestration
60% —
Side and rear facade
fenestration
25% —
Building face or roof offset 5 feet —
(2) Parking.
(a) Rear loaded garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(c) Carports.
(d) Structured parking.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Pools and spas are not permitted.
(c) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
I. Private realm.
§ 203-145 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-145
198:1047
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be flat, mansard or a combination thereof.
[4] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side yard
encroachments
Terrace 8 feet —
Patio 8 feet 10 feet
Bay window — 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette 2 feet 8 feet
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
§ 203-145 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-145
198:1048
Minimum Maximum
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(a) Structured parking shall have a maximum height of two levels.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment, Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
J. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
Front doors are required to be on public streets.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 60 feet. For
buildings with facades exceeding 100 feet, a maximum average
building height of 55 feet shall be permitted, measured along the
affected facade.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on upper front facade: 30%.
§ 203-145 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-145
198:1049
(c) Minimum area of window opening on front retail: 60%.
(d) Vertically line up windows.
(e) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(f) Minimum area of window opening on side and rear facades:
25%.
(4) Vertical breaks. Required every 30 feet minimum through use of
offsets, fenestration, bay windows, balconies, balconettes or
material change; requires minimum one-foot offset.
(5) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(b) May use banding, setbacks or material change.
(6) Roofline.
(a) Flat and mansard are permitted.
(b) Maximum length of roofline: 60 feet.
(c) Minimum offset: five feet.
(7) Building materials.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) A prominent front entry feature is required.
(b) Balconies, balconettes, terraces and/or patios are required at
one per unit.
(c) Bay windows are encouraged.
§ 203-145 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-145
198:1050
(10) Accessory structures.
(a) Structured parking is permitted.
(b) A freestanding garage is permitted.
(c) Carports are permitted.
K. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from public sidewalks.
(2) Entry plazas and courts should be designed to welcome public use.
(3) Front doors or doors to common lobbies should be grand in scale
and largely transparent to public space through the use of glass
walls and doors.
(4) Canopies, awnings and overhangs are encouraged on the first floor
with emphasis on the front doors.
(5) Screening of loading, service and trash storage areas is required.
L. Semipublic space notes.
(1) All semipublic space (i.e., yards, courts, plazas) must be fully
appointed with landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses
and ground cover or a combination of decorative paving and
landscaping. Where appropriate, seating and lighting shall be
provided.
(2) Semipublic space must be separated from public space by either a
low garden wall, decorative fence (maximum of six feet high),
hedge material or a combination of the three.
M. Private space notes.
(1) Residential storage space is required.
(2) Residential outdoor patio space is required.
N. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Parking lots adjacent to street edges must be screened with a fourand-
half-foot-high hedge or masonry wall.
(2) Parking adjacent to a residential use must be screened with a
minimum six-foot-high masonry wall or fence and must include a
minimum three-foot-wide vegetated buffer that is a minimum of six
feet high at time of planting.
(3) Lighting must be screened from residential uses.
O. Amenity notes.
§ 203-145 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-145
198:1051
(1) Must provide at least one direct pedestrian connection to perimeter
public streets per 150 feet of frontage.
(2) Connections must be a minimum of a ten-foot-wide path with fivefoot-
wide landscaped edges.
(3) Must provide textured pedestrian crosswalks internal to parking
lots.
P. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement and bioswales are permitted.
(2) Vehicle access shall be from alleys or secondary streets only.
(3) Maximum of one vehicle access point per secondary street
frontage.
§ 203-145 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-145
198:1052
ARTICLE XX
Mixed-Use Commercial/Residential Walkable Neighborhood Center
(AR-1) District
§ 203-146. Townhouse units.
A. Goal: to provide a mixture of unit sizes to address the needs and desires
of those at various stages of life who wish to live in densities associated
with townhouse living.
B. Definition: a one-family dwelling unit with a private entrance, attached
horizontally in a linear arrangement, being located on a separate lot,
and being separated from an adjoining dwelling unit by an approved
wall extending from the foundation through the roof and structurally
independent of the corresponding wall of the adjoining unit and having
a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light and
ventilation.
C. Zoning Map.
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the townhouse unit:
(1) Photo 1.
§ 203-146 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-146
198:1053
(a) Bay windows work to provide street rhythm and to break down
the horizontal scale.
(b) Small private front yard planting softens the street
environment.
(c) Windows on the side facade enliven corner buildings.
(d) Stoops provide public/private transition.
(e) The front door is accentuated in scale.
(f) Durable materials stand up to the test of time.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) On a case-by-case basis, townhouses may be arranged in a
courtyard configuration with front doors and garages facing a
landscaped parking/multipurpose court.
(b) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
roles of rhythm, scale and material choice are respected.
(c) Low garden walls define courtyard edges.
§ 203-146 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-146
198:1054
(d) High-quality landscaping and surface materials such as pavers
are required in courtyards.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Slight variations in dormer design reduce monotony in
otherwise identical units.
(b) Low front yard garden walls provide appropriate public/private
transition.
(c) A large mansard roof element accentuates horizontal breaks to
respect human scale at the sidewalk level.
(d) Generous windows on the front facade provide internal light
while animating the street and promoting safety.
(e) Roof gardens and decks provide necessary outdoor private
space.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Vertical and horizontal architectural offsets and material
changes reinforce human scale at the street level.
(b) Windows turning the corner of the building acknowledge the
special location at a street intersection.
(c) Solar screens provided reduce unit energy loads and provide
horizontal breaks.
§ 203-146 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-146
198:1055
(d) Variations in window dimensions provide interest to the street
and address scale and rhythm issues.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Maximum number of units: 210 dwelling units.
(2) Densities: See TDR Market Analysis.
(3) Townhouses are encouraged to provide architectural edges to open
space.
(4) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(5) No front yard parking.
(6) All vehicle access via alleys.
(7) On-street parking.
F. Blocks.
§ 203-146 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-146
198:1056
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175' 500'
Block perimeter 1,150' 1,800'
Sidewalk width 5' 10'
Planting strip width 4' 10'
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15' 20'
Path width 5' 10'
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center)
50' 75'
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22' 25'
Cartway 18' 21'
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20' —
Width 8' —
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through alley-loaded
driveways and garages.
(b) On-street parking shall be provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
§ 203-146 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-146
198:1057
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
G. Site.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] No more than eight units built in a row.
[2] Provide common mid-block crossing through building to
rear alley if eight units are built.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 1,500 SF 2,625 SF
Lot width 20' 30'
Corner lot 20' 35'
Lot depth 75' —
§ 203-146 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-146
198:1058
Minimum Maximum
Building coverage — 60%
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback 5' 15'
Side yard setback 0' 15'
Rear yard setback 20' —
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 2.5 —
Driveway length 20' —
Driveway width 8' 12'
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(c) Foundation plantings.
(d) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(e) Parking planting.
(f) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(g) Pergolas.
(h) Trellises.
(i) Arbors.
(4) Environment.
(a) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
H. Public realm.
§ 203-146 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-146
198:1059
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/Balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnades.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Usable open or covered stoops.
[12] Porticos.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30' 45'
First floor elevation 2' 5'
Eave height 24' 36'
Window-to-eave offset 1' —
Front facade fenestration 30% —
§ 203-146 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-146
198:1060
Minimum Maximum
Side and rear facade
fenestration
20% —
Building face or roof offset 2' —
(2) Parking.
(a) Rear-loaded attached garages with windows and storage
space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Deck setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of 10
feet.
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(c) Pools are not permitted.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
I. Private realm.
§ 203-146 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-146
198:1061
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, stucco or similar
material.
[2] Synthetic trim board.
[3] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles,
tiles or similar material.
[4] Roof types shall be flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped,
salt box or combinations thereof.
[5] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
[6] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[7] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10' 15'
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Stoop — 8'
Bay window — 4'
Awning — 4'
Solar screen — 4'
Balcony/Balconette — 4'
Rear deck — 8'
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10' 15'
Garage width 14' 24'
Garage depth 25' —
Garage setback 20' —
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes.
§ 203-146 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-146
198:1062
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
J. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
Front doors are required to be on public streets.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 45 feet.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically line up windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of windows on side and rear facades: 20%.
(4) Vertical breaks: two-foot building offsets every 60 feet minimum.
(5) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material changes, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
(b) A minimum of one break is required.
§ 203-146 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-146
198:1063
(6) Roofline.
(a) Flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are
permitted.
(b) A minimum two-foot offset is required every 60 feet for
multiple units.
(7) Building materials.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Stoops are required.
(b) Balconies are encouraged.
(c) Decks are required at a minimum area of 160 square feet.
(10) Accessory structures: none.
K. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
(2) Front doors shall be on public streets.
L. Semi-public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(2) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(3) Front stoops are encouraged as public space transition.
M. Private space notes.
§ 203-146 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-146
198:1064
§ 203-147. Twin units with alleys.
(1) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(2) Pools are not permitted.
(3) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
N. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(2) Walls, fences, and hedges in front yards are prohibited.
(3) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(4) Maximum edge height for rear yards: six feet.
O. Amenity notes.
(1) Custom mailboxes.
(2) Foundation plantings required.
(3) On-lot sidewalks.
P. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(2) Vehicle access from alleys only.
(3) No parking in front yards.
A. Goal: to provide a mixture of unit sizes to address the needs and desires
of those at various stages of life who wish to live in densities associated
with twin living.
B. Definition: a one-family dwelling unit with a private entrance, attached
horizontally in a linear arrangement to one other dwelling unit, each
located on a separate lot, and being separated from each other by an
approved wall extending from the foundation through the roof and
structurally independent of the corresponding wall of the adjoining unit
and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access,
light and ventilation.
C. Zoning Map.
§ 203-146 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-147
198:1065
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the twin unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Front porches provide entry features and a sitting area to
converse and interact with passers-by.
(b) Roof offsets combined with porches help to provide
appropriate scale and rhythm.
(c) Small front yards provide adequate privacy.
(2) Photo 2.
§ 203-147 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-147
198:1066
(a) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
rules of rhythm, scale and material choice are respected.
(b) Generous window dimensions animate the facade and help
provide appropriate vertical and horizontal scale and rhythm.
(c) Two-foot vertical offsets conform to rules of vertical offsets.
(d) Garden walls and front gardens serve as public/private
transition.
(e) Material change provides vertical breaks.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) When appropriately scaled, twins can serve as transition units
between townhouses and single-family detached units.
(b) Twins need not be identical.
(c) First- and second-floor porches and terraces provide necessary
“eyes” on the street and private outdoor space.
(4) Photo 4.
§ 203-147 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-147
198:1067
(a) Simple architecture following basic rules can be attractive.
(b) A wrap-around porch can add a unique architectural element.
(c) The low front yard fence provides appropriate public/private
transition.
(d) A water table element provides horizontal offset.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Maximum number of units: 162 dwelling units.
(2) Densities: See TDR Market Analysis.
(3) Twins are found in less dense areas of neighborhoods acting as a
transition between flats/townhouses and single-family detached
units.
(4) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(5) No front yard parking.
(6) Vehicle access via alleys.
(7) On-street parking.
§ 203-147 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-147
198:1068
F. Blocks.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Specifications.
Minimize Maximize
Block length 175' 500'
Block perimeter 1,150' 1,850'
Sidewalk width 5' 10'
Planting strip width 4' 10'
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15' 20'
Path width 5' 10'
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center)
50' 75'
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22' 25'
Cartway 18' 21'
§ 203-147 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-147
198:1069
Minimum Maximum
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20' —
Width 8' —
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through alley-loaded
driveways and garages.
(b) On-street parking shall be provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
G. Site.
§ 203-147 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-147
198:1070
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Required break at party wall with adjacent twin.
[2] Vertical breaks with window treatment encouraged: bays,
projections or recesses.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 3,000 SF 6,250 SF
Lot width 40' —
Corner lot 40' —
Lot depth 75' 125'
Building coverage — 60%
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback 15' 30'
Side yard setback 10' 15'
Rear yard setback 20' —
Accessory structure
setbacks
Rear and side yard 2' 5'
Principal building 10' —
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 1.5 2.5
Driveway length 20' —
§ 203-147 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-147
198:1071
Minimum Maximum
Driveway width 8' 12'
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Front yard fence height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(c) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(d) Foundation plantings.
(e) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(f) Parking planting.
(g) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(h) Pergolas.
(i) Trellises.
(j) Arbors.
(4) Environment.
(a) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
H. Public realm.
§ 203-147 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-147
198:1072
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/Balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnades.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Front porches.
[12] Usable open or covered stoops.
[13] Porticos.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30' 45'
First floor elevation 2' 5'
Eave height 24' 36'
Window-to-eave offset 1' —
§ 203-147 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-147
198:1073
Front facade fenestration 30% —
Side and rear facade
fenestration
20% —
Building face or roof offset 2' —
(2) Parking.
(a) Rear-loaded garages with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Pool and deck setback from side and rear property lines:
minimum of 10 feet.
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
I. Private realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
§ 203-147 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-147
198:1074
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, wood and simulated clapboard or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles or
similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped, salt
box or combinations thereof.
[4] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
[5] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[6] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10' 15'
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Front porch — 8'
Stoop — 8'
Bay window — 4'
Awning — 4'
Solar screen — 4'
Balcony/Balconette — 4'
Rear deck — 8'
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10' 15'
Garage width 14' 24'
Garage depth 25' —
Garage setback 20' —
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
§ 203-147 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-147
198:1075
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
J. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
Front doors are required to be on public streets.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 45 feet.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically line up windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of windows on side and rear facades: 20%.
(4) Vertical breaks.
(a) Required offset at party wall with adjacent twin: two-foot
minimum.
(b) Vertical breaks with window treatment, such as bays,
projections and recesses, are encouraged.
(5) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material changes, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
§ 203-147 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-147
198:1076
(b) Required number of breaks: one minimum.
(6) Roofline.
(a) Flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are
permitted.
(b) Required break at party wall with adjacent twin: minimum twofoot
offset.
(7) Building materials.
(a) Wood and simulated clapboard.
(b) Brick.
(c) Stone.
(d) Stucco.
(e) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Front porches are required with a minimum dimension of eight
feet by 10 feet.
(b) Bay windows are encouraged.
(c) Rear decks are required at a minimum area of 160 square feet.
(10) Accessory structures.
(a) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(b) Sheds are permitted at a maximum area of 120 square feet and
height of eight feet.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
K. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
§ 203-147 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-147
198:1077
§ 203-148. Single-family detached units with alleys.
(2) Front doors shall be on public streets.
L. Semi-public space notes.
(1) All yards must be fully appointed with landscaping of trees, shrubs,
ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(2) Semi-public space must be separated from public space by either a
low garden wall, decorative fence, hedge or combination of the
three. Fences in front yards shall have a maximum height of three
feet. Fences in side and rear yards shall have a maximum height of
six feet high.
(3) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(4) Usable open or covered stoops are encouraged as public space
transition.
M. Private space notes.
(1) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(2) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
N. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(2) Maximum edge height for front yard: three feet.
(3) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(4) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
O. Amenity notes.
(1) Custom mailboxes.
(2) Foundation plantings are required.
(3) On-lot sidewalks.
P. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(2) Vehicle access from alley or secondary street only.
(3) No parking in front yard.
A. Goal: to provide a mixture of unit sizes to address the needs and desires
of those at various stages of life who wish to live in a walkable
community with densities associated with single-family detached units
on small individual lots.
§ 203-147 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-148
198:1078
B. Definition: a detached single dwelling unit on its own lot designed for or
used exclusively by one family.
C. Zoning Map.
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the single-family detached unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Bays, vertical elements, window dimensions and window
locations work together to break down the scale of an
otherwise large house.
(b) Special consideration is given to front door design.
(c) Sensitive use of varied materials reduces monotony and helps
provide a human scale.
(2) Photo 2.
§ 203-148 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-148
198:1079
(a) Porches and terraces provide necessary “eyes” on the street
and private outdoor space; appropriate public/private
transition.
(b) Durable materials stand the test of time.
(c) Single-family still functions very well with small front yard
setbacks.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Where outlined in the zoning plan, driveway access from
streets is permitted.
(b) Parking and garage locations limited to backyards only.
(c) Porous pavement provides stormwater benefit.
(4) Photo 4.
§ 203-148 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-148
198:1080
(a) Variety of architecture along street frontage provides personal
identity and makes the journey for pedestrians more enjoyable.
(b) Small gable ends facing the street help to reduce the scale of
the house mass.
(c) Horizontal banding helps reduce the perception of the vertical
massing of the house.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Maximum number of residential units: 130 dwelling units.
(2) Densities: See TDR Market Analysis.
(3) Single-family dwellings are the lowest density typology.
(4) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(5) On-street parking is permitted.
§ 203-148 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-148
198:1081
(6) Vehicle access via alleys.
F. Blocks.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175' 500'
Block perimeter 1,150' 1,800'
Sidewalk width 5' 10'
Planting strip width 4' 10'
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15' 20'
Path width 5' 10'
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center)
50' 75'
(2) Parking.
§ 203-148 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-148
198:1082
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22' 25'
Cartway 18' 21'
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20' —
Width 8' —
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through alley-loaded
driveways and garages.
(b) On-street parking shall be provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
G. Site.
§ 203-148 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-148
198:1083
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Vertical breaks are encouraged.
[2] Material change, window lines and pediments are required
as horizontal breaks.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 11,000 SF 13,000 SF
Lot width 70' 105'
Corner lot 70' 105'
Lot depth 125' 175'
Building coverage — 50%
Impervious coverage — 60%
Front yard setback 20' 15'
Side yard setback 5' 15'
Rear yard setback 20' —
Accessory structure
setbacks
Rear and side yard 2' 5'
Principal building 10' —
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 1.5 2.5
Driveway length 20' —
§ 203-148 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-148
198:1084
Minimum Maximum
Driveway width 8' 12'
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Front yard fence height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(c) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(d) Foundation plantings.
(e) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(f) Parking planting.
(g) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(h) Pergolas.
(i) Trellises.
(j) Arbors.
(4) Environment.
(a) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
H. Public realm.
§ 203-148 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-148
198:1085
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnades.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Front porches.
[12] Porticos.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30' 45'
First floor elevation 3' 8'
Eave height 18' 28'
Window-to-eave offset 6" —
Front facade fenestration 30% —
§ 203-148 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-148
198:1086
Minimum Maximum
Side and rear facade
fenestration
20% —
Building face or roof offset 16" —
Window trim offset 4" —
(2) Parking.
(a) Rear-loaded garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Pool and deck setback from side and rear property lines:
minimum of 10 feet.
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
I. Private realm.
§ 203-148 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-148
198:1087
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, wood and simulated clapboard or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles,
tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped, salt
box or combinations thereof.
[4] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
[5] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[6] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10' 15'
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Front porch — 8'
Bay window — 4'
Awning — 4'
Solar screen — 4'
Balcony/Balconette — 4'
Rear deck — 8'
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10' 15'
Garage width 14' 24'
Garage depth 25' —
Garage setback 20' —
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
§ 203-148 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-148
198:1088
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
J. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
Front doors are required to be on public streets.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet or 2 1/2
stories.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically line up windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of windows on side and rear facades: 20%.
(4) Vertical breaks are required.
(5) Horizontal breaks. Use of material change, window lines and
pediments is required.
(6) Roofline.
(a) Gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are permitted.
(b) Maximum length of roofline: 40 feet.
§ 203-148 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-148
198:1089
(7) Building materials.
(a) Wood and simulated clapboard.
(b) Brick.
(c) Stone.
(d) Stucco.
(e) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Front porches are required with minimum dimensions of eight
feet by 10 feet.
(b) Rear decks are required at a minimum area of 160 square feet.
(10) Accessory structures.
(a) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(b) Sheds permitted are permitted at a maximum area of 120
square feet and height of eight feet.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
K. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
(2) Larger setback for units on Swedesboro-Paulsboro Road.
(3) Front doors shall be on public streets.
L. Semi-public space notes.
(1) All yards must be fully appointed with landscaping of trees, shrubs,
ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(2) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(3) Front porches and walks are encouraged as public space transition.
§ 203-148 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-148
198:1090
§ 203-149. Auburn Village retail.
M. Private space notes.
(1) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(2) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
N. Edge, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(2) Maximum edge height for front yard: three feet.
(3) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(4) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
O. Amenity notes.
(1) Custom mailboxes.
(2) Foundation plantings are required.
(3) On-lot sidewalks.
P. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(2) No parking in front yard.
A. Goal: to provide mixed-use commercial buildings that allow for retail
and/or office space in individual or attached buildings.
B. Definition: a building that contains either retail uses on ground floor
levels and office on upper levels or buildings that solely contain office
space, either multiple or single tenants.
C. Zoning Map.
§ 203-148 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-149
198:1091
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the Auburn Village retail unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Recessed storefronts provide architectural interest and solar
screening.
(b) Second-story office space is acceptable. It provides opportunity
to meet local needs as well as legitimizing the design of twostory
architecture. Fake second stories are not encouraged.
Clear stories are acceptable.
(c) Small raised seating platforms serve as local outdoor meeting
places and opportunities for a village cafe.
(2) Photo 2.
§ 203-149 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-149
198:1092
(a) Single-story retail is acceptable. Windows in the second floor
are acceptable if they serve a purpose such as a "clear story."
(b) Storefronts should be individualized and a twenty-five-foot to
thirty-five-foot storefront rhythm respected to match the
village scale.
(c) Architecture should be designed with the intent of providing
logical locations for facade signage.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Side and rear yard parking courts are permitted. Storefronts
may face directly onto parking courts.
(b) Parking courts should be kept to a small scale and should use
pavement patterns to signify that the space is shared by both
pedestrians and automobiles.
(4) Photo 4.
§ 203-149 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-149
198:1093
(a) Awnings and arbors provide architectural interest plus provide
shade for users.
(b) Freestanding buildings are acceptable. They can be joined to
other buildings by means of arbors, pergolas and arcades.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zone acreage: 6.0 acres.
(2) FAR: 0.2 or approximately 50,000 square feet.
(3) Density: See TDR Market Analysis.
F. Site.
§ 203-149 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-149
198:1094
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces shall be accessible and
visible to the public.
[4] Plazas.
[5] Mid-block pedestrian connections to respond to grid.
[6] Bus shelters.
[7] Bike racks.
[8] Water features/fountains.
[9] Decorative pedestrian lighting.
[10] Litter containers.
[11] Architectural lighting.
[12] Benches.
[13] Clock towers.
[14] Kiosks.
[15] Public art.
(b) Specifications.
§ 203-149 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-149
198:1095
Minimum Maximum
Block length 250' 500'
Block perimeter 1,000' 2,000'
Sidewalk width 5' 10'
Planting strip width 4' 10'
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15' 20'
Path width 5' 10'
Decorative streetlighting
(distance on center)
50' 75'
Lot area 20,000 SF —
Lot width 100' —
Corner lot 100' —
Lot depth 150' —
Impervious coverage — 90%
Front yard setback 10' 30'
Side yard setback — 10'
Rear yard setback 20' —
Building separation 20' —
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22' 25'
Cartway 18' 21'
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20' —
Width 8' —
Ratio (spots/du) 0.8 1.3
Driveway length 20' —
Driveway width 8' 12'
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through alley-loaded
driveways.
(b) On-street parking shall be provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
§ 203-149 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-149
198:1096
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(e) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(f) Nonresidential parking shall be provided at a ratio of four
spots per 1,000 square feet.
(g) Shared parking shall be conditionally permitted.
(3) Edges and buffers.
Minimum Maximum
Street tree spacing (distance
on center)
36' 50'
Side and rear yard fence height — 6'
(a) Planting buffers.
(b) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(c) Custom mailboxes.
(d) Tree grates.
(e) Foundation plantings.
(f) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(g) Parking planting.
(h) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(i) Planters.
(j) Potted plants.
(4) Environment.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
(d) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(e) Xeriscape.
(f) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
§ 203-149 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-149
198:1097
(g) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
G. Public realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Decorative cornices.
[8] First-floor colonnades.
[9] Porte cocheres.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Porches.
[12] Porticos.
[13] Arcades.
[14] Terraces.
(b) Specifications.
§ 203-149 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-149
198:1098
Minimum Maximum
Building height 20' 45'
Eave height 18' 40'
Window-to-eave offset 6" —
Upper front facade
fenestration
30% —
Lower front facade
fenestration
70% —
Side and rear facade
fenestration
25% —
Building face or roof offset 5' —
(2) Parking.
(a) Carports.
(b) Structured parking.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
H. Private realm.
§ 203-149 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-149
198:1099
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be flat, mansard or combinations thereof.
[4] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear height 10' 15'
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Bay window — 8'
Awning — 8'
Solar screen — 8'
Balcony/Balconette — 8'
Rear deck — 8'
Terrace 8' —
Patio 8' 10'
(2) Parking. Structured parking shall have a maximum height of two
levels.
§ 203-149 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-149
198:1100
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment. Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous
pavement driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
I. Architectural notes.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
Front doors to upper floor uses are permitted on secondary
facades.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(d) Buildings should be built to the sidewalk, public square or
plaza edge.
(2) Building height. Maximum building height shall be 45 feet.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on all facade upper floors:
30%.
(c) Vertically line up windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal
(e) Minimum area of windows opening on first-floor retail public
facades: 70%.
§ 203-149 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-149
198:1101
(f) Retail windows must remain unobstructed on interior spaces.
(4) Vertical breaks.
(a) Required every 30 feet minimum through the use of offsets,
fenestration, bay windows, balconies, balconettes or material
change.
(b) Maximum length of storefront: 60 feet.
(5) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(b) May use banding, setbacks or material change.
(c) First-floor retail shall have a minimum clear height of 16 feet.
(6) Roofline.
(a) Flat and mansard are permitted.
(b) Maximum length of roofline: 60 feet.
(c) Minimum offset: five feet.
(7) Building materials.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal.
(c) Tile.
(d) Slate.
(e) Metal panels (accent).
(9) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Storefronts are encouraged to have awnings.
(b) Storefronts must provide sign plate area.
(c) Pop-out cafe windows are permitted.
§ 203-149 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-149
198:1102
(d) Storefronts are encouraged to be open and inviting to the
public.
(e) Bay windows are encouraged.
(10) Accessory structures.
(a) Structured parking is permitted.
(b) Freestanding garages are permitted.
J. Public space notes.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be built to public sidewalks.
(2) Street furniture and amenities are encouraged.
(3) Entry plazas and courts should be designed to welcome public use.
(4) Large storefront windows are required on first floors. Windows
may be framed in wood.
(5) First-floor retail.
(6) Screening of loading, service and trash areas is required.
K. Semi-public space notes.
(1) All semi-public space (i.e., yards, courts, plazas) must be fully
appointed with landscaping of trees, shrubs and ground cover or a
combination of decorative paving and landscaping. Where
appropriate, seating and lighting shall be provided.
(2) Semi-public space must be separated from public space by either a
low garden wall, decorative fence (maximum of six feet high),
hedge material or a combination of the three.
L. Private space notes.
(1) Storage space is required.
(2) Outdoor patio space is required.
M. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Parking lots adjacent to street edges must be screened with a fourand-
one-half-foot-high hedge or masonry wall.
(2) Parking adjacent to residential uses must be screened with a
minimum six-foot-high masonry wall or fence and must include a
three-foot-wide vegetated buffer that is a minimum of six feet high
at the time of planting.
(3) Lighting must be screened from residential uses.
N. Amenity notes.
§ 203-149 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-149
198:1103
(1) Must provide at least one direct pedestrian connection between the
parking and main street commercial per 150 feet of commercial
frontage.
(2) Connection must be a minimum of ten-foot-wide path with five-footwide
landscaped edges.
(3) Must provide textured pedestrian crosswalks internal to parking
lots.
O. Parking amenities/access notes.
(1) Porous pavement and bioswales are permitted.
(2) Vehicle access shall be from alleys or secondary streets only.
(3) Maximum of one vehicle access point per secondary street
frontage.
(4) Lighting must be shielded from residential uses.
(5) Must provide one pedestrian connection between parking and
commercial main street every 200 feet minimum.
§ 203-149 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-149
198:1104
ARTICLE XXI
Comprehensive Sign Plan
§ 203-150. Mixed Use Commercial/Residential Walkable Town
Center (RC-1); Mixed Use Commercial/Residential Walkable
Neighborhood Center (AR-1).
A comprehensive sign plan shall be provided which has a consistent sign
design theme throughout the Town Center or Neighborhood Center. The
color of letters and background shall be carefully considered in relation
to the color of the materials of the building(s) and where the signs are
proposed to be located. All building signs shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building and shall be a subordinate rather than
predominant feature of any building. If a project is submitted as a general
development plan (GDP) and meets the requirements of a GDP, the Joint
Land Use Board has the discretion to review and approve a separate
comprehensive sign package that is different than the following sign
ordinance for the parcels associated with the GDP.
A. Purpose.
(1) To implement and enforce the sign regulations set forth below.
(2) To encourage signage compatible with the character of buildings
and integrated with the building's architectural design and other
signs on and in the vicinity of the building.
(3) To promote creativity in signage design, utilizing high-quality
materials and craftsmanship and to develop a distinctive image.
(4) To encourage efficient use of signage to avoid visual clutter.
(5) To protect the public health, safety and welfare by promoting
signage that effectively identifies establishments and is visible to
both pedestrians and motorists alike.
B. Sign approval and enforcement procedures.
(1) Any person wishing to erect, alter, modify or expand any sign shall
first apply to the lessor (property owner) or its property
management agent for review and approval of such sign
improvement relative to an approved comprehensive sign plan.
Upon receipt of such approval in writing, such person shall then
apply to the Township Planner and Township Building Department
for all necessary permits. The applicant shall provide all
information and materials for the proposed sign(s) necessary for
the property owner and the Township Planner to determine
compliance with the approved comprehensive sign plan.
(2) If the Township Planner determines the proposed sign(s) conforms
to the applicable comprehensive sign plan standards and
restrictions, he/she shall issue zoning approval for such sign.
§ 203-150 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-150
198:1105
Notwithstanding the following requirements, the Township Planner
shall have limited discretion in the administration of these
standards. In the exercise of that discretion, he/she may approve
a sign that deviates in a minor way from such standards, if he/
she determines that the sign(s) substantially conforms to the
requirements set forth in the standards.
(3) The Township Planner shall have the final authority to approve or
deny a proposed sign request, to direct the removal of any sign
installed without such approval, and to enforce all provisions
contained in this Part 2.
(4) Failure to comply with such provisions may result in enforcement
action by the Township Planner, which may lead to the imposition of
penalties, including fines, as provided by the Township Code.
(5) Any person aggrieved by a compliance decision rendered by the
Township Planner may appeal such decision to the municipal board
having jurisdiction over such matters as determined by the
Township Planner after conferring with the Township Attorney.
C. General standards.
(1) The sign regulations set forth in the Township Code, Article VIII,
shall control for sign standards not otherwise enumerated in these
regulations or this sign plan.
(2) Flags and emblems of a government organization or of a political,
civil, philanthropic, educational or religious organization are
exempt from all provisions of the Township Code and this sign plan.
(3) No exposed raceways, ballast boxes or electrical signs shall be
permitted.
(4) Sign company names or stamps shall be concealed (applicable
ordinances and codes permitting).
(5) Public safety decals in minimum sizes may be used, subject to
compliance with all applicable codes.
(6) Tenants shall not use or affix to a building or window, temporarily
or permanently, any stickers or paper, cardboard, plastic or other
similar low-quality signs; nor shall banners, pennants and/or flagtype
signs of various materials be so used.
(7) No merchandise, wall storage units or equipment of any sort shall
be placed in front of building windows so as to obscure views into
and out of the building.
(8) Signs that are necessary for the safe movement of traffic or other
directional assistance shall be permitted, provided they follow the
materials, colors, and letter type standards approved for such
§ 203-150 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-150
198:1106
signage. All signage of this type shall be approved by the Township
Planner and lessor or lessor's authorized agent prior to installation.
(9) Special mounting standards shall be used for traffic directional,
handicapped parking and other similar on-site signage. Signs shall
comply with Subtitle 1 of Title 39 (Standard Traffic Signs) and be
mounted utilizing the special design details for such signs
approved for the project.
(10) Drawings showing letter sizes, letter type, fabrication, and
installation shall have to be approved and signed by the lessor or
lessor's authorized agent.
(11) After a tenant has vacated the premises, the lessor shall be
responsible for the removal of all prior tenant signage and
restoration of areas where such signage was located to the original
condition, including painting and patching, if necessary.
(12) Signs, including bracing and support structures, shall be
compatible with the principal structure to which they are attached
in both overall design and materials.
(13) All signs shall be securely attached to the building by means of
metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws, subject to any required
review and approval by the Township Building Department.
(14) Architectural features of the principal structure shall not be
obscured by any sign or its supporting structures or braces.
(15)No sign shall be affixed to any roof, tree, fence, utility pole or
similar structure.
(16)No vehicle shall be parked in such a manner that it serves as a
means of advertising.
(17) Animated, moving and fluttering signs (including business-related
banners, flags and pennants), blinking, flashing, sparkling or
glittering signs are prohibited. Signs that produce glare or use bare
bulbs, such as exposed neon and other exposed tube signs, as well
as signs that use bright day-glo or fluorescent colors are
prohibited. Signs that obstruct pedestrian traffic, such as sandwich
board and other portable signs, are prohibited.
(18)No permanent sign shall be painted directly on the surface of any
wall, building, fence or similar structure.
(19) The maximum graphic content coverage of any sign shall not
exceed 70% of the sign face.
(20)No sign shall have more than two faces, and such faces shall be
parallel to each other.
§ 203-150 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-150
198:1107
(21) Every permitted sign, including window lettering and exterior
signs, shall be constructed using high-quality materials and shall
be kept in good condition and repair at all times. All signs to the
contrary shall be removed. The responsibility of making sure this
requirement is satisfied shall primarily rest with the lessor of the
property.
(22) Internally illuminated sign boxes or individual letter signs with
translucent faces are prohibited.
(23) Inflatable or similar such signs shall be prohibited.
(24) All changeable copy signs are prohibited, except for permitted
menu board type signs and permitted office tenant directory signs.
(25) Nonadvertising or noncommercial signs that are part of and
accessory to bus shelters, pay phones, trash receptacles and other
similar street furniture shall be permitted.
(26) Holiday window painting or decorations such as for Halloween,
Thanksgiving, Christmas, etc. shall be permitted and exempt from
window sign limitations. However, such painting or decorations
shall contain no reference to named goods or services, and any text
shall be strictly limited to reference to the applicable holiday and
shall not include reference to any sales, promotions, merchandise
or services. In addition, all such decorations shall be removed
within 10 days of the applicable holiday.
(27) All business establishments above the street level shall be
prohibited from installing or otherwise placing any signage on the
exterior of the building or in the windows of such building. This
includes both permanent and temporary signs of any kind.
(28) Permanent signs that advertise continuous sales, special prices,
etc., are prohibited.
D. Sign area measurement.
(1) The area of a sign shall be computed based on the area of the actual
sign face, exclusive of any supporting structure or bracing. Where
a sign has two parallel faces, only one of the faces shall be
measured to determine the area of the sign.
(2) The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the
extreme limits of all lettering, background, symbol or logo,
representations, or other display within a single continuous
boundary forming a square or rectangle.
E. Sign design standards.
(1) For the purpose of determining maximum permitted sign area,
minimum and maximum permitted letter height and the number of
signs permitted, the following sign types are identified:
§ 203-150 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-150
198:1108
(a) Awning/Canopy signs.
(b) Facade/Wall signs.
(c) Projecting/Hanging signs.
(d) Window signs.
(e) Office tenant directory signs.
(2) Awning/Canopy signs.
(a) Specifications.
[1] Maximum area: three square feet.
[2] Maximum sign length: six feet.
[3] Maximum letter size: eight inches.
(b) The terms "awning" and "canopy" as used in these sign
standards are used interchangeably and shall be considered
synonymous.
(c) Awnings and canopies shall extend no farther than possible as
a self-supporting structure (no visible vertical support poles or
columns), shall be compatible with the building window
treatment, and shall not dominate the building elevation where
such structure is proposed. All awnings and canopies shall be
coordinated and compatible with other existing or proposed
awnings and canopies on the building. Signage shall be placed
on the front valance portion of the awning structure only; for
non-fabric-type canopies, signage may be located along the
upper edge of the front portion of the canopy, in a manner that
is compatible and complementary to the design and
appearance of the building on which it is located.
§ 203-150 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-150
198:1109
(d) Noncommercial product logos and signature marks shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis subject to the Design
Standards for Signs.
(3) Facade/Wall signs.
(a) Specifications.
[1] Maximum area: one square foot per linear foot of
storefront up to 24 square feet.
[2] Maximum sign height: 24 inches.
[3] Maximum sign length: 12 feet.
[4] Maximum lettering size: 16 inches, one line of text; eight
inches, two lines of text (not to exceed two lines of text).
[5] Minimum height above sidewalk: eight feet, unless greater
height required by building code.
[6] Maximum height above sidewalk: 14 feet and shall not
extend above the base of the second floor window sill. All
such signs shall be coordinated with the placement of
other such signs along the same building elevation and,
where possible, shall be located within areas of the
building elevation intended to accommodate such signage.
Signs shall not cover doors, windows or architectural
details.
§ 203-150 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-150
198:1110
(b) Noncommercial product logos and signature marks shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis subject to the Design
Standards for Signs.
(c) Facade/Wall signs shall not project above the edge of the roof
or beyond the side walls of a structure.
(d) A wall sign shall be located where architectural features or
details suggest a location, size or shape for the sign. Generally,
the best location for a wall sign is generally a band or blank
area between the first and second floors of a building.
(e) New wall signs shall be placed consistent with sign locations
on adjacent buildings. This can establish visual continuity
among storefronts.
(f) No facade/wall sign or individual lettering shall project more
than three inches from the surface to which such sign or
lettering is attached.
(g) Restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes, delicatessens and similar
establishments shall also be permitted one wall-mounted or
hung display board for the purpose of displaying the
establishment's menu, announcing daily specials, etc. Such
display board shall be made of high-quality materials, whether
wood or metal, with a high-quality finish and a high level of
design detail, making it both compatible and complementary to
the design and appearance of the building on which it is
located. Such sign shall be located adjacent to the entrance to
the establishment and shall be limited to three square feet in
total area.
(h) Internally illuminated box signs and individual letter signs with
translucent faces are prohibited.
(i) Lettering shall not occupy more than 70% of the area where
the sign is placed to avoid a cluttered look.
(4) Projecting/Hanging signs.
§ 203-150 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-150
198:1111
(a) Specifications.
[1] Maximum area: eight square feet, no wider or longer than
four feet; although signs exceeding such limits may be
permitted if deemed consistent with the Design Standards
for Signs (see Section 13 below) and approved by the
Township Planner/Zoning Officer.
[2] Maximum lettering size: 16 inches, one line of text; eight
inches, two or mores lines of text.
[3] Minimum height above sidewalk: eight feet.
[4] Maximum height above sidewalk grade: 14 feet and shall
not extend above the floor level of the second floor of the
building.
[5] Height above sidewalk: minimum of eight feet, unless
greater clearance is required by the building code, but no
greater than 14 feet or higher than the height of the first
floor of the building, whichever is less.
(b) Noncommercial product logos and signature marks shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis subject to the Design
Standards for Signs.
(c) One per tenant, located near main entrance and external
illumination only.
§ 203-150 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-150
198:1112
(d) Sign supports and brackets shall be compatible with the design
and scale of the sign.
(e) Internal illumination of a projecting sign is prohibited.
(f) Projecting signs shall be constructed of metal, wood or highdensity
preformed foam or similar material made to look like
wood, as approved by the Township Planner/Zoning Officer
(see page 12, "sign materials").
(g) The text, copy, or logo face shall not exceed 70% of the sign
face of a projecting sign.
(h) The sign shall be hung at a ninety-degree angle from the face
of the building.
(i) No hanging or projecting sign shall have a sign face that has a
depth of less than two inches.
(j) One per business frontage shall be permitted.
(k) Only permanent signs that are an integral part of the awning or
canopy shall be allowed.
(l) The sign or logo shall not occupy more than 60% of the awning
valance or the bottom 10 inches of the awning if a valance is
not present.
(m) Sign or logo shall not occupy more than 60% of the awning
valance or the bottom 10 inches of the awning if a valance is
not present.
(n) Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated.
(o) Awning signs shall be regularly cleaned and kept free of dust
and visible defects.
(p) Where applicable, awnings may contain street numbers, but
telephone numbers or product advertising and product logos
are prohibited.
(5) Window signs (permanent window lettering on glass).
§ 203-150 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-150
198:1113
(a) Specifications.
[1] Maximum area: six square feet or 30% of a window area,
whichever is less (including any sign background/design
details), but in no case longer or wider than six feet.
[2] Maximum lettering height: eight inches.
(b) Noncommercial product logos and signature marks shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis subject to the Design
Standards for Signs.
(c) Interior signage other than window signage, that is clearly
visible and positioned to be readily seen from outside the
building, shall be prohibited.
(d) Window signs shall be limited to individual letters placed on
the interior surface of the window and intended to be viewed
from outside. Glass-mounted graphic logos may be applied by
silk screening or prespaced vinyl die-cut forms.
(e) The window lettering or sign shall pertain only to the
establishment occupying that portion of the premises where
the window is located.
(f) The text or sign copy of a window sign shall be limited to the
business name and brief messages identifying the type of
product or service or pertinent information (e.g., "reservations
required" or business hours).
(g) Window signs indicting that an establishment is "Open" or
"Closed" for business shall be permitted; maximum one square
foot in area and no more than one sign per business frontage.
They shall be considered accessory to window signs and shall
not be included in incidental window sign area calculations.
(h) Window lettering or signs that have an exterior source of
illumination or include moving or animated images or text are
specifically prohibited.
(i) Building space leasing signs shall be permitted as follows: one
six-square-foot sign per street frontage for each leased space
or one twelve-square-foot sign per street frontage when more
than one space is available for lease in a building.
(6) Office tenant directory signs (outside building).
§ 203-150 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-150
198:1114
(a) Specifications.
[1] Maximum area: six square feet; no wider or taller than
three feet.
[2] Minimum letter height: none.
[3] Maximum lettering height: two inches.
[4] Maximum height above sidewalk: six feet.
[5] Maximum one per building and only to be used for upperstory
tenants.
(b) Shall be located at the principal entrance to the building
serving tenants identified on the directory, shall be affixed
directly to the building face and located, where possible,
perpendicular to the building elevation where the entrance is
located.
F. Sign copy. The sign copy (text) of permanent signs shall relate only to
the name and/or nature of the business or service offered.
G. Number of signs.
(1) Each store or establishment on the street level shall be permitted a
maximum of two exterior signs, including a facade/wall sign, a
projecting/hanging sign, and an awning/canopy sign for each
principal building face. "Principal building face" shall be defined as
any building face that includes a public/customer entrance (not
emergency, service, or employee entrances) to the store or
establishment to which the sign is related. Window signs shall be
considered interior signs and shall be located on the inside of the
window only.
(2) Each store or establishment on the street level having frontage on
two streets shall also be permitted one of the above permitted
exterior signs along a secondary street frontage that is not
otherwise considered a principal building face.
§ 203-150 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-150
198:1115
(3) In addition to the above, restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes,
delicatessens and similar establishments shall also be permitted to
mount/hang a display board.
(4) No more than one additional sign shall be permitted on a drivethrough
canopy. Its design, size and lighting shall be consistent
with other proposed signs for the store or establishment.
H. Maintenance.
(1) Signs and supporting hardware shall be structurally safe, clean,
free of visible defects, and functioning properly at all times. The
responsibility to satisfy this requirement shall rest with the lessor
and shall be subject to the enforcement of the Township Planner.
(2) Repairs to signs shall use materials and craftsmanship that are
comparable or better than were used for the original sign, and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the lessor as well as the
Township Planner.
I. Colors and materials. Color is one of the most important aspects of
visual communication. It can be used to catch the eye or to
communicate ideas or feelings. Too many colors used simultaneously
can confuse and negate the message of a sign. Even the most carefully
planned sign may look unattractive due to poor color selection.
Contrast is an important influence on the legibility of signs. Light
letters on a dark background or dark letters on a light background are
the most legible.
(1) Limit the total number of colors used in any one sign. Small accents
of several colors may make a sign unique and attractive, but the
competition of large areas of many different colors decreases
readability.
(2) Colors or color combinations that interfere with legibility of the
sign copy or that interfere with viewer identification of other signs
shall be avoided. Bright day-glo (fluorescent) colors shall be
avoided as they are distracting and do not usually blend well with
other background colors.
(3) Sign colors shall complement the colors used on the structures and
the project as a whole.
(4) Sign materials shall be of the highest quality and shall be
compatible with the design of the facade where they are placed.
(5) The selected materials shall contribute to the legibility of the sign.
For example, glossy finishes are often difficult to read because of
glare and reflections.
(6) Required materials.
§ 203-150 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-150
198:1116
(a) The following are required materials for signs unless otherwise
approved by the Township Planner:
[1] Wood (carved, sandblasted, etched, and properly sealed,
primed and painted, or stained).
[2] Metal (formed, etched, cast, engraved, and properly
primed and painted or factory-coated to protect against
corrosion). Such signs shall be prepared in a manner such
that there shall be a three-dimensional quality to the
appearance of the sign face(s).
[3] High-density preformed foam or similar material approved
by the Township Planner.
(b) New materials may be very appropriate if properly designed in
a manner consistent with these standards, and painted or
otherwise finished to complement the architecture of the
building.
J. Sign illumination. The way in which a sign is to be illuminated shall be
considered carefully. Like color, illumination has considerable value for
visual communication.
(1) First, consider if the sign needs to be lighted at all. Lights in the
window display may be sufficient to identify the business. This is
particularly true if good window graphics are used. Often, nearby
streetlights provide ample illumination of a sign after dark.
(2) If the sign can be illuminated by an indirect source of light, this is
usually the best arrangement because the sign will appear to be
better integrated with the building's architecture. Light fixtures
supported in front of the structure cast light on the sign and
generally a portion of the face of the structure as well. Indirect
lighting emphasizes the continuity of the structure's surface and
signs become an integral part of the facade.
(3) Whenever indirect lighting fixtures are used, care shall be taken to
properly shield and place the light source to prevent glare from
spilling over into mixed-use or residential areas and any public
right-of-way. Signs shall be lighted only to the minimum level
required for nighttime readability.
(4) Signs comprised of individual letters mounted directly on a
structure can often use a distinctive element of the structure's
facade as a backdrop, thereby providing a better integration of the
sign with the structure. In keeping with this approach, internally
illuminated individual back-lighted solid letters (i.e., reverse
channel or hallo-type lighted letters) are permitted.
(5) Overall, the most appropriate type of sign illumination is indirect
lighting. Again, indirect lighting helps the sign to appear as an
§ 203-150 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-150
198:1117
integral part of the facade, not something that was added later.
Indirect lighting is generally more appropriate for smaller single
buildings. In addition, indirect lighting produces a more intimate
ambience on the street.
(6) Any illuminated sign located on any building, which sign is adjacent
to a residential use, shall not be illuminated between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(7) Lighting for signage may be on a timer.
(8) External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct
illumination of any object other than the sign.
(9) Internally illuminated sign boxes or individual letter signs with
translucent faces are prohibited. Internally illuminated reverse
channel letter type signs and individual letter signs are permitted.
The use of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) for such signs is
encouraged.
(10) Externally illuminated signs shall be lit only by downward pointing
shielded fixtures where 90% of the light emitted from such fixtures
is shone directly on the face of the sign. Wall-mounted goose-necktype
lighting fixtures are encouraged.
(11)No exposed sign illumination and no floodlighting of signs or
storefronts shall be permitted.
(12) All wiring associated with signs shall be installed and maintained
so as not to be in view of the public. Wiring shall under no
circumstances be installed within conduit attached to the face of
any building.
(13) Any light fixture used to illuminate a sign shall be compatible in
design with the architecture of the principal building to which it is
attached.
(14) Upward lighting of signs and canopies or awnings is prohibited.
(15) Exposed bulbs or tubing, including neon, is prohibited.
(16) The light from a illuminated sign shall be steady in nature, not
flashing, moving or changing in brilliance, character, color, degree,
intensity, location and type of illumination, and shall be the
minimum necessary to provide for the readability of the proposed
sign without shedding further illumination on nearby buildings,
especially residential buildings or units in the vicinity of the sign.
(17) Light sources shall utilize energy-efficient fixtures to the greatest
extent possible.
(18) Burned-out lamps, failing ballasts or other necessary electrical
components shall be replaced within two weeks.
§ 203-150 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-150
198:1118
§ 203-151. Gateway Highway Service (RC-2); large-format retail
(RC-3); big box retail (RC-3); regional office/hotel (RC-3); Gateway
East (RC-4).
A comprehensive sign plan shall be provided which has a consistent sign
design theme throughout the sector. The color of letters and backgrounds
shall be carefully considered in relation to the color of the materials of the
building(s) and where the signs are proposed to be located. All building
signs shall be compatible with the architecture of the building and shall be
a subordinate rather than predominant feature of any building.
K. Removal of signs.
(1) In the event a business ceases operation for a period of time in
excess of 30 days, the lessor shall, during the following tencalendar-
day period, or greater period as agreed to by the
Township Planner, remove any sign identifying or advertising said
business.
(2) For the purpose of this subsection, the word "remove" shall mean:
(a) Removal of the sign face, along with posts, columns, brackets,
and/or other supporting structures; and
(b) Restoration of the area affected to the original condition prior
to such sign installation. Affected building surfaces shall be
restored to match adjacent portions of the structure.
A. Purpose.
(1) To implement and enforce the sign regulations set forth below.
(2) To encourage signage compatible with the character of buildings
and integrated with the building's architectural design and other
signs on and in the vicinity of the building.
(3) To promote creativity in signage design, utilizing high-quality
materials and craftsmanship, and to develop a distinctive image.
(4) To encourage efficient use of signage to avoid visual clutter.
(5) To protect the public health, safety and welfare by promoting
signage that effectively identifies establishments and is visible to
both pedestrians and motorists alike.
B. Sign approval and enforcement procedures.
(1) Any person wishing to erect, alter, modify or expand any sign shall
first apply to the lessor (property owner) or its property
management agent for review and approval of such sign
improvement relative to an approved comprehensive sign plan.
Upon receipt of such approval in writing, such person shall then
apply to the Township Planner and Township Building Department
§ 203-150 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1119
for all necessary permits. The applicant shall provide all
information and materials for the proposed sign(s) necessary for
the property owner and the Township Planner to determine
compliance with the approved comprehensive sign plan.
(2) If the Township Planner determines that the proposed sign(s)
conforms to the applicable comprehensive sign plan standards and
restrictions, he/she shall issue zoning approval for such sign.
Notwithstanding the following requirements, the Township Planner
shall have limited discretion in the administration of these
standards. In the exercise of that discretion, he/she may approve a
sign that deviates in a minor way from such standards, if he/she
determines that the sign(s) substantially conforms to the
requirements set forth in the standards.
(3) The Township Planner shall have the final authority to approve or
deny a proposed sign request, to direct the removal of any sign
installed without such approval, and to enforce all provisions
contained in this document.
(4) Failure to comply with such provisions may result in enforcement
action by the Township Planner, which may lead to the imposition of
penalties, including fines, as provided by the Township Code.
(5) Any person aggrieved by a compliance decision rendered by the
Township Planner may appeal such decision to the municipal board
having jurisdiction over such matters as determined by the
Township Planner after conferring with the Township Attorney.
C. General standards.
(1) The sign regulations set forth in the Township Code, Article VIII,
shall control for sign standards not otherwise enumerated in these
regulations or this sign plan.
(2) Flags and emblems of a government organization or of a political,
civil, philanthropic, educational or religious organization are
exempt from all provisions of the Township Code and this sign plan.
(3) No exposed raceways, ballast boxes or electrical signs shall be
permitted.
(4) Sign company names or stamps shall be concealed (applicable
ordinances and codes permitting).
(5) Public safety decals in minimum sizes may be used, subject to
compliance with all applicable codes.
(6) Tenants shall not use or affix to a building or window, temporarily
or permanently, any stickers or paper, cardboard, plastic or other
similar low-quality signs; nor shall banners, pennants and/or flagtype
signs of various materials be so used.
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1120
(7) No merchandise, wall storage units or equipment of any sort shall
be placed in front of building windows so as to block the view into
and out of the building.
(8) Signs that are necessary for the safe movement of traffic or other
directional assistance shall be permitted, provided they follow the
materials, colors, and letter type standards approved for such
signage. All signage of this type shall be approved by the Township
Planner and lessor or lessor's authorized agent prior to installation.
(9) Special mounting standards shall be used for traffic directional,
handicapped parking and other similar on-site signage. Signs shall
comply with Subtitle 1 of Title 39 (Standard Traffic Signs) and be
mounted utilizing the special design details for such signs
approved for the project.
(10) Drawings showing letter sizes, letter type, fabrication, and
installation shall have to be approved and signed by the lessor or
lessor's authorized agent.
(11) After a tenant has vacated the premises, the lessor shall be
responsible for the removal of all prior tenant signage and
restoration of areas where such signage was located to the original
condition, including painting and patching, if necessary.
(12) Signs, including bracing and support structures, shall be
compatible with the principal structure to which they are attached
in both overall design and materials.
(13) All signs shall be securely attached to the building by means of
metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws, subject to any required
review and approval by the Township Building Department.
(14) Architectural features of the principal structure shall not be
obscured by any sign or its supporting structures or braces.
(15)No sign shall be affixed to any roof, tree, fence, utility pole or
similar structure.
(16)No vehicle shall be parked in such a manner that it serves as a
means of advertising.
(17) Animated, moving and fluttering signs (including business-related
banners, flags and pennants), blinking, flashing, sparkling or
glittering signs are prohibited. Signs that produce glare or use bare
bulbs, such as exposed neon and other exposed tube signs, as well
as signs that use bright day-glo or fluorescent colors, are
prohibited. Signs that obstruct pedestrian traffic, such as sandwich
board and other portable signs, are prohibited.
(18)No permanent sign shall be painted directly on the surface of any
wall, building, fence or similar structure.
§ 203-151 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1121
(19) The maximum graphic content coverage of any sign shall not
exceed 70% of the sign face.
(20)No sign shall have more than two faces, and such faces shall be
parallel to each other.
(21) Every permitted sign, including window lettering and exterior
signs, shall be constructed using high-quality materials and shall
be kept in good condition and repair at all times. All signs to the
contrary shall be removed. The responsibility of making sure this
requirement is satisfied shall primarily rest with the lessor of the
property.
(22) Internally illuminated sign boxes or individual letter signs with
translucent faces are discouraged.
(23) Inflatable or similar such signs shall be prohibited.
(24) All changeable copy signs are prohibited, except for permitted
menu board type signs and permitted office tenant directory signs.
(25) Nonadvertising or noncommercial signs that are part of and
accessory to bus shelters, pay phones, trash receptacles and other
similar street furniture shall be permitted.
(26) Holiday window painting or decorations such as for Halloween,
Thanksgiving, Christmas, etc. shall be permitted and exempt from
window sign limitations. However, such painting or decorations
shall contain no reference to named goods or services, and any text
shall be strictly limited to reference to the applicable holiday and
shall not include reference to any sales, promotions, merchandise
or services. In addition, all such decorations shall be removed
within 10 days of the applicable holiday.
(27) All business establishments above the street level shall be
prohibited from installing or otherwise placing any signage in the
windows of such building. This includes both permanent and
temporary signs of any kind.
(28) Permanent signs that advertise continuous sales, special prices,
etc., are prohibited.
D. Sign area measurement.
(1) The area of a sign shall be computed based on the area of the actual
sign face, exclusive of any supporting structure or bracing. Where
a sign has two parallel faces, only one of the faces shall be
measured to determine the area of the sign.
(2) The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the
extreme limits of all lettering, background, symbols or logos,
representations, or other display within a single continuous
boundary forming a square or rectangle.
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1122
E. Sign design standards.
(1) For the purpose of determining maximum permitted sign area,
minimum and maximum permitted letter height and the number of
signs permitted, the following sign types are identified:
(a) Use-specific signs.
(b) Awning/Canopy signs.
(c) Facade/Wall signs.
(d) Projecting/Hanging signs.
(e) Window signs.
(f) Office tenant directory signs.
(g) Project identifiable signs (place holder).
(2) Use-specific signs. The signage shall be designed to provide a
cohesive theme throughout the entire project and shall be broken
down into the following categories: big box retail, supermarkets,
attached retail buildings, freestanding fast foods, banks and retail
buildings.
(a) The following criteria shall be applicable to big box retail and
large-format retail:
[1] The big box facade signage shall be either internally
illuminated reverse channel or internally illuminated
channel letters not exceeding 3% of a facade or 400 square
feet and 40 feet in length. Up to three signs shall be
permitted and shall be placed on the front and/or side
building facades not less than 18 feet and not more than
30 feet above grade in the predetermined sign band on the
architectural drawings.
§ 203-151 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1123
[2] One ground sign limited to 70 square feet and which may
not exceed 10 feet in height. Sign text is limited to name
and/or logo. Illumination, if desired, must be internal.
(b) The following criteria shall be applicable to offices, hotels and
supermarkets:
[1] The supermarket signage must shall be either internally
illuminated reverse channel or internally illuminated
channel letters not exceeding 5% of the facade or 200
square feet and 30 feet in length. Up to two signs shall be
permitted and shall be placed on the front and/or side
building facades not less than 18 feet and not more than
30 feet above grade in the predetermined sign band on the
architectural drawings.
[2] One ground sign, limited to 50 square feet and which may
not exceed eight feet in height. Sign text is limited to name
and/or logo. Illumination, if desired, must be internal.
(c) The following criteria shall be applicable to attached retail
buildings:
[1] The retail building signage shall be internally illuminated
reverse channel, internally illuminated channel letters, or
signs with external sources of illumination. With the
exception of a corner tenant, which may have one sign on
the front elevation and one sign on a side elevation, not
more than one sign shall be permitted and shall be placed
on the building facade in the predesignated sign band on
the architectural drawings.
[2] A second projecting/hanging sign identifying the tenant
shall be suspended from the soffit of the pedestrian arcade
or canopy awning in the area of the store's entrance door.
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1124
This sign shall be consistent in shape, perpendicular to
the face of the building facade and mounted at a
predesignated height. Acceptable materials for such signs
shall be wood, metal, or high-density preformed foam.
(d) The following criteria shall be applicable to freestanding fast
food buildings:
[1] Major identification of the fast-food restaurant shall be
limited to two ground-mounted signs, two buildingmounted
signs, and two freestanding signs (menu board),
located at the entrance to the drive-through facility.
[2] Building-mounted signage shall either be internally
illuminated reverse channel, internally illuminated
channel letters, or signs with external sources of
illumination.
[3] The freestanding signs or menu boards are limited to 24
square feet and may not exceed six feet in height. Sign text
is limited to name and/or logo and the price signage.
Illumination, if desired, must be internal.
[4] The ground-mounted signs shall be limited to 60 square
feet and shall not exceed a height of eight feet, excluding
the sign base. Sign text is limited to name and logo.
Illumination, if desired, can be external or internal.
(e) The following criteria shall be applicable to freestanding bank
buildings:
[1] Major identification of the banks shall be limited to two
building-mounted signs and one freestanding directional
sign, located at the entrance to the drive-through facility.
[2] Building-mounted signage shall either be internally
illuminated reverse channel, internally illuminated
channel letters or signs with external sources of
illumination.
§ 203-151 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1125
[3] The freestanding directional sign is limited to six square
feet and may not exceed four feet in height. Sign text is
limited to name and/or logo and directional arrow.
Illumination, if desired, must be internal.
[4] The ground-mounted signs shall be limited to 60 square
feet and shall not exceed a height of eight feet, excluding
the sign base. Sign text is limited to name and logo.
Illumination, if desired, can be external or internal.
(f) The following criteria shall be applicable to freestanding retail
buildings and restaurants less than 20,000 square feet:
[1] Major identification of the freestanding retail buildings
shall be limited to two building-mounted signs and two
ground-mounted signs.
[2] Building-mounted signage shall either be internally
illuminated reverse channel, internally illuminated
channel letters, or signs with external sources of
illumination. With the exception of a corner tenant, which
may have one sign on the front elevation and one sign on
the side elevation, not more than one sign shall be
permitted and shall be placed on the building facade in the
predesignated sign band on the architectural drawings.
[3] The ground-mounted signs shall be limited to 60 square
feet and shall not exceed a height of eight feet, excluding
the sign base. Sign text is limited to name and logo.
Illumination, if desired, can be external or internal.
(g) The following criteria shall be applicable to freestanding retail
buildings greater than 20,000 square feet:
[1] Major identification of the freestanding retail buildings
shall be limited to two building-mounted signs and two
ground-mounted signs.
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1126
[2] The signage must be either internally illuminated reverse
channel, internally illuminated channel letters or signs
with external sources of illumination. With the exception of
a corner tenant, which may have one sign on the front
elevation and one sign on a side elevation, not more than
one sign shall be permitted and shall be placed on the
building facade in the predesignated sign band on the
architectural drawings.
[3] The ground-mounted sign shall be limited to 60 square feet
and shall not exceed a height of eight feet, excluding the
sign base. Sign text is limited to name and logo.
Illumination, if desired, can be either external or internal.
(h) The following criteria shall be applicable to freestanding office
buildings:
[1] Major identification of freestanding office buildings shall
be limited to one building-mounted sign and one groundmounted
sign.
[2] Building-mounted signage shall either be internally
illuminated reverse channel, internally illuminated
channel letters, or signs with external sources of
illumination.
[3] The ground-mounted signs shall be limited to 100 square
feet and shall not exceed a height of eight feet, excluding
the sign base. Sign text is limited to name and logo.
Illumination, if desired, can be external or internal.
(3) Awning/Canopy signs.
§ 203-151 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1127
(a) Specifications.
[1] Maximum area: three square feet.
[2] Maximum sign length: six feet.
[3] Maximum letter size: eight inches.
(b) The terms "awning" and "canopy" as used in these sign
standards are used interchangeably and shall be considered
synonymous.
(c) Awnings and canopies shall extend no farther than possible as
a self-supporting structure (no visible vertical support poles or
columns), shall be compatible with the building window
treatment, and shall not dominate the building elevation where
such structure is proposed. All awnings and canopies shall be
coordinated and compatible with other existing or proposed
awnings and canopies on the building. Signage shall be placed
on the front valance portion of the awning structure only; for
non-fabric-type canopies, signage may be located along the
upper edge of the front portion of the canopy in a manner that
is compatible and complementary to the design and
appearance of the building on which it is located.
(d) Noncommercial product logos and signature marks shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis subject to the Design
Standards for Signs.
(4) Facade/Wall signs.
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1128
(a) Specifications.
[1] Maximum area: one square foot per linear foot of
storefront up to 24 square feet.
[2] Maximum sign height: 24 inches.
[3] Maximum sign length: 12 feet.
[4] Maximum lettering size: 16 inches, one line of text; eight
inches, two lines of text (not to exceed two lines of text).
[5] Minimum height above sidewalk: eight feet, unless greater
height is required by the building code.
[6] Maximum height above sidewalk: 14 feet and shall not
extend above the base of the second floor window sill. All
such signs shall be coordinated with the placement of
other such signs along the same building elevation and,
where possible, shall be located within areas of the
building elevation intended to accommodate such signage.
Signs shall not cover doors, windows or architectural
details.
(b) Noncommercial product logos and signature marks shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis subject to the Design
Standards for Signs.
(c) Facade/Wall signs shall not project above the edge of the roof
or beyond the side walls of a structure.
§ 203-151 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1129
(d) A wall sign shall be located where architectural features or
details suggest a location, size or shape for the sign. Generally,
the best location for a wall sign is generally a band or blank
area between the first and second floors of a building.
(e) New wall signs shall be placed consistent with sign locations
on adjacent buildings. This can establish visual continuity
among storefronts.
(f) No facade/wall sign or individual lettering shall project more
than three inches from the surface to which such sign or
lettering is attached.
(g) Restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes, delicatessens and similar
establishments shall also be permitted one wall-mounted or
hung display board for the purpose of displaying the
establishment's menu, announcing daily specials, etc. Such
display board shall be made of high-quality materials, whether
wood or metal, with a high-quality finish and a high level of
design detail, making it both compatible and complementary to
the design and appearance of the building on which it is
located. Such sign shall be located adjacent to the entrance to
the establishment and shall be limited to three square feet in
total area.
(h) Internally illuminated box signs and individual letter signs with
translucent faces are prohibited.
(i) Lettering shall not occupy more than 70% of the area where
the sign is placed to avoid a cluttered look.
(5) Projecting/Hanging signs.
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1130
(a) Specifications.
[1] Maximum area: eight square feet, no wider or longer than
four feet, though signs exceeding such limits may be
permitted if deemed consistent with the Design Standards
for Signs (Section 13 below) and approved by the
Township Planner/Zoning Officer.
[2] Maximum lettering size: 16 inches, one line of text; eight
inches, two or mores lines of text.
[3] Minimum height above sidewalk: eight feet.
[4] Maximum height above sidewalk grade: 14 feet and shall
not extend above the floor level of the second floor of the
building.
[5] Height above sidewalk: minimum of eight feet, unless
greater clearance is required by the building code, but no
greater than 14 feet or higher than the height of the first
floor of the building, whichever is less.
(b) Noncommercial product logos and signature marks shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis subject to the Design
Standards for Signs.
(c) One per tenant, located near the main entrance and with
external illumination only.
§ 203-151 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1131
(d) Sign supports and brackets shall be compatible with the design
and scale of the sign.
(e) Internal illumination of a projecting sign is prohibited.
(f) Projecting signs shall be constructed of metal, wood or highdensity
preformed foam or similar material made to look like
wood, as approved by the Township Planner/Zoning Officer
(see page 12 "sign materials").
(g) The text, copy, or logo face shall not exceed 70% of the sign
face of a projecting sign.
(h) The sign shall be hung at a ninety-degree angle from the face
of the building.
(i) No hanging or projecting sign shall have a sign face that has a
depth of less than two inches.
(j) One per business frontage shall be permitted (unless a second
sign is for a second-floor tenant).
(k) Only permanent signs that are an integral part of the awning or
canopy shall be allowed.
(l) Sign or logo shall not occupy more than 60% of the awning
valance or the bottom 10 inches of the awning if a valance is
not present.
(m) Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated.
(n) Awning signs shall be regularly cleaned and kept free of dust
and visible defects.
(o) Where applicable, awnings may contain street numbers, but
telephone numbers or product advertising and product logos
are prohibited.
(6) Window signs (permanent window lettering on glass).
(a) Specifications.
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1132
[1] Maximum area: six square feet or 30% of a window area,
whichever is less (including any sign background/design
details), but in no case longer or wider than six feet.
[2] Maximum lettering height: eight inches.
(b) Noncommercial product logos and signature marks shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis subject to the Design
Standards for Signs.
(c) Interior signage other than window signage, that is clearly
visible and positioned to be readily seen for outside the
building, shall be prohibited.
(d) Window signs shall be limited to individual letters placed on
the interior surface of the window and intended to be viewed
from outside. Glass-mounted graphic logos may be applied by
silk screening or prespaced vinyl die-cut forms.
(e) The window lettering or sign shall pertain only to the
establishment occupying that portion of the premises where
the window is located.
(f) The text or sign copy of a window sign shall be limited to the
business name and brief messages identifying the type of
product or service or pertinent information (e.g., "reservations
required" or business hours).
(g) Window signs indicting that an establishment is "Open" or
"Closed" for business shall be permitted; maximum one square
foot in area and no more than one sign per business frontage.
They shall be considered accessory to window signs and shall
not be included in incidental window sign area calculations.
(h) Window lettering or signs that have an exterior source of
illumination or include moving or animated images or text are
specifically prohibited.
(i) Building space leasing signs shall be permitted as follows: one
six-square-foot sign per street frontage for each leased space
or one twelve-square-foot sign per street frontage when more
than one space is available for lease in a building.
(7) Office tenant directory signs (outside building).
§ 203-151 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1133
(a) Specifications.
[1] Maximum area: six square feet; no wider or taller than
three feet.
[2] Minimum letter height: none.
[3] Maximum lettering height: two inches.
[4] Maximum height above sidewalk: six feet.
[5] Maximum of one per building and only to be used for
upper-story tenants.
(b) The signs shall be located at the principal entrance to the
building serving tenants identified on the directory, shall be
affixed directly to the building face and shall be located, where
possible, perpendicular to building elevation where the
entrance is located.
F. Sign copy. The sign copy (text) of permanent signs shall relate only to
the name and/or nature of the business or service offered.
G. Number of signs.
(1) Each store or establishment on the street level shall be permitted a
maximum of two exterior signs, including a facade/wall sign, a
projecting/hanging sign, and an awning/canopy sign for each
principal building face. "Principal building face" shall be defined as
any building face that includes a public/customer entrance (not
emergency, service, or employee entrances) to the store or
establishment to which the sign is related. Window signs shall be
considered interior signs and shall be located on the inside of the
window only.
(2) Each store or establishment on the street level having frontage on
two streets shall also be permitted one of the above permitted
exterior signs along a secondary street frontage that is not
otherwise considered a principal building face.
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1134
(3) In addition to the above, restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes,
delicatessens and similar establishments shall also be permitted to
mount/hang a display board.
(4) No more than one additional sign shall be permitted on a drivethrough
canopy. Its design, size and lighting shall be consistent
with other proposed signs for the store or establishment.
H. Maintenance.
(1) Signs and supporting hardware shall be structurally safe, clean,
free of visible defects, and functioning properly at all times. The
responsibility to satisfy this requirement shall rest with the lessor
and shall be subject to the enforcement of the Township Planner.
(2) Repairs to signs shall use materials and craftsmanship that are
comparable or better than were used for the original sign, and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the lessor as well as the
Township Planner.
I. Colors and materials. Color is one of the most important aspects of
visual communication. It can be used to catch the eye or to
communicate ideas or feelings. Too many colors used simultaneously
can confuse and negate the message of a sign. Even the most carefully
planned sign may look unattractive due to poor color selection.
Contrast is an important influence on the legibility of signs. Light
letters on a dark background or dark letters on a light background are
most legible.
(1) Limit the total number of colors used in any one sign. Small accents
of several colors may make a sign unique and attractive, but the
competition of large areas of many different colors decreases
readability.
(2) Colors or color combinations that interfere with legibility of the
sign copy or that interfere with viewer identification of other signs
shall be avoided. Bright day-glo (fluorescent) colors shall be
avoided as they are distracting and do not usually blend well with
other background colors.
(3) Sign colors shall complement the colors used on the structures and
the project as a whole.
(4) Sign materials shall be of the highest quality and shall be
compatible with the design of the facade where they are placed.
(5) The selected materials shall contribute to the legibility of the sign.
For example, glossy finishes are often difficult to read because of
glare and reflections.
(6) Materials.
§ 203-151 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1135
(a) The following are the permitted materials for signs unless
otherwise approved by the Township Planner:
[1] Wood (carved, sandblasted, etched, and properly sealed,
primed and painted, or stained).
[2] Metal (formed, etched, cast, engraved, and properly
primed and painted or factory-coated to protect against
corrosion). Such signs shall be prepared in a manner such
that there shall be a three-dimensional quality to the
appearance of the sign face(s).
[3] High-density preformed foam or similar material approved
by the Township Planner.
(b) New materials may be very appropriate if properly designed in
a manner consistent with these standards, and painted or
otherwise finished to complement the architecture of the
building.
J. Sign illumination. The way in which a sign is to be illuminated shall be
considered carefully. Like color, illumination has considerable value for
visual communication.
(1) First, consider if the sign needs to be lighted at all. Lights in the
window display may be sufficient to identify the business. This is
particularly true if good window graphics are used. Often, nearby
streetlights provide ample illumination of a sign after dark.
(2) If the sign can be illuminated by an indirect source of light, this is
usually the best arrangement because the sign will appear to be
better integrated with the building's architecture. Light fixtures
supported in front of the structure cast light on the sign and
generally a portion of the face of the structure as well. Indirect
lighting emphasizes the continuity of the structure's surface and
signs become an integral part of the facade.
(3) Whenever indirect lighting fixtures are used, care shall be taken to
properly shield and place the light source to prevent glare from
spilling over into mixed-use or residential areas and any public
right-of-way. Signs shall be lighted only to the minimum level
required for nighttime readability.
(4) Signs comprised of individual letters mounted directly on a
structure can often use a distinctive element of the structure's
facade as a backdrop, thereby providing a better integration of the
sign with the structure. In keeping with this approach, internally
illuminated individual backlighted solid letters (i.e., reverse
channel or hallo-type lighted letters) are permitted.
(5) Overall, the most appropriate type of sign illumination is indirect
lighting. Again, indirect lighting helps the sign to appear as an
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1136
integral part of the facade, not something that was added later.
Indirect lighting is generally more appropriate for smaller single
buildings. In addition, indirect lighting produces a more intimate
ambience on the street.
(6) Any illuminated sign located on any building, which sign is adjacent
to a residential use, shall be turned off no more than one hour after
closing unless necessary for security purposes.
(7) Lighting for signage may be on a timer.
(8) External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct
illumination of any object other than the sign.
(9) Internally illuminated sign boxes or individual letter signs with
translucent faces are discouraged. Internally illuminated reverse
channel letter type signs and individual letter signs are permitted.
The use of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) for such signs is
encouraged.
(10) Externally illuminated signs shall be lit only by downward pointing
shielded fixtures where 90% of the light emitted from such fixtures
is shone directly on the face of the sign. Wall-mounted goose-necktype
lighting fixtures are encouraged.
(11)No exposed sign illumination and no floodlighting of signs or
storefronts shall be permitted.
(12) All wiring associated with signs shall be installed and maintained
so as not to be in view of the public. Wiring shall under no
circumstances be installed within conduit attached to the face of
any building.
(13) Any light fixture used to illuminate a sign shall be compatible in
design with the architecture of the principal building to which it is
attached.
(14) Upward lighting of signs and canopies or awnings is prohibited.
(15) Exposed bulbs or tubing, including neon, are prohibited.
(16) The light from a illuminated sign shall be steady in nature, not
flashing, moving or changing in brilliance, character, color, degree,
intensity, location and type of illumination, and shall be the
minimum necessary to provide for the readability of the proposed
sign without shedding further illumination on nearby buildings,
especially residential buildings or units in the vicinity of the sign.
(17) Light sources shall utilize energy-efficient fixtures to the greatest
extent possible.
(18) Burned-out lamps, failing ballasts or other necessary electrical
components shall be replaced within two weeks.
§ 203-151 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-151
198:1137
K. Removal of signs (except in the RC-3 District).
(1) In the event a business ceases operation for a period of time in
excess of 30 days, the lessor shall, during the following tencalendar-
day period, or greater period as agreed to by the
Township Planner, remove any sign identifying or advertising said
business.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the word "remove" shall mean:
(a) Removal of the sign face, along with posts, columns, brackets,
and/or other supporting structures; and
(b) Restoration of the area affected to the original condition prior
to such sign installation. Affected building surfaces shall be
restored to match adjacent portions of the structure.
§ 203-151 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-151
198:1138
ARTICLE XXII
General Design Standards (All Uses)
§ 203-152. Standards; incorporation into plan.
The physical appearance of a Center development shall be of the highest
quality. It is necessary that Center developments adhere to a set of
standards and criteria that address a variety of site plan considerations,
including site layout, building massing and form, and landscaping. This will
result in an overall coordinated appearance for a particular development.
The general design standards and criteria listed below must be
incorporated into a Center development plan submission for a development.
Design covenants shall incorporate, complement and expand upon these
general design standards and criteria. Such design covenants may be
required by the Joint Land Use Board as part of the development plan
application, review, and approval process.
§ 203-153. Site design and layout.
A. Passive solar design and orientation of buildings is encouraged.
B. Visitor building entrances and vehicular entrance driveways shall be
readily identifiable and accessible to the first-time visitor.
C. The scale and massing of buildings on any given street shall be
harmonious. Corner gateway buildings shall be provided.
D. A variety of building setbacks, rooflines, color schemes, elevations and
heights shall generally be required in a development to avoid a
repetitious and monotonous streetscape.
E. Buildings with more than one facade facing a public street, parking lot,
open space area, or square shall be required to provide multiple front
facade treatments.
F. Nonresidential and mixed-use buildings shall be arranged to reduce
visibility of service areas from streets, customer parking areas and
adjacent properties.
G. Low-maintenance, durable, tactile, natural materials such as wood,
stucco and masonry are required. Paintable concrete clapboard is
permitted on residential buildings with paint rated for a minimum of 20
years. High-quality man-made materials are permitted as architectural
accents and trim.
H. Pitched roofs are generally encouraged. Roof pitches shall be generally
consistent throughout the development. Generally, flat and pitched-type
roofs may be allowed on a limited basis as part of an overall Center
design scheme for the proposed development.
§ 203-152 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-153
198:1139
I. Dormers, gables, bay windows and windows across a building facade
and other similar design features shall be provided, as appropriate to
address scale and rhythm.
J. An orderly relationship among windows, doors, porches and roof forms
shall be provided.
K. The exteriors of all buildings in the development, including any
permitted accessory buildings, shall be architecturally compatible and
be constructed of complementary materials.
L. The treatment of side and rear walls of any building in terms of building
materials and colors shall be similar to the treatment of the front
facade.
M. The visual impact of large parking lots in front of buildings (where
permitted) and long street frontages shall be minimized with low
architectural screen walls, landscaping and pedestrian systems and by
making parking lots smaller.
N. Nonresidential and mixed-use buildings shall be highlighted by such
features including:
(1) Outdoor patios.
(2) Display windows.
(3) Plazas, paver block crosswalks or other landscape features.
(4) Entry overhangs (projecting or recessed).
(5) Specially treated architectural walls.
(6) Covered walkways.
(7) Awnings and arcades.
(8) Balconies and balconettes.
(9) Recesses and projections.
(10) Bays.
(11) Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas
and/or places for sitting.
(12) Distinctive roof forms.
O. Nonresidential and mixed-use buildings shall be arranged and
clustered to maximize opportunities for shared circulation, parking,
loading, pedestrian walkways and plazas, recreation areas, transitrelated
facilities, and day and night security surveillance.
§ 203-153 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-153
198:1140
§ 203-154. Block layout.
P. New buildings or additions on any given street shall generally be
consistent with the predominant or emerging setback pattern for the
street.
Q. Street-level storefronts and building entrances shall be open and
inviting to pedestrians.
R. For buildings located and oriented around open space, awnings,
canopies, solar screens, and/or colonnades are encouraged.
S. Restaurants shall be permitted to operate outdoor cafes on sidewalks,
provided that pedestrian circulation and access to building entrances
are not impaired.
T. Special ground texture treatment shall be required for pedestrian
crossings in streets and elsewhere, to include brick, pavers, porous
pavement, stone and/or other material deemed suitable by the Joint
Land Use Board.
U. All streets, alleys, and sidewalks and pathways shall connect to other
streets within the Auburn Road Village and connect to existing streets
outside the Auburn Road Village, as appropriate. Dead-end streets are
generally not permitted within the Auburn Road Village unless such
condition is unavoidable, subject to Joint Land Use Board approval.
V. Air-conditioning units, HVAC systems, exhaust pipes or stacks, satellite
dishes and other telecommunications receiving devices shall be
screened or specially treated to be, as much as possible, inconspicuous
as viewed form the public right-of-way and adjacent properties or
otherwise incorporated into the architecture.
W. Street furniture such as benches, street lamps, bicycle racks, trash
receptacles, tree grates, bus stops, landscape planters and hanging
baskets and the like shall be provided. The Joint Land Use Board may
require some street furniture to be permanently secured to the
sidewalk.
A. The blocks created by streets, avenues, and boulevards shall conform in
location and size to the regulations specified in the Street Regulating
Plan, unless otherwise amended by approval of the Joint Land Use
Board.
B. As a general rule, buildings shall reflect a continuity of treatment
obtained by maintaining the buildings' scale or by subtly graduating
changes; by maintaining base courses; by continuous use of front
porches on residential buildings; by maintaining cornice lines in
buildings of the same height; by extending horizontal lines of
fenestration; and by echoing architectural styles and details, design
themes, building materials, and colors recommended in locations
designated on the plan as requiring special architectural treatment.
§ 203-153 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-154
198:1141
§ 203-155. Residential building design.
C. Aesthetics of block layouts.
(1) A residential neighborhood with varying block configurations shall
be designed within a street grid and accommodate a variety of lot
sizes and types. Flexibility is built into the Street Regulating Plan
as to the location and orientation of "small streets" and alleys.
(2) The build-to line for residential buildings shall be used as a
guideline for all residential units in a given block and shall not be
interpreted so as to create a single setback line. The intent shall be
that the buildings shall vary along setback lines within the
guidelines as established in this Part 2.
(3) Streets in some cases are intended to weave through
neighborhoods and open spaces to create varied site vistas while
maintaining the integrity of the street grid. Pedestrian walkways
for these streets are intended to promote walking to create a sense
of neighborhood. Small neighborhood parks and green edges
abutting residential homes are intended to add interest to the
neighborhood. Common open spaces are provided at the edges of
some blocks to provide opportunity for active and/or passive
recreational activities.
(4) All of the above components shall be viewed in conjunction with
one another in creating neighborhood design.
D. Buildings shall be architecturally emphasized through fenestration,
entrance treatment, and detailing. Buildings with more than one facade
facing a public street or internal open space shall be designed to
provide for enhanced facade treatments on those sides of said buildings
which are not the front of the building.
E. A block consisting of between three lots and 10 lots shall be developed
with the minimum of three different base model type homes varying by
both amount of habitable space and architecture treatment. Blocks
consisting of between 11 lots and 30 lots shall be developed with a
minimum of four base types. Each base model type home in any block
shall have at least two alternative front elevations containing different
design features as enumerated.
F. Exterior public and semi-public spaces, such as courtyards or plazas,
shall be designed to enhance surrounding buildings, and provide
amenities for users, in the form of textured paving, landscaping,
lighting, street trees, benches, litter containers, and other items of
street furniture, as appropriate. Courtyards shall have recognizable
edges defined on at least three sides by buildings, walls, elements of
landscaping, and/or elements of street furniture, in order to create a
strong sense of enclosure.
§ 203-154 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-155
198:1142
A. The front facade of a single-family detached, twin or townhouse unit
shall reflect traditional rules of scale and rhythm, Awnings, open and
usable porches, stoops, bay windows and/or balconies and facade and
roofline offsets are required to aid the articulation of scale and rhythm.
B. A minimum of 50% of single-family detached and twin dwelling units
shall have a front entrance articulated with a covered front entry porch.
Front porches shall generally be located on the front of the dwelling
facing the sidewalk, but may occasionally be located on the side wall of
a dwelling. The size of front entry porches shall be a minimum of eight
feet deep from the front wall of the dwelling to the enclosing porch rail
and a minimum of 10 feet long.
C. The ground floor of all residential units except flats shall be raised
above the level of the adjacent sidewalk as specified for the various
street types. Residential units shall have their ground floors raised
above ground level at the front of the building by a minimum of two
feet, and residential buildings which are required to comply with ADA
standards and state handicapped accessibility codes are exempt from
this requirement.
D. Garages are discouraged along the main front facade of single-family
detached, twin and townhouse units and are prohibited forward of such
facades. Subject to the rules of the Street Regulating Plan, garages may
be front, side or rear entry types. Windows are required in the walls of
such garages to admit light and eliminate blank walls. Sufficient
storage area to accommodate tools, auto accessories, trash/recyclable
materials storage, lawn and garden maintenance equipment shall be
considered in sizing the garages so that an accessory storage structure
will not be necessary. Individual bay overhead garage doors are
encouraged. Detached garages shall be offered as a permitted option on
certain available single-family detached and twin units.
E. All single-family detached, twin and townhouse units are encouraged to
have clearly defined front yards using landscaping, hedging, fencing, or
a brick or stone wall, none of which shall exceed three feet in height.
F. Where the rear of a single-family detached, twin or townhouse unit is
visible from an exterior or interior street, such building elevations and
yard areas shall be specially designed and treated to present a pleasant
appearance to such street.
G. Townhouse buildings shall consist of no more than eight townhouse
dwelling units in order to prevent the development of long and
monotonous buildings. There shall be different roofline heights and
vertical offsets in each overall townhouse building. No more than two
adjacent townhouse units shall have the same building offset, which
shall vary by at least two feet.
H. Flats shall have access provided by an outside entrance or stairway
exclusively serving the residential units.
§ 203-155 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-155
198:1143
§ 203-156. Nonresidential and mixed-use building design.
I. All single-family, twin and townhouse dwelling units shall have private
outdoor space, which may include a deck, patio and/or terrace. Such
outdoor space shall be enclosed, as appropriate, by a decorative wall or
fence, evergreen hedge, trellis or lattice, vines, or some combination
thereof.
J. In case of walls, fences or trellises, the height of such open space
enclosures shall be five feet or seven feet high. Portions of fencing
below five feet shall be of solid material and above five feet in height
must be made to screen views of neighboring uses.
K. Each upper-floor flat dwelling shall be provided with a terrace, recessed
inside the exterior building wall of the dwelling, or an occupiable
balcony projecting on the outside of the building wall. If a terrace or
balcony is not provided for upper-floor flats, each dwelling shall be
provided with access to a conveniently located common space, park or
green.
A. The scale of buildings shall be broken up both horizontally and
vertically with offsets to reinforce the human scale.
B. No commercial statements of the occupant's products or services shall
be allowed as part of the building facade or elevation.
C. Architectural designs shall be evaluated in terms of the sensitive
integration of form, textures, and colors with the particular landscape
and topographic characteristics of each individual site.
D. Groups of related buildings shall be designed to present a harmonious
appearance in terms of style and use of exterior materials, fenestration
and roof type.
E. Building exterior walls shall be articulated to reduce the scale and the
uniform appearance of buildings and to provide visual interest that will
be consistent with the community's identity, character and scale. The
intent is to encourage a more human scale that residents and workers
will be able to identify with their community. As such, one or a
combination of the following shall be utilized in a development:
(1) Roofline variation.
(2) Arcades, display windows and entry areas.
(3) Grouping into smaller or multiple structures.
(4) Mature landscaping and landform manipulation.
(5) Wall texture placement and change.
(6) Clustering small-scale elements such as planter walls around the
major form.
§ 203-155 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-156
198:1144
(7) Creation of a horizontal and vertical shadow line.
(8) Offsets and/or breaks in the building line.
(9) Patterned walls.
(10) Fenestration.
(11) Color change.
(12) Recessed entrances.
F. Each building shall be sensitive to the immediate neighboring
structure. Opportunities to provide walkway systems to adjoining
buildings, including common plazas or courtyards, are encouraged.
G. All facades of a building which are visible from adjoining properties
and/or public streets should contribute to the pleasing scale features of
the building and encourage community integration by featuring
characteristics similar to the front facade.
H. The exterior walls of each building shall be constructed of durable
permanent architectural materials compatible with campus-like
standards, tastefully handled, i.e., carefully selected brick; stone with a
weathered face or polished, fluted, or broken-faced. Exterior building
materials may include smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete
panels or prefabricated steel panels as secondary accent materials only.
I. Preengineered metal buildings, industrial-type structures featuring
predominantly painted exteriors, and corrugated metal-sided or
clapboard aluminum-sided "Butler" type buildings shall not be
permitted.
J. All facade materials must be low maintenance. There shall be no
exposed common concrete block on the exterior of any building, and
painted concrete block shall not be permitted.
K. Window treatment shall be required along the front and sides of all
buildings. The use of multifloor glass curtain walls should be avoided.
L. Drainage pipes and roof leaders on building surfaces must be located
on the interior and not exposed.
M. Building roofs are to be uncluttered. Vertical roof projections such as
towers, vents, stacks or roof-mounted equipment shall be integrated
into the architecture. All penetrations through the roof (i.e., mechanical
equipment or skylights) must be organized in a manner that is integral
to the architectural form of the building, or be completely screened
from view by parapet walls or approved enclosures. Screens shall be
attractive in appearance and reflect or complement the architecture of
the building to which they belong.
N. The design of canopies shall be in keeping with the design of the
building.
§ 203-156 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-157
198:1145
§ 203-157. Parking and circulation.
A. Off-street parking.
(1) Each building site must include adequate off-street automobile
parking and loading facilities per the ratios established in this Part
2. The Urban Land Institute's Shared Parking Analysis shall be
used by the applicant when it is deemed appropriate by the Joint
Land Use Board.
(2) Textured crosswalks are to be used where pedestrians come in
contact with vehicular traffic. All walks must be well lighted with
bollards. On-site pedestrian linkages must connect buildings to
external perimeter pedestrian systems.
(3) Parking is prohibited in front and side yards unless otherwise
noted.
(4) Parking access shall be via alleys unless otherwise noted (except in
the RC-3 District).
(5) Large parking fields are generally discouraged.
(6) Parking buffers are required on all four sides.
(7) Block cut-throughs shall provide access to rear yard parking;
minimums provided per this plan.
B. Use of on-street parking spaces.
(1) On-street parking credit may be counted for spaces which do not
actually front on the property for which they are to be considered
as serving, provided they are located within 1,000 feet of the
property for customer or client parking and 2,000 feet of the
property for employee parking. The Joint Land Use Board may, in
its discretion, elect to give such spaces on-street parking credit,
deny any credit for such spaces, or give partial credit for such
spaces depending on the use of the property upon which they front
and the uses of intervening properties located between the
property seeking to apply the spaces toward its parking need and
the spaces themselves.
(2) The following guidelines shall be used to determine which on-street
parking spaces an applicant may assume are available:
(a) Parking spaces located on a road that the Street Regulating
Plan classified as a “residential street” shall not be included in
the parking inventory for a commercial land use.
(b) Spaces directly abutting the applicant's property are onehundred-
percent available to the applicant, unless parking
regulations restrict parking during the time period when the
§ 203-157 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-157
198:1146
spaces are needed to satisfy the applicant's peak parking
demand.
(c) Spaces abutting a different commercial use shall not be
counted unless that use has an off-setting peak parking
demand or unless the owner of the use certifies that it has no
need for the available parking spaces.
(d) Parking that abuts open space, wetlands or detention basins
shall be considered available but must be shared with other
nearby commercial users. The applicant shall propose to the
Joint Land Use Board the percentage of the parking for which
credit will be taken and will explain to the Joint Land Use
Board the methodology used in determining that percentage.
C. Parking for all dwelling units shall be prohibited in front yard setback
areas. With the exception of lots that do not back up to lanes, as
depicted on the Street Regulating Plan, driveways and driveway access
shall be prohibited in any front yard area. Driveways shall be set back a
minimum of three feet from the side of dwelling units. Driveways shall
be set back a minimum of three feet from any side property line, unless
such driveway is shared by dwellings on two adjacent lots on the
common side lot line. Parking for townhouses shall be provided as
driveways or garages with access from a rear lane. Private driveways
for townhouses shall connect to lanes only and not to streets. Parking
for apartments may be located in common parking lots located on a lot
other than that containing the apartment building entrances. If access
to a garage is provided from a street, the front entrance of such a
garage shall be set back 10 feet further than the front wall of the
dwelling unit. The location of a garage shall be set back a minimum of
three feet from side property lines and five feet from a rear property
line.
D. Parking lot landscaping, buffering and screening.
(1) Lots for apartment and nonresidential uses shall balance the
functional requirements of parking with the provision of pedestrian
amenities. Transition areas between parking and civic, commercial,
or residential uses shall be designed with textured paving,
landscaping and street furniture approved by the Joint Land Use
Board.
(2) Parking lot layout, landscaping, buffering and screening shall be
provided to minimize direct views of parked vehicles from streets
and sidewalks, avoid spillover light, glare, noise, or exhaust fumes
onto adjacent properties, in particular residential properties, and
provide the parking area with a reasonable measure of shade, when
trees reach maturity. In order to achieve these objectives, parking
lots exposed to view of public streets and walkways shall be
surrounded by a minimum of a four-and-half-foot-high (three-foothigh
minimum in the RC-3 District), year-round visually impervious
§ 203-157 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-157
198:1147
screen, hedge, masonry wall and shall decrease where driveways
approach sidewalks or walkways, in order to provide adequate
visibility of pedestrians from motor vehicles and shall not interfere
with clear sight triangle requirements. Parking lots adjacent to
residential properties or residential alleys shall provide a minimum
six-foot-high year-round visually impervious screen, hedge or
masonry wall.
(3) The interior of all parking lots shall be landscaped to provide shade
and visual relief. This is best achieved by protected planting islands
or peninsulas within the perimeter of the parking lot. Parking lots
with 10 or fewer spaces may not require interior landscaping if the
Joint Land Use Board determines that there is adequate perimeter
landscaping. In parking lots with 11 or more spaces, a maximum of
one deciduous shade tree shall be required to be planted in the
parking lot for every five parking spaces. A six-foot planting
diamond, or equivalent planter, is required per tree. Choice of plant
materials, buffer width, type of screening, location, and frequency
of tree planting shall be flexible, provided these objectives are
designed to the satisfaction of the Joint Land Use Board.
E. Structured parking and carports.
(1) Structured parking shall be faced with other uses such as retail or
be designed to hide the utilitarian look of parking garages.
(2) Utilize the architectural vocabulary of adjacent facades to minimize
the inherent look of the parking structure and integrate the
structure as part of the overall facade.
(3) Parking entrances shall be indicated through increased massing,
increased detail, material change or signage and shall be clearly
visible from the secondary streets.
(4) Structured parking layouts shall take into consideration pedestrian
circulation and connections with adjacent building uses.
(5) Structured facades shall be articulated similar to, and colors shall
coordinate with, adjacent buildings.
(6) Utilitarian appearances of structured parking are not permitted.
Structures shall have design treatments such as colonnades,
arcades, awnings, landscaping, street furniture, and other public
amenities to create the appearance of an occupied building. Blank
walls are not permitted.
(7) Parked cars shall be visually screened from adjacent buildings and
the street, and such screening shall be in keeping with the rest of
the building's architectural style and materials.
(8) Locating structural parking at the interior of the block, surrounded
by buildings, is the preferred method.
§ 203-157 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-157
198:1148
(9) Vehicular access to structured parking shall be accessed from
alleys, placed underground, placed in structures above the ground
floor, or located behind or to the side of a building. Always provide
clear signage to direct the driver to the parking entrance.
(10) Structured parking shall not exceed 50 feet in height.
(11) Carports shall be required for some mixed-use developments and
flats, to be located within parking lots. Provision shall be made for
storage. Their design shall complement the principal structure and
in some instances be used as a buffer to single-family, twin and
townhouse units.
F. Residential garage and parking design standards.
(1) With the exception of lots that do not back up to lanes, as depicted
in this Part 2, driveways and driveway access shall be prohibited in
any front yard area.
(2) Driveways that are accessed through the front yard area shall be no
wider than 10 feet, and parking for all dwelling units shall be
prohibited within the front yard setback.
(3) Garages, driveways and parking areas shall have a minimum
setback of three feet from any side property line or side of dwelling
unit. An exception to the three-foot setback from the side property
line shall exist for townhouse and twin lots to permit garages,
driveways and parking areas that share a common wall on the
common property line.
(4) Garages shall only be located to the rear of the principal building.
(5) Two adjacent lots may share a driveway along their common
property line, subject to a cross-access easement.
(6) Residential lots may require on site parking spaces adjacent to the
garage in order to meet the minimum off-street parking
requirements if sufficient spaces are not provided within the
garage and the driveway to the garage.
(7) The maximum width of a driveway throat shall not exceed 24 feet.
There shall be no more than one driveway apron per lot.
(8) Driveways may be constructed of porous pavers, two-foot-wide
concrete to wheel tracks, or stone pavers.
(9) Except as noted, all driveways and parking spaces shall only be
accessed from the rear lane.
(10) Required parking for flats must be located internal to the block
upon which the condo/flats building is located. First-floor garage
parking for condo/flats is permitted, subject to meeting
architectural requirements.
§ 203-157 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-157
198:1149
(11) Each garage car space shall be counted as one off-street parking
space, regardless of the dimensions of the driveway.
(12) A one-car garage and driveway combination shall count as two offstreet
parking spaces, provided the driveway measures a minimum
of 18 feet in length between the face of the garage door and the
right-of-way.
(13) A two-car garage and driveway combination shall count as 3.5 offstreet
parking spaces, provided a minimum parking area width of
20 feet is provided for a minimum length of 18 feet as specified for
a one-car garage and driveway combination.
G. Shared parking.
(1) The overall intent for the provision of parking is to balance the use
mix with available parking opportunities both on- and off-street. A
parking analysis shall be performed in consideration of any
development application in order to ensure the adequacy of
parking without, wherever possible, overdeveloping off-street
parking areas. Off-street parking shall be provided according to
minimum requirements as specified in this Part 2, the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance137 and in
accordance with New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS).
(2) Off-street parking for commercial uses shall be sufficient to provide
parking for the employees of all proposed uses as well as long-term
customer parking. Spaces reserved for employees shall be
designated as such by means of striping and signage. Off-street
parking lots may in some instances be prohibited in the front yard
setback area. They shall be located at the side and rear of buildings
on the interior of lots whenever possible, and shall be accessed by
means of common driveways, preferably from side streets, lanes or
alleys. Cross-access easements for adjacent lots with
interconnected parking lots shall be required, in language
acceptable to the Township Committee. In addition to the off-street
parking requirements specified above, on-street parking shall be
provided to serve customers of commercial uses. Commercial onstreet
parking shall be provided as curbside, parallel, or angle
parking located along both sides of the streets on all blocks upon
which commercial uses front.
(3) Each applicant for a nonresidential development greater than
5,000 square feet shall be required to conduct a parking study to
determine the number of on-street and off-street parking spaces
required to accommodate peak parking demand. In calculating
peak parking demand, the applicant shall:
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-157 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-157
198:1150
(a) Project the peak number of occupied parking spaces using
formulas and procedures presented in the most recent edition
of Parking Generation, an information report published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).
(b) Calculate the number of parking spaces needed by expanding
the number of occupied parking spaces by 10% to assure a
reasonable number of vacant parking spaces to permit
turnover of the parking supply.
(c) Identify how these parking spaces will be assured to future
occupants and customers of the proposed land uses.
(4) Shared parking shall be encouraged for all commercial parking lots
and particularly for those serving mixed-use commercial and
residential buildings. Where necessary, in parking lots which are
serving mixed-use commercial and residential buildings, the Joint
Land Use Board may, in its discretion, permit a limited amount of
parking to be reserved either for residential or specified
commercial uses only; or may restrict the hours that certain
spaces, the Board shall do so with the intent to limit such
restrictive use in order to advance the objective of encouraging
shared parking.
(5) An applicant seeking to satisfy its parking requirement using a
shared parking approach shall prepare a parking report that
documents how an adequate supply of parking spaces will be
provided to satisfy projected parking demand. The report shall be
prepared using procedures presented in the most recent version of
the report “Shared Parking,” published by the Urban Land
Institute. The report shall be prepared using the most current
shared parking methodology published by the Urban Land Institute
or the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
(6) A captured and shared parking study and report shall:
(a) Calculate the projected peak parking demand for each land use
that will be sharing the available parking supply using the
latest edition of the ITE informational report “Parking
Generation.”
(b) Calculate the extent to which parking demand will be
mitigated on the site as a result of trips captured from
adjoining land uses and therefore occurring without the use of
a vehicle.
(c) Calculate the peak parking accumulation for the development,
making use of shared parking procedures.
(d) Expand the peak parking accumulation by 10% to determine
the needed supply of parking spaces. This will assure an
adequate capacity of spaces for the turnover of vehicles.
§ 203-157 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-157
198:1151
(e) Determine the number of on-site parking spaces that will be
supplied.
(f) Determine the number of on-street parking spaces that are
available to the development in accordance with procedures
established by this section of Part 2.
(g) Determine whether any additional parking spaces will be
needed to serve the development and, if so, how they will be
supplied.
(h) Propose additional methods, if needed, to reduce parking
demand to mitigate an insufficient supply of parking. Other
methods could include the use of fringe parking lots, a satellite
parking lot with shuttle bus service, the provision of transit
subsites to employees in lieu of assurance of a parking space or
the establishment of a valet parking service making use of an
identified off-street parking lot.
(7) A sample shared parking calculation is presented on the chart
below:
Shared Parking Calculations
Monday - Friday Saturday and Sunday
Uses
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. to
12:00
Midnight
12:00
Midnight
to 8:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. to
12:00
Midnight
12:00
Midnight
to 8:00
a.m.
Residential 60% 100% 100% 80% 100% 100%
Office 100% 10% 5% 5% 5% 5%
Commercial 90% 80% 5% 100% 60% 5%
Hotel 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100%
Restaurant 70% 100% 10% 70% 100% 20%
Movie
theater
40% 80% 10% 80% 100% 10%
Entertainment40% 100% 10% 80% 100% 50%
Institutional
(nonreligious
institution)
100% 40% 5% 10% 10% 5%
Religious
institution
20% 40% 5% 100% 50% 5%
(a) The number of required parking spaces may be reduced on a
space-per-space basis if the applicant can demonstrate that
suitable alternative parking spaces are located within close
proximity to the subject property or site, through a shared
parking arrangement with an adjoining use. Those spaces, to
§ 203-157 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-157
198:1152
§ 203-158. Green design guidelines.
Green building guidelines ensure that development within a Center
preserves the unique character of the site. The Township encourages the
construction of sustainable or "green" buildings. The guidelines that follow
are intended to result in environmentally friendly and economically vibrant
projects.
be counted towards this shared parking arrangement, must be
demonstrated to be available during the hours of operation of
the affected uses, and access to those spaces must be provided
for vehicles and pedestrians in a safe and efficient manner,
including shared driveways and interconnected walkways
where possible.
(b) The Township Planner may conduct site visits to confirm that
the amount of parking provided is being utilized by the
development and, in fact, that the parking remains sufficient to
meet the needs of the development. If at any time it is
determined that this is no longer the case, the construction of
additional banked or reserved parking spaces may be required
by the Township Planner to meet the demand.
H. The piling of snow is discouraged in required parking spaces or where it
will damage landscaping or appear unsightly in the public view.
A. Green building certification. According to the U.S. Green Building
Council (USGBC), Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) evaluates environmental performance from a whole building
perspective over a building's lifecycle, providing a definitive standard
for what constitutes a "green building." It is based on accepted energy
and environmental principles and strikes a balance between known
established practices and emerging concepts. LEED is a performanceoriented
system in which scoring points are earned for satisfying
performance criteria in the categories of sustainable site development
for new construction: reducing the urban heat island, energy efficiency,
water savings, materials selection and indoor environmental quality.
Different levels of green building certification are awarded by the
USGBC based on the total points earned. As a means of evaluating and
measuring achievements in sustainable design, this Part 2 encourages
design, construction, and operation of developments that meet the
criteria for a LEED-certified rating.
B. Reducing the urban heat island. The ambient air in urban environments
is usually significantly warmer (sometimes more than 10° F. warmer)
than the air in less developed areas, an effect known as the “urban heat
island.” Dark, nonreflective surfaces absorb heat from the sun and then
radiate it back to the surrounding area. Such hotter temperatures lead
to an increased need for air conditioning, which costs money and
consumes significant amounts of energy. Current statistics show that
air conditioning consumes 1/6 of all electricity used in the United
§ 203-157 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-158
198:1153
States. The following guidelines help to mitigate the formation of an
urban heat island:
(1) Provide shade (within five years) for 30% of the site's non-roof
impervious surfaces.
(2) Use light-colored/high-albedo materials (reflectance of a least 0.3)
for at least 30% of the site's non-roof impervious surfaces.
(3) Use highly reflective and high-emissive roofing material (at least
0.9 when tested in accordance with ASTM 408) for at least 75% of
the roof surface. In addition to the operational benefits to the
building, this application helps to extend the life span of a roof.
(4) Use a "green" vegetative roof for at least 50% of the roof area. In
addition to its ability to reduce stormwater flows and provide
insulation, this application helps to extend the life span of the roof.
C. Energy efficiency.
(1) Buildings should be designed to exceed by 20% the state energy
code or the most recent edition of ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1
(without amendments), whichever is more stringent.
(2) Building owners are encouraged to provide a portion of the total
energy used by a building with on-site renewable sources, such as
photovoltaic systems.
D. Water savings. The following guidelines help decrease the amount of
municipal water needed for buildings:
(1) Decrease the quantity of potable water used for landscape
irrigation by 50%.
(2) Install ultra-low-flow fixtures in bathrooms and consider reusing
roof runoff volumes for flushing toilets in order to reduce the
amount of potable water required.
E. Materials selection and indoor environmental quality. The following
materials guidelines ensure quality environments that help decrease
the environmental impact of the materials needed for buildings:
(1) Divert as much construction waste away from disposal in landfills
as possible by recycling construction materials, including metal,
wood, concrete, brick, drywall and cardboard.
(2) Incorporate building materials that contain a high percentage of
recycled content.
(3) Incorporate building materials that have been manufactured and,
where possible, extracted regionally. Using regional products not
only reduces the amount of energy required for transportation, but
it also supports the local economy.
§ 203-158 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-158
198:1154
§ 203-159. Landscaping.
(4) Incorporate bio-based building materials where possible. This
includes materials incorporating certified wood, bamboo, wood,
cotton, cork, natural linoleum and agricultural fiber boards.
(5) Limit the amount of indoor air contaminants that are introduced
through building materials where possible. Materials, including
adhesives, sealants, paints and carpets, with lower VOC values
shall be preferred over standard versions. Materials made of wood
and agricultural fiber shall contain no added urea formaldehyde.
A. Landscaping shall be required in those areas that are designated as
setback areas, areas within parking lots, and areas not used for ingress,
egress, parking, or storage, and areas subject to grading and
recontouring.
B. Landscaping shall be integrated with other functional and ornamental
site design elements, where appropriate, such as recreational facilities,
ground paving materials, paths and walkways, fountains or other water
features, trellises, pergolas, gazebos, fences, walls, street furniture, art
and sculpture.
C. Plant suitability, maintenance and compatibility with site and
construction features are critical factors which shall be considered.
Plants shall be nonexotic, noninvasive and drought-tolerant and to the
best possible xeriscape.
D. Deciduous trees shall have at least a two-inch caliper at the time of
planting and shall be balled and burlapped. Evergreen trees shall be a
minimum of five feet to six feet high at the time of planting. Shrubs shall
be two feet in height at the time of planting. Only nursery-grown plant
materials shall be acceptable, and all trees, shrubs and ground covers
shall be planted according to accepted horticultural standards.
E. Within two years from the time of planting, all dead or dying plants,
whether installed new, transplanted, or designated as existing trees to
be retained on the plan, shall be replaced by the developer. The
developer shall be responsible for the required maintenance and
watering during the initial two years. Trees or other vegetation which
die after the second year shall be replaced and maintained by the
property owners or their agents.
F. Landscaping and site treatment plans shall consider seasonal flowers in
planters, planting beds, and hanging baskets.
G. Garbage collection, recycling and other utility areas shall be screened
around their perimeter by wood enclosures with a roof or by masonry
walls, with a minimum height of seven feet, and shall extend on three
sides of such an area, with a gate or door on the third side. Such a wall
shall be capped on the top. A landscaped planting strip a minimum of
three feet wide shall be located on three sides of such a facility. Planting
§ 203-158 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-159
198:1155
§ 203-160. Shade trees.
§ 203-161. Detention basins.
material shall be separated from the parking lots by Belgian block
curbing and shall have ramp access to such facility for vehicles and
carts. A mixture of hardy flowers and/or decorative evergreen and
deciduous trees may be planted.
H. To conserve energy, landscaping shall include the planting of evergreen
windbreaks to block northwest winds in the winter, thereby reducing
heating energy costs in the winter. Deciduous shade trees shall be
planted near the southern facades of buildings to block summer sun,
thereby reducing solar heat gain during the summer months.
I. All landscaping, including lawn areas, trees and shrubbery, shall be
maintained in excellent condition by the property owners or
development association by cutting, trimming, feeding, watering and
weeding. Plants shall be replaced as may be required. Landscaping
shall be installed upon the substantial completion of the building,
weather permitting, and an underground irrigation system may be
required by the Joint Land Use Board in some landscaped areas.
J. Existing vegetation to be preserved on each site must be designated on
each plan. Techniques to be employed to preserve such vegetated areas
shall be submitted to the Joint Land Use Board for review and approval.
Such techniques should address the following elements for the tree
structure so as to avoid damaging effects during and after construction
to these elements: crown; branch system; dripline; existing grade;
drainage and soil character; root system; and feeder root system.
A. Street trees, with a minimum caliper of two inches or 12 feet high at the
time of planting, shall be spaced per the requirements specified in the
Open Space Linkage Plan regarding streets, avenues, boulevards, and
highways, as well as medians of boulevards and divided roads. Bottom
branches shall be trimmed to a minimum of eight feet from the ground
to allow pedestrian passage in commercial areas. Street trees shall be
planted on both sides of the street and in the parkway between the curb
and the sidewalk, if such exists. Existing trees shall be used where
possible. In locations where healthy and mature shade trees exist, the
requirements for new trees maybe waived or modified.
B. The particular species of shade trees shall be determined upon specific
locational requirements, soil types, geology, climate and indigenous
species. The list of tree species permitted in the Center and Village is
presented in the Open Space Linkage Plan.
C. All intersections shall have street trees recognizing the requirements
for clear sight lines.
D. See the Public Spaces Plan for species options.
§ 203-159 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-161
198:1156
A. The specific locations of detention basins are indicated in the
Stormwater Management Plan. The system includes a host of
stormwater elements, including:
(1) Larger basins.
(2) Linear basins or bioswales and rain gardens.
(3) Small basins located in parks.
(4) Lakes or ponds.
B. Size and depth of the various elements shall be calculated based on
recognized engineering standards. Each parcel's stormwater drainage
must be collected on-site and released at an approved location or
locations. After being temporarily detained in basins, the stormwater
must be released at a controlled rate into the channel systems which
become part of the natural drainage watershed. In cases where water
drains onto the parcel from adjacent parcels, the drainage system must
provide for the inflow, unless special arrangements are made to the
contrary.
C. Stormwater detention areas may be necessary to ensure recharge of
sensitive groundwater systems. Determination of this need must be
made by the Township Engineer on the basis of topography, subsoil
characteristics, aquifer characteristics, and ground coverage.
D. Individual detention basins on each parcel shall not be required.
However, each site's individual drainage collection system must be
designed to collect and direct all surface runoff to an overall
comprehensive drainage system.
E. Detention basins must be sensitively designed to provide both practical
stormwater control and to develop into attractive and ecologically
stable landscapes. The following design guidelines shall be adhered to:
(1) Basin design should be site specific. Avoid using standard "cookiecutter"
shapes and angular designs; keep line and contours freeflowing
and natural in appearance.
(2) Vary basin shape and slopes to produce basins that blend into the
surrounding topography and existing natural conditions.
(3) Where appropriate, basin design should incorporate recreational
amenities such as ballfields and/or open play areas integrated with
plantings in a parklike and safe manner.
F. When required by the Joint Land Use Board and indicated on an
approved development plan, detention basins shall be landscaped. The
following planting design guidelines must be adhered to:
(1) Plant species should be tolerant of both wet and dry soil conditions.
§ 203-161 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-161
198:1157
§ 203-162. Lighting.
(2) Trees and shrubs should be planted in masses and groves to mimic
naturally occurring patterns.
(3) Plantings should be allowed to go on and over side slopes.
(4) Plantings should not be permitted on any dikes associated with the
detention basin unless approved by the Township Engineer.
(5) Provision for emergency access as well as general maintenance of
the basin should be reviewed and approved by the Township
Engineer. Plantings should be designed to disguise, yet not hinder,
vehicular access.
(6) Plantings should not be located too close to low-flow channels to
allow for maintenance of the basin.
(7) Vary plant spacing; allow for openings and gaps and more closely
planted areas.
(8) Tree plantings should be a mixture of species and sizes to be
reviewed and approved by the Joint Land Use Board.
(9) Shrubs should be planted in masses. Groups of single species
should be allowed to overlap a group of another species to form
large continuous beds.
(10) Grass mixtures should be specified that remain attractive while
being cut only three to four times per year, e.g., tall fescue
varieties. Avoid using high-maintenance fine lawn grasses. Where
appropriate, basins may be seeded with meadow grass or
wildflower mixtures that require only one mowing per year.
(11) Open areas, from the basin to existing woodlands, should be
planted with indigenous species of shade trees and naturalizing
meadow grass and/or wildflower mixture to help blend the two
areas together.
(12) Reforestation is a landscape treatment appropriate for detention
basins that are not highly visible or are located adjacent to areas of
native wood lots. Where reforestation is determined to be
appropriate by the Joint Land Use Board, tree sizes should vary.
Trees should be planted in groves.
A. Well-designed soft lighting of the building exterior shall be permitted,
provided that the lighting complements the architecture. The lighting
shall not draw inordinate attention to the building.
B. Parking lot, service area, and roadway lighting shall be provided by
freestanding fixtures designed to minimize glare to the street and
adjacent parcels. The type of fixture and color of lamping will be
§ 203-161 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-162
198:1158
§ 203-163. Restaurants and cafes.
evaluated for their compatibility with existing streetlighting, the
architecture and natural site characteristics.
C. Freestanding lights shall be located and protected to avoid being easily
damaged by vehicles or vandalized. The height of such lights shall in no
case be greater than 15 feet, except for big box, large-format retail and
regional office/hotel commercial type uses, wherein the height of such
lights within the parking lots shall in no case be greater than 40 feet
and within rear areas of the building, exclusive of pad sites and service
areas, shall be no greater than 30 feet. All lighting shall be serviced
underground. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
D. Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings and visible to the public
are prohibited. Where lights along property lines will be visible from
adjacent properties or are adjacent to residential districts or uses, the
lights shall be appropriately shielded and shall have a maximum height
of 30 feet. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
E. The lighting for pedestrian walkways may include either cut-off or
exposed sources, but the height and intensity of the light must be
subdued. All lighting designs and installation are subject to Joint Land
Use Board review and approval.
F. All proposed lighting plans shall be accompanied by a point-by-point
plan indicating numerical illumination levels. The plan shall indicate
the average, minimum and maximum illumination levels and minimumto-
maximum illumination ratio for maintained footcandles. [Amended
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
G. See the Public Spaces Plan for fixture options.
H. The use of string lighting in trees, up-lighting of trees or other special
effect lighting and after-hours lighting is permitted.
A. Restaurants shall be permitted to operate outdoor cafes on sidewalks,
including areas within the public right-of-way and in courtyards,
provided that pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances shall
not be impaired.
B. The design of sidewalk cafes shall be subject to approval by the Joint
Land Use Board. The following standards and guidelines are applicable
to sidewalk cafes:
(1) Allow for pedestrian circulation; a minimum of five feet of sidewalk
along the curb leading to the entrance of the establishment shall be
maintained free of tables and other encumbrances.
(2) Planters, posts with ropes, wrought iron railings, or other
removable enclosures are encouraged and shall be used as away of
defining the area occupied by the cafe.
§ 203-162 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-163
198:1159
§ 203-164. Utilities.
All utilities and related appurtenances on the site shall be underground or
in the main building or structure.
§ 203-165. Street and park furniture, plazas and community spaces.
(3) Extended awnings, canopies, or large umbrellas shall be permitted
and located to provide shade. Colors shall complement building
colors.
(4) Outdoor cafes shall be required to provide additional outdoor trash
receptacles.
(5) Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles and other elements of
street furniture shall be compatible with the architectural
character of the building where the establishment is located.
(6) Outdoor cafes shall not be entitled to additional signage, over and
beyond what is permitted for this use.
(7) The operators of outdoor cafes shall be responsible for maintaining
a clean, litter-free and well-kept appearance within and
immediately adjacent to the area of their activities.
A. Street furniture includes benches, waste containers, planters, phone
booths, bus shelters, bicycle racks, water fountains, potted plants and
planters, window boxes and bollards. The Public Spaces Plan provides
examples of desired vocabulary. Street furniture must be compatible
with the architecture of surrounding buildings, the character of the
area and other elements of the streetscape. Consistency in the selection
and location of the various elements of street furniture is critical for
maximum effect and functional usage.
B. The design of a building's related entrance areas, plazas or terraces
may vary, based on the intentions and needs of individual building
owners. At a minimum, however, building entrances shall be
highlighted with plant materials and paved surfaces.
C. In time, the need for varied forms of street furniture beyond signage
may arise. For example, introduction of a public or private transit
system may necessitate bus shelters. As such needs become formalized,
the developer must prepare a basic design vocabulary to cover such
individual needs consistent with the overall design program. Every
development shall include some or all of these community spaces: patio/
seating areas, pedestrian plazas with benches, window shopping
walkways, outdoor playground areas, kiosk areas, a water feature,
clock tower or other such deliberately shaped area and/or a focal
feature or amenity that, in the judgment of the Joint Land Use Board,
adequately enhances such community and public spaces. Any such
areas shall have direct access to a sidewalk network, and such features
§ 203-163 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-165
198:1160
§ 203-166. Screening of loading and service areas.
All loading docks and service areas must be sufficient to serve the business
being conducted on the parcel without using adjacent streets. No loading
and service areas shall be visible from any neighboring property or adjacent
street. Provision must be made for handling all freight on those sides of the
buildings which do not face a street. The recommended method of screening
should consist of walls and gates compatible in color and texture with the
building material, buffered by deciduous and evergreen shrubs and trees, so
as not to be visible from neighboring properties and streets. The joint use of
truck loading and maneuvering areas between on-site and adjacent off-site
complementary uses shall be maximized. Delivery and loading operations
shall not disturb adjoining neighborhoods or other uses.
§ 203-167. Solid waste and litter management.
shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the principal
materials of the building and landscape.
A. All outdoor containers shall be visually screened within a durable,
noncombustible enclosure, so as not to be visible from adjacent lots or
sites, neighboring properties or streets. No collection areas shall be
permitted between a street and the front of a building. Appropriate
landscaping shall be installed to form a year-round effective visual
screen at time of planting.
B. Collection areas shall be designed to contain all material generated onsite
and deposited between collections. Deposited material shall not be
visible from outside the enclosure.
C. Collection enclosures shall be designed of durable materials with
finishes and colors which are unified and harmonious with the overall
architectural theme.
D. Collection areas shall be so located upon the lot as to provide clear and
convenient access to collection vehicles and thereby minimize wear and
tear on on-site and off-site developments. Refuse collection and
recycling areas shall not be located within parking areas or required
landscaped buffers.
E. Collection areas shall be designed and located upon the lot so as to be
convenient for the deposition of material generated on-site.
F. An option to reduce the visual impact of the collection containers is to
store and compact material inside the building at the service area, thus
eliminating the need to screen containers.
G. Delivery, loading, trash removal or compaction, or other such
operations may be limited by the Joint Land Use Board between certain
hours where noise impacts at the lot line of any adjoining residential
property or district or otherwise exceeds Township and state
requirements. Also, an applicant shall provide an effective litter
§ 203-165 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-167
198:1161
§ 203-168. Storage.
§ 203-169. Fences and walls.
Fences are not desirable and shall only be approved for limited situations.
Chain-link and/or periphery fencing shall not be permitted. Decorative
fences or walls may be used to screen service and loading areas, private
patios or courts. Fences may be used to enclose playgrounds, recreational
areas, or to secure sensitive areas to uses, such as vehicle storage areas.
Fences shall not be located where they impede pedestrian or bicycle
circulation through or between site areas. If approved, all fences and walls
shall be designed as integrated parts of the overall architectural and site
design. All materials shall be durable and finished in textures and colors
complementary to the overall architectural design. No hedge, wall or fence
of any type shall be erected or maintained if it is deemed a safety hazard in
obstructing the view of motorists.
§ 203-170. Maintenance of improvements.
All site improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, drives, parking
lots, drainage areas, culverts, curbing, buildings, and lighting, must be
maintained in good condition and repair by either the Township, owner or
other designated entity.
§ 203-171. Sidewalks and/or pathways.
management plan, subject to Joint Land Use Board approval. Such
management plan shall be submitted with an application for final site
plan approval.
A. No open storage shall be permitted on any lot. No articles,
merchandise, products, goods, materials, incinerator, storage tanks, or
like equipment shall be kept in the open or exposed to public view, and
no accessory use should be constructed to permit open storage of
materials or goods on a lot. These requirements are not meant to
prohibit the outdoor sale of merchandise if designed appropriately in
the form of a garden center.
B. Nonenclosed areas for the storage and sale of seasonal inventory shall
be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or fences.
Materials, colors, and design of screening walls and/or fences and the
cover shall conform to those used as predominant materials and colors
on the building. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall
conform to the materials used as predominant materials and colors on
the building.
A. Sidewalks and/or pathways shall be installed by the developer within
perimeter landscape areas and along streets.
B. Permitted surface materials for sidewalks shall be floated aggregate
concrete, scored concrete or approved pavers.
§ 203-167 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-171
198:1162
§ 203-172. Electrical and mechanical equipment.
All exterior electrical and mechanical equipment at ground level, such as
transformers, shall be screened and located at the side or rear of the
building and away from entrances. Recommended screening methods
include walls compatible with the building material, and a plant material
buffer utilizing a layered installation of shrubs, flowering trees, and ground
cover. Utility accessories such as boxes, meters and fire hydrants shall be
coordinated with the overall streetscape.
§ 203-173. Open space.
Projects in RC-1, RC-2, RC-3, RC-4 and AR-1 Districts shall provide an
adequate amount of open space, exclusive of detention and retention basins,
and developed for on-site conservation and recreation facilities to service
the needs of all employees and their visitors. The applicant shall submit
an open space plan showing the proposed land area and general location
of parks and any other land area to be set aside for conservation and
recreational purposes and a general description of improvements to be
C. Permitted surface materials for pedestrian multipurpose paths shall be
bituminous.
D. On-site pedestrian circulation systems shall be provided to meet the
circulation needs of on-site users. Such systems shall provide safe, allweather-
efficient, and aesthetically pleasing means of on-site
movement and shall be an integrated part of the overall architectural
and site design concept. At a minimum, sidewalks and/or pathways
shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited
to, transit stops, street crossings, building and entry points, and shall
feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches,
flower beds, ground covers, or other such materials.
E. Sidewalks shall be provided along the full length of the building along
any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade
abutting public parking areas. Pedestrian sidewalks shall provide
weather protection features such as awnings or arcades when located
close to customer entrances.
F. Where appropriate, connections shall be made between on-site and
perimeter sidewalk and/or pathway circulation systems.
G. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be clearly delineated by a material different
from the surrounding road surface through the use of durable, lowmaintenance
surface materials such as pavers or scored concrete to
enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of
the sidewalk and/or pathway.
H. Permitted surface materials for crosswalks shall be pavers or stamped
asphalt.
§ 203-171 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-173
198:1163
made thereon, including a plan for the operation and maintenance of parks
and recreational facilities.
§ 203-174. Wildlife habitat.
The utilization of landscape planting to promote the creation and/or
preservation of wildlife habitat must take form at two levels. The first effort
is required in the areas referred to as "developed common open space."
This includes parks, playgrounds, backyards, walkways, etc. in which plant
material selected to satisfy the needs of the human population can also have
food and shelter value for bird and small game species. The second effort
lies in the protection of the habitat value of the undeveloped open space and
augmenting such habitat with plant material that further promotes food and
shelter values.
§ 203-175. Public safety.
§ 203-176. General residential standards.
A. The developer and/or owners' association shall employ private security
services. A planned commercial development shall provide foot patrols
and vehicle patrols during its hours of operation if determined to be
necessary.
B. All buildings shall be fully sprinklered. Fire lanes and signage shall be
provided as well as access to both the front and rear of buildings
designed to meet the Township's fire code.
C. Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes (moving violations) shall
apply so that enforcement of such motor vehicle laws will be available
to the Township Police Department.
A. Density variation. Residential net density shall generally decrease from
the community plaza, square and/or commercial core towards the
periphery of the Center. A mix of dwelling unit types shall be distributed
throughout the Center. Smaller lots and higher net density dwellings
are generally located closer to the public spaces and main street
commercial core areas.
B. Building variation. Buildings containing dwelling units shall be
designed in conformance with the Regulating Plan. Building designs
shall vary in terms of footprint, architectural elevations, window
placement, type of roof, height, front entrance, and porch locations.
Colors, materials, and architectural details should be limited in number,
compatibility, and repetition throughout a neighborhood.
C. Front yards. All dwelling units, excluding accessory dwellings and
apartments, shall have a clearly defined front yard using landscaping,
hedging, fencing, or a brick or stone wall, none of which shall exceed
3 1/2 feet in height. Accessory dwellings shall only be permitted on
single-family detached lots with the maximum lot size.
§ 203-173 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-176
198:1164
§ 203-177. Commercial and mixed-use standards.
D. Patios/Terraces, decks and rear yards. All dwelling units, except
apartments located on upper floors, shall have a private yard or patio
designed in accordance with the standards of this Part 2 and having a
minimum of 400 square feet in area. Rear steps and landings are
permitted, but may not encroach into the minimum required yard or
patio area by more than 20 square feet. Decks in rear yard areas are
permitted, provided they are constructed no more than 21 inches above
grade. In no case shall rear steps and landings in excess of 21 inches
high be closer than 15 feet to side and rear property lines. Property
owners may not alter existing property grade without Township
approval. The yard or patio shall be within an area enclosed by a
masonry wall, wooden fence, trellis or lattice, evergreen hedge, vines,
or some combination thereof. Rear walls, fences, or trellises may not be
closer than seven feet to the alley right-of-way. In case of walls, fences
or trellises, the height of such yard or patio enclosure shall be five feet
or seven feet high. Portions of fencing below five feet shall be of solid
material and above five feet in height must be made of a trellis or other
semi-transparent material and shall be suitable to provide privacy and
screen views of neighboring uses. Each upper-floor apartment dwelling
should be provided with a terrace consisting of a minimum of 64 square
feet, recessed inside the exterior building wall of the dwelling, or a
balcony of 72 square feet projecting on the outside of the building wall.
If a terrace or balcony is not provided for upper-floor apartments, each
dwelling shall be provided with access to a conveniently located
common space, park, or green with a minimum size equal to or greater
than the total of all combined balconies which should have been
provided to serve those residential units which do not have the same.
An additional 100 square feet of area per unit shall be included in the
common open space. Such additional space shall be designed to
accommodate hard surfaces, with places for grills, movable chairs,
tables and the like.
E. Roofline orientation. Roofline orientation shall vary to the highest
extent possible.
F. Garden sheds. Garden sheds shall not exceed 50 square feet and six
feet in height for homes with two-car garages and shall not exceed 30
square feet and six feet in height for homes with one-car garages. Sheds
shall be permitted in the rear yards and shall be architecturally
attached to the garage structure. Garden sheds shall be of wood or
cement board siding and roof materials similar to those of the main
house. Sheds shall not encroach in the required minimum yard area.
A. Building color and texture.
(1) Simple and uniform texture patterns are encouraged to create
shadow patterns which will reduce the high visibility of the
building.
§ 203-176 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-177
198:1165
(2) Variations in color shall be kept to a minimum.
(3) Colors shall be subdued in tone.
(4) Accent colors may be used to express corporate identity.
B. Parking and circulation.
(1) Each building site must include adequate off-street automobile
parking and loading facilities, and no parking or loading facilities
shall be permitted on any street, entrance drive, or any place other
than in an approved space. Off-street parking and loading design
shall conform to those identified in the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance138 although actual design may be
based on site experiences at other locations. It may not be
necessary to pave the entire parking area established by these
ratios where the minimum ordinance requirements can be
demonstrated.
(2) The lighting for pedestrian walkways may include either cut-off or
exposed sources, but the height and intensity of the light must be
subdued. All lighting designs and installation are subject to Joint
Land Use Board review and approval.
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision of Land.
§ 203-177 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-177
198:1166
ARTICLE XXIII
Mixed Use (MU)
[Added 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 203-178. Mixed use.
A. Goal: to provide locations for commercial uses that include commercial
and office locations as well as residential opportunities in single- or
multi-use buildings and that may or may not be on individual lots.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Residential flats or lofts above the ground floor.
(2) Civic green, square.
(3) Daycare establishments for children and adults.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities, including but not limited to tot lots,
public playgrounds, conservation areas, tennis, basketball, football,
soccer, hockey and ice skating.
(5) Civic buildings, including but not limited to post office, community
center, fire emergency and police station facilities.
(6) Public libraries and museums.
(7) Anchor or magnet stores, shopping centers, supermarkets,
wholesale clubs, lumber, hardware and garden centers.
(8) Amusement, recreation and leisure uses not otherwise prohibited.
(9) Art gallery.
(10) Bakeries, confectioners.
(11) Breweries, wineries, and distilleries.
(12) Business and household service uses including repair shops for
business equipment, appliances and the shops of tradesmen such
as plumbers and electricians.
(13) Delicatessen/carryout.
(14) Dinner theaters.
(15) Farm and open-air markets.
(16) Greenhouses, including retail sales.
(17) Florists.
(18) Health and fitness centers; dance and exercise studios.
(19) Medical and dental clinics.
§ 203-178 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-178
198:1167
(20) Offices for administrative, executive, professional, business sales,
government offices and similar uses, the normal attributes of which
do not involve the storage, exchange or delivery of merchandise to
the general public.
(21)Office of banks and loan associations not having drive-through
facilities for the transaction of business from motor vehicles.
(22) Personal service businesses including hair salons, tanning salons,
nail salons, dry cleaning outlets, dressmaking or tailor shops, shoe
repair shops and related uses except for tattoo studios and body
piercing establishments.
(23) Public transportation stations and shelters.
(24) Recreational and sport facility, indoor, commercial.
(25) Rental halls for meetings and social occasions.
(26) Restaurant, full service or fast food freestanding or in multi-tenant
building, no drive-through.
(27) Brewpubs.
(28) Retail sales and services, including newspapers, gifts, novelties,
tobacco products, drugs, food, clothing, spirits, confections, florist
items, books and specialty merchandise, automotive supplies and
services (exclusive of service stations and repair garages),
including convenience stores.
(29) Sidewalk cafes.
(30) Taverns and nightclubs serving legal beverages.
(31) Theaters for motion pictures and live performances.
(32) Public and commercial garages.
(33) Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer, electricity and
gas.
(34)Wireless telecommunications towers and antenna located entirely
within an existing building or on the roof or side of a building or
attached to an existing structure.
(35) Any combination of the above.
C. Customary accessory uses incidental to the above permitted principal
uses in the MU Zone, including:
(1) Flag poles; clock towers.
(2) Home occupations and home professional offices.
(3) Kiosks and street vending carts.
§ 203-178 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-178
198:1168
(4) Parking structures.
(5) Temporary building or yards for construction materials or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
immediate area.
(6) Temporary construction trailers.
(7) Temporary office or model home both incidental and necessary for
the sale or rental of real property in the immediate area.
(8) Surface parking lots.
(9) Swimming pools on individual lots.
(10)Walls and fences.
(11) Outdoor/sidewalk sales and display in accordance with the
conditions of this chapter.
(12) Signage.
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the large-format retail unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Attractive one-story retail main streets work well when the
architecture is accentuated vertically to provide a sense of
enclosure on the street.
(b) Large glass storefronts provide an inviting image to shoppers.
(c) Arcades provide user comfort and help to modulate the
architectural rhythm, relating it to the human scale.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Second-story office use is encouraged. It provides on-site users
of the first floor retail.
§ 203-178 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-178
198:1169
(b) Most national chains now have architecture that will fit into a
main street setting.
(c) Solar screens and awnings provide shade to lower floors.
(d) Creative use of projecting bays, fenestration and materials
provides architectural interest to the street and may serve as a
reference to a special place in the community.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Sidewalks should be designed with a generous width to
encourage walking and outdoor dining.
(b) Signage should be artfully incorporated into the building
facade; less is sometimes more.
(c) Appropriate levels of lighting are important to provide user
comfort in evening hours; decorative lighting fixtures add to
the design of the environment.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Public or semipublic plazas or greens are important to provide
context to the land plan; provide gathering places on a daily
basis; and to provide a place for special events.
§ 203-178 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-178
198:1170
(b) The use of landscaping, walkways, fountains and architectural
follies helps to provide context to public and semipublic open
space.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zone acreage: 158.97 acres.
(2) Base density: No residential units in the "triangle" between Kings
Highway, Pancoast Road, and US Route 322. Residential units
permitted with participation in the TDR program. [Amended
10-1-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
(3) Ground floor commercial retail or office use required north of US
Route 322 between Kings Highway and Pancoast Road. Groundfloor
commercial retail or office use optional north of Pancoast
Road and west of Kings Highway. Residential density for north of
Pancoast Road and west of Kings Highway shall be in accordance
with RR-BD when ground-floor commercial retail or office use is not
proposed.
(4) The purpose of the zone is to provide the opportunity for a
regionally based, walkable commercial main street that is
attractive to national chain stores, small boutiques and offices as
well as residential units above.
(5) Buildings should be built to the sidewalk edge.
(6) Buildings shall be built out to perimeter county streets to establish
a strong architecture street edge.
(7) Maximum building height: 60 feet and five stories.
(8) On-street parking is permitted on interior roads.
F. The block.
(1) Zoning and design.
§ 203-178 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-178
198:1171
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
[4] Plazas.
[5] Mid-block pedestrian connections to respond to the street
grid.
[6] Bus shelters.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 300 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,400 feet 1,800 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 3
ROW width 20 feet
Path width 10 feet
Decorative street
lighting (distance on
center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW (where
appropriate)
22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking provided through alley-loaded driveways
and garages.
(b) On-street parking provided through parallel stalls.
§ 203-178 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-178
198:1172
(c) Porous pavement is encouraged.
(d) Belgian block curbing or concrete curbing is permitted.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Street trees shall be spaced a minimum of 36 feet and a
maximum of 50 feet on center.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(e) Tree grates.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for parking
areas.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
G. The site.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Bike racks.
[2] Water features/fountains.
[3] Decorative pedestrian lighting.
[4] Litter containers.
[5] Architectural lighting.
[6] Benches.
[7] Clock towers.
[8] Kiosks.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 20,000 square feet —
Lot width 100 feet —
Corner lot 100 feet —
§ 203-178 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-178
198:1173
Minimum Maximum
Lot depth 150 feet —
Impervious coverage — 90%
Front yard setback 10 feet 30 feet
Side yard setback — 10 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
Building separation 20 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Parking spaces per unit 0.8 1.3
Driveway length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet 12 feet
(a) Nonresidential parking to be provided at a ratio of four spaces
per 1,000 square feet.
(b) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(c) Shared parking permitted.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(b) Foundation plantings.
(c) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(d) Parking planting.
(e) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(f) Planters.
(g) Potted plants.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) (Reserved)
(b) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for parking
areas.
(c) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(d) Trees to modulate microclimate.
§ 203-178 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-178
198:1174
(e) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(f) Xeriscape.
(g) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(h) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
H. The public realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Permitted design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnade.
[10] Porte cocheres.
[11] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[12] Porches.
[13] Porticos.
§ 203-178 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-178
198:1175
[14] Arcades.
[15] Terraces.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height** 45 feet 60 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
Window-to-eave
offset
6 inches
Upper front facade
fenestration
30% —
Lower front facade
fenestration
70%
Side and rear
facade fenestration
25% —
Building face or
roof offset
5 feet —
NOTES:
** For buildings with facades exceeding 100 feet, a
maximum average building height of 55 feet shall be
permitted measured along the affected facade.
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Rear-loaded garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(c) Carports.
(d) Structured parking.
(3) Edge and buffer requirements.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum five
feet.
(b) Pools and spas are not permitted.
(c) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens are permitted.
(c) Solar panels are permitted.
§ 203-178 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-178
198:1176
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
I. The private realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be flat, mansard or combinations thereof.
[4] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
15 feet 20 feet
Roof pitch
Front and side
encroachments
— 9/12
Terrace 8 feet
Patio 8 feet 10 feet
Bay window — 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette — 8 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
Stoop 8 feet
§ 203-178 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-178
198:1177
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet
Garage setback 20 feet
(a) Structured parking shall have a maximum height of two levels.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes are permitted.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens are permitted.
(d) Green roofs are permitted.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood, masonry, metal (excluding woven wire) or similar
material.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
J. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
Front doors are required on streets with public easements.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(d) Buildings should be built to the sidewalk, public square or
plaza edge.
(2) Fenestration.
§ 203-178 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-178
198:1178
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on all facades, upper floors:
30%.
(c) Minimum area of window opening on all facades, first floor:
70%.
(d) Vertically line up windows.
(e) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(f) Retail windows must remain unobstructed on interior spaces.
(3) Vertical breaks:
(a) Required every 30 feet minimum through use of offsets,
fenestration, bay windows, balconies, balconettes or material
change.
(b) Maximum length of store front: 60 feet.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(b) May use banding, setbacks or material change.
(c) First floor retail shall have a minimum clear height of 16 feet.
(5) Roofline.
(a) Flat and mansard are permitted.
(b) Maximum length of roofline: 60 feet.
(c) Minimum offset: five feet.
(6) Building materials.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(7) Roof materials (pitched roofs).
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
§ 203-178 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-178
198:1179
(d) Slate.
(e) Metal panels (accent).
(8) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Store fronts encouraged to have awnings.
(b) Store fronts must provide sign plate area.
(c) Pop-out cafe windows are permitted.
(d) Store fronts encouraged to be open and inviting to public.
(e) Balconies, balconettes, terraces and/or patios are required at
one per dwelling unit.
(f) Bay windows encouraged.
(9) Accessory structures.
(a) Structured parking is permitted.
(b) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(c) Carports are permitted.
(10) Public space design guidelines.
(a) Fronts of buildings shall be constructed to the public sidewalk.
(b) Street furniture and amenities encouraged.
(c) Entry plazas and courts shall be designed to welcome public
use.
(d) Large storefront windows required on first floor. Windows may
be framed in wood.
(e) First floor retail.
(f) Screening of loading, service, and trash storage areas is
required.
(11) Semipublic space design guidelines.
(a) All semipublic space (i.e., yards, courts, plazas) must be fully
appointed with landscaping of trees, shrubs and groundcover
or a combination of decorative paving and landscaping. Where
appropriate, seating and lighting shall be provided.
(b) Semipublic space must be separated from public space by a
low garden wall, decorative fence (maximum six feet high),
hedge material or a combination of the three.
§ 203-178 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-178
198:1180
(12) Private space design guidelines.
(a) Storage space is required for all uses.
(b) Residential outdoor space is required.
K. Edges, buffers and transitions notes.
(1) Parking lots adjacent to street edges must be screened with 4 1/
2-foot-high hedge or masonry wall.
(2) Parking adjacent to residential use must be screened with
minimum six-foot-high masonry wall or fence and must include
three-foot-wide vegetated buffer, a minimum of six feet high at time
of planting.
(3) Lighting must be screened from residential uses.
L. Amenity design guidelines.
(1) Must provide at least one direct pedestrian connection between the
parking and main street commercial per 150 feet of commercial
frontage.
(2) Connection must be a minimum of ten-foot-wide path with five-footwide
landscaped edges.
(3) Must provide textured pedestrian crosswalks internal to parking
lots.
M. Parking amenities/access design guidelines.
(1) Porous pavement and bioswales permitted.
(2) Vehicle access from alley or secondary streets only.
(3) Maximum one vehicle access point per secondary street frontage.
(4) Lighting must be shielded from residential uses.
(5) Must provide one pedestrian connection between parking and
commercial main street every 200 feet minimum.
§ 203-178 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-178
198:1181

ARTICLE XXIV
Residential Receiving — Base Density (RR-BD)
[Added 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 203-179. Residential Receiving — Base Density (RR-BD).
A. Goal: to provide a mixture of unit types to address the needs and
desires of those at various stages of life in a zone eligible for TDR
receiving credits.
B. Permitted uses:
(1) Residential uses.
(a) Single-family detached.
(b) Twin.
(c) Townhouses and court townhouses.
(d) Multifamily.
(2) Civic green, square.
(3) Daycare establishments for children and adults.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities, including but not limited to tot lots,
public playgrounds, conservation areas, tennis, basketball, football,
soccer, hockey and ice skating.
(5) Public transportation stations and shelters.
(6) Congregate care.
(7) Nursing homes.
(8) Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer, electricity and
gas.
(9) Wireless telecommunications towers and antenna located entirely
within an existing building or on the roof or side of a building or
attached to an existing structure.
(10) Independent living units for occupancy by residents of age 55 or
over, including community centers and community gardens.
C. Accessory uses: customary accessory uses incidental to the above
permitted principal uses.
(1) Flag poles.
(2) Home occupations and home professional offices.
§ 203-179 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-179
198:1183
§ 203-180. Single-family detached units with or without alley.
(3) Temporary building or yards for construction materials or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
immediate area.
(4) Temporary construction trailers.
(5) Temporary office or model home both incidental and necessary for
the sale or rental of real property in the immediate area.
(6) Tool sheds and noncommercial greenhouses.
(7) Surface parking lots.
(8) Swimming pools on individual lots.
(9) Walls and fences.
(10) Clubhouses and associated recreational facilities including, but not
limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts, patios, etc.
(11) Decks and patios.
D. Size and scope.
(1) Minimum density: 3.5 d.u./ac. with TDR credits. [Amended
10-1-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
(2) Maximum density: 7.5 d.u./ac. with TDR credits.
(3) Minimum number of affordable units: 104. [Amended 10-1-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-15]
(4) A variety of unit sizes must be offered.
(5) No front yard parking.
(6) All vehicle access via alleys.
(7) On-street parking.
E. Unit mix.
(1) Single-family 20% minimum to 40% maximum.
(2) Twin 10% minimum to 20% max.
(3) Townhouse 25% minimum to 45% maximum.
(4) Multifamily 20% minimum to 35% maximum.
A. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the single-family detached unit:
(1) Photo 1.
§ 203-179 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-180
198:1184
(a) Bays, vertical elements, window dimensions and window
locations work together to break down the scale of an
otherwise large house.
(b) Special consideration to front door design.
(c) Sensitive use of varied materials reduces monotony and helps
provide a human scale.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Porches and terraces provide necessary "eyes" on the street
and private outdoor space-appropriate public/private
transition.
(b) Durable materials stand the test of time.
(c) Single-family still functions very well with small front yard
setbacks.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Where outlined in the zoning plan, driveway access from street
is permitted.
(b) Parking and garage locations limited to backyards only.
(c) Porous pavement provides stormwater benefit.
§ 203-180 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-180
198:1185
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Variety of architecture along street frontage provides personal
identity and makes the journey for pedestrians more enjoyable.
(b) Small gable ends facing the street help to reduce the scale of
the house mass.
(c) Horizontal banding helps reduce the perception of the vertical
massing of the house.
B. The block.
§ 203-180 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-180
198:1186
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,150 feet 1,800 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15 feet 20 feet
Path width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative
streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
§ 203-180 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-180
198:1187
Minimum Maximum
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking provided through driveways to street.
(b) On-street parking provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edges and buffers.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for onstreet
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
C. The site.
§ 203-180 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-180
198:1188
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Vertical breaks are encouraged.
[2] Material change, window lines and pediments are required
as horizontal breaks.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 7,000 square feet 12,000 square feet
Lot width 50 feet 110 feet
Corner lot 50 feet 110 feet
Lot depth 75 feet 125 feet
Building coverage — 50%
Impervious coverage — 60%
Front yard setback 10 feet 30 feet
Side yard setback 5 feet 10 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
Accessory structure
setbacks
Rear and side
yards
2 feet 5 feet
Principal building 10 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
§ 203-180 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-180
198:1189
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 1.5 2.5
Driveway length 40 feet —
Driveway width 8 feet 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(b) Garages in rear yard only.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Front yard fence height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(c) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of five feet.
(d) Foundation plantings.
(e) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(f) Parking planting.
(g) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(h) Pergolas.
(i) Trellises.
(j) Arbors.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Long-life trees encouraged to maximize green infrastructure
funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species encouraged to minimize water
needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
D. (Reserved)
E. The public realm.
§ 203-180 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-180
198:1190
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnades.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Front porches.
[12] Porticos.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
First floor elevation 3 feet 8 feet
Eave height 18 feet 28 feet
Window-to-eave
offset
6 inches —
§ 203-180 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-180
198:1191
Minimum Maximum
Front facade
fenestration
30% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
20% —
Building face or
roof offset
16 inches —
Window trim offset 4 inches —
(2) Parking.
(a) Rear yard garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Pool and deck setback from side and rear property lines:
minimum of 10 feet.
(b) In-ground pools are permitted.
(c) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
F. The private realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, wood and simulated clapboard or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles,
tiles or similar material.
§ 203-180 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-180
198:1192
[3] Roof types shall be gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped, salt
box or combinations thereof.
[4] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
[5] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[6] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Front porch — 8 feet
Bay window — 4 feet
Awning — 4 feet
Solar screen — 4 feet
Balcony/balconette — 4 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(3) Edge and buffer recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
§ 203-180 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-180
198:1193
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
G. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade. A
front door required on a public street.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically align windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of window opening on wide and rear facades:
20%.
(3) Vertical breaks:
(a) Vertical breaks are required.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Use of material change, window lines and pediments is
required.
(5) Roofline.
(a) Gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are permitted.
(b) Maximum length of roofline: 40 feet.
(6) Building materials permitted.
(a) Wood and simulated clapboard.
(b) Brick.
§ 203-180 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-180
198:1194
(c) Stone.
(d) Stucco.
(e) Synthetic trim boards.
(7) Roof materials permitted.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(8) Accessory structures.
(a) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(b) Sheds are permitted, with a maximum floor area of 120 square
feet and height of eight feet tall.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
(9) The public realm.
(a) Front of building set back from sidewalk.
(b) Front doors on public street.
(10) The semipublic realm.
(a) All yards must be fully appointed with landscaping of trees,
shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(b) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(c) Front porches and walks are encouraged as public space
transition.
(11) The private realm.
(a) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(b) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(12) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(b) Maximum edge height for front yard: three feet.
(c) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(d) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
§ 203-180 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-180
198:1195
§ 203-181. Twin units, with or without alley.
(13) Amenity design guidelines.
(a) Custom mailboxes.
(b) Foundation plantings required.
(c) On-lot sidewalks.
(14) Parking amenities/access notes.
(a) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(b) No parking in front yard.
A. (Reserved)
B. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the twin unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Front porches provide entry features and a sitting area to
converse and interact with passers-by.
(b) Roof offsets combined with porches help to provide
appropriate scale and rhythm.
(c) Small front yards provide adequate privacy.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
rules of rhythm, scale and material choice are respected.
(b) Generous window dimensions animate the facade and help
provide appropriate vertical and horizontal scale and rhythm.
(c) Two-foot vertical offsets conform to rules of vertical offsets.
§ 203-180 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-181
198:1196
(d) Garden wall and front garden serve as public/private
transition.
(e) Material change provides vertical breaks.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) When appropriately scaled, twins can serve as transition units
between townhouses and single-family detached units.
(b) Twins need not be identical.
(c) First-and second-floor porches and terraces provide necessary
"eyes" on the street and private outdoor space.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Simple architecture following basic rules can be attractive.
(b) Wraparound porch can add unique architectural element.
(c) Low front yard fence provides appropriate public/private
transition.
(d) Water table element provides horizontal offset.
C. The block.
§ 203-181 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-181
198:1197
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Specifications; zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,160 feet 1,850 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 6 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
ROW width 15 feet 20 feet
Path width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative
streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
§ 203-181 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-181
198:1198
Minimum Maximum
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking provided through alley-loaded driveways
and garages.
(b) On-street parking provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens encouraged for on-street
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees encouraged to lower summer cooling
load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
D. The site.
§ 203-181 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-181
198:1199
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Required break at party wall with adjacent twin.
[2] Vertical blocks with window treatment encouraged
including bays, projections, and recesses.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 3,000 square feet 6,250 square feet
Lot width 40 feet —
Corner lot 40 feet —
Lot depth 75 feet 125 feet
Building coverage — 60%
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback 15 feet 30 feet
Side yard setback 10 feet 15 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
Accessory structure
setbacks
Rear and side
yards
2 feet 5 feet
Principal building 10 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
§ 203-181 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-181
198:1200
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 1.5 2.5
Driveway length 20 feet —
Driveway width 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks, or porous pavement.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Front yard fence height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(c) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(d) Foundation plantings.
(e) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(f) Parking planting.
(g) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(h) Pergolas.
(i) Trellises.
(j) Arbors.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Long-life trees encouraged to maximize green infrastructure
funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species encouraged to minimize water
needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material encouraged to aid in reducing stormwater
runoff.
E. The public realm.
§ 203-181 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-181
198:1201
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnade.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Front porches.
[12] Usable open or covered stoops.
[13] Porticos.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
First floor elevation 2 feet 5 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
§ 203-181 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-181
198:1202
Minimum Maximum
Window-to-eave
offset
1 foot —
Front facade
fenestration
30% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
20%
Building face or
roof offset
2 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Rear-loaded garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) In-ground pools are permitted. Pool and deck setback from side
and rear property lines: minimum of 10 feet.
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(c) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(d) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
F. The private realm.
§ 203-181 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-181
198:1203
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, wood and simulated clapboard or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles or
similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped, salt
box or combinations thereof.
[4] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco. Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[5] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 16 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Front porch — 8 feet
Stoop — 8 feet
Bay window — 4 feet
Awning — 4 feet
Solar screen — 4 feet
§ 203-181 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-181
198:1204
Minimum Maximum
Balcony/balconette — 4 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone, or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
G. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade. A
front door required on a public street.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
§ 203-181 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-181
198:1205
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically align windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of window opening on wide and rear facades:
20%.
(3) Vertical breaks:
(a) Required offset at party wall with adjacent twin: two-foot
minimum.
(b) Vertical breaks with window treatments, such as bays,
projections and recesses, are encouraged.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material changes, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
(b) A minimum of one horizontal break is required.
(5) Roofline.
(a) Flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are
permitted.
(b) Required offset at party wall with adjacent twin: two-foot
minimum.
(6) (Reserved)
(7) Building materials permitted.
(a) Wood and simulated clapboard.
(b) Brick.
(c) Stone.
(d) Stucco.
(e) Synthetic trim boards.
(8) Roof materials permitted.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
§ 203-181 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-181
198:1206
(e) Cedar wood.
(9) Accessory structures.
(a) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(b) Sheds are permitted, with a maximum floor area of 120 square
feet and height of eight feet tall.
(c) In-ground pools are permitted.
(10) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Front porches are required with a minimum dimension of eight
feet by 10 feet.
(b) Bay windows are encouraged.
(c) Rear decks are required, with a minimum area of 160 square
feet.
(11) The semipublic realm.
(a) All yards must be fully appointed with landscaping of trees,
shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(b) Semipublic space must be separated from public space by
either a low garden wall, decorative fence, hedge or
combination of the three. Fences in front yards shall have a
maximum height of three feet. Fences in side and rear yards
shall have a maximum height of six feet high.
(c) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(d) Usable open or covered stoops are encouraged as public space
transitions.
(12) The private realm.
(a) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(b) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(13) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(b) Maximum edge height for front yard: three feet.
(c) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(d) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
(14) Amenity design guidelines.
§ 203-181 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-181
198:1207
§ 203-182. Townhouse and court townhouse units.
(a) Custom mailboxes.
(b) Foundation plantings required.
(c) On-lot sidewalks.
(15) Parking amenities/access notes.
(a) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(b) Vehicle access from alley only.
(c) No parking in front yard.
A. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the townhouse unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Bay windows work to provide street rhythm and to break down
the horizontal scale.
(b) Small private front yard planting softens street environment.
(c) Windows on side facade enliven corner buildings.
(d) Stoop provides public/private transition.
(e) Front door accentuated in scale.
(f) Durable materials stand up to the test of time.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) On a case-by-case basis townhouses may be arranged in a
courtyard configuration with front doors and garages facing a
landscaped parking/multipurpose court.
§ 203-181 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-182
198:1208
(b) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
rules of rhythm, scale and material choice are respected.
(c) Low garden walls define courtyard edges.
(d) High-quality landscaping and surface materials such as pavers
are required in courtyards.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Slight variations in dormer design reduces monotony in
otherwise identical units.
(b) Low front yard garden walls provide appropriate public/private
transition.
(c) Large mansard roof elements accentuates horizontal break to
respect human scale at sidewalk level.
(d) Generous windows on front facade provide internal light while
animating street and promoting safety.
(e) Roof gardens and decks provide necessary outdoor private
space.
§ 203-182 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-182
198:1209
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Vertical and horizontal architectural offsets and material
changes reinforce human scale at street level.
(b) Windows turning corner of building acknowledge special
location at street intersection.
(c) Solar screens provided reduce unit energy loads and provide
horizontal break.
(d) Variations in window dimensions provide interest to the street
and address scale and rhythm issues.
B. The block.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Special architectural features at corners.
[2] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 175 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,150 feet 1,800 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 1 3
§ 203-182 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-182
198:1210
Minimum Maximum
ROW width 15 feet 20 feet
Path width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative
streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking provided through alley-loaded driveways
and garages.
(b) On-street parking provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens encouraged for on-street
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees encouraged to lower summer cooling
load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
§ 203-182 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-182
198:1211
C. The site.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] No more than eight units built in a row.
[2] Provide common mid-block crossing through building to
rear alley if eight units are built.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 1,500 square feet 2,625 square feet
Lot width 20 feet 30 feet
Corner lot 20 feet 35 feet
Lot depth — 75 feet
Building coverage — 60%
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback 5 feet 15 feet
Side yard setback 0 feet 15 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 2 —
Driveway length 2 —
Driveway width 8 feet 12 feet
§ 203-182 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-182
198:1212
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(c) Foundation plantings.
(d) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(e) Parking planting.
(f) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(g) Pergolas.
(h) Trellises.
(i) Arbors.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Long-life trees encouraged to maximize green infrastructure
funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species encouraged to minimize water
needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material encouraged to aid in reducing stormwater
runoff.
D. The public realm.
§ 203-182 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-182
198:1213
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnade.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Usable open or covered stoops.
[12] Porticos.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 45 feet
First floor elevation 2 feet 5 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
Window-to-eave
offset
1 foot —
Front facade
fenestration
30% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
20% —
Building face or
roof offset
2 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Rear-loaded attached garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Deck setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of 10
feet.
§ 203-182 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-182
198:1214
(b) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(c) Pools are not permitted.
(d) Spas are only permitted on or within a rear deck.
(e) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
E. The private realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, stucco, or similar
masonry material.
[2] Synthetic trim board is permitted as an accent material.
[3] Roof materials shall be clad in cedar wood shingles,
raised-seam metal, slate, architectural asphalt shingles,
tiles or similar material.
[4] Roof types shall be flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped,
salt box or combinations thereof.
§ 203-182 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-182
198:1215
[5] Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick, stone or
stucco.
[6] Chimney tops shall have decorative details.
[7] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Stoop — 8 feet
Bay window — 4 feet
Awning — 4 feet
Solar screen — 4 feet
Balcony/balconette — 4 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
§ 203-182 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-182
198:1216
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement.
(b) Driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
F. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade. A
front door required on a public street.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 30%.
(c) Vertically align windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(e) Minimum area of window opening on wide and rear facades:
20%.
(3) Vertical breaks: two-foot building offsets every 60 feet minimum.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material changes, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
(b) A minimum of one horizontal break is required.
(5) Roofline.
(a) Flat, gable, gambrel, mansard, hipped and salt box are
permitted.
(b) A minimum two-foot offset is required every 60 feet for
multiple units.
(6) Building materials permitted.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
§ 203-182 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-182
198:1217
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(7) Roof materials permitted.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Cedar wood.
(8) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Stoops are required.
(b) Balconies are encouraged.
(c) Rear decks are required, with a minimum area of 160 square
feet.
(9) The public realm.
(a) Front of building set back from sidewalk.
(b) Front doors must face public street.
(10) The semipublic realm.
(a) Front of building (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or
groundcover.
(b) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(c) Front stoops are encouraged as public space transition.
(11) The private realm.
(a) Pergolas, trellises and arbors are permitted.
(b) Pools are not permitted on or within a rear deck.
(12) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(b) Walls, fences, and hedges in front yards are prohibited.
(c) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet.
(d) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet.
§ 203-182 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-182
198:1218
§ 203-183. Residential flats.
(13) Amenity design guidelines.
(a) Custom mailboxes.
(b) Foundation plantings required.
(c) On-lot sidewalks.
(14) Parking amenities/access notes.
(a) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(b) Vehicle access from alley only.
(c) No parking in front yard.
A. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the residential flat:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Prominent architectural features at key corners provide visual
reference points in the town fabric.
(b) Terraces and balconies provide necessary outdoor space and
an opportunity to modulate the scale of the architecture with
vertical and horizontal breaks.
(c) Small private green spaces provides public/private transition.
(d) Cornice line serves as horizontal break.
(e) First floor height differentiated from upper floor heights.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Large windows serve to provide scale to the building as well as
interior light for units.
(b) Bay windows provide design interest to street facade.
(c) Balconies provide outdoor space for individual units while
providing solar screen for lower level windows.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Flats reflect smaller family lifestyle choices.
(b) Large areas of units are devoted to entertaining space.
(c) Floor plans often emphasize the dramatic that takes advantage
of town views.
(d) Typical loft units.
§ 203-182 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-183
198:1219
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Modern can coexist with traditional as long as well-established
rules of scale, rhythm and materials choice are respected.
(b) Use of large windows and glass elements provides interest to
street elevation.
(c) Varying roof heights reduces the monotony of large buildings.
B. The block.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
[4] Plazas.
[5] Mid-block pedestrian connections to respond to street
grid.
[6] Bus shelters.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Block length 300 feet 500 feet
Block perimeter 1,400 feet 1,800 feet
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Mid-block crossings
Number per block 3
ROW width 20 feet
Path width 10 feet
Decorative
streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
§ 203-183 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-183
198:1220
Minimum Maximum
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking provided through alley-loaded driveways
and garages.
(b) On-street parking provided through parallel stalls.
(c) Porous pavement.
(d) Belgian block curbing.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center).
[1] Minimum 36 feet.
[2] Maximum 50 feet.
(b) Planting buffers.
(c) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(d) Custom mailboxes.
(e) Tree grates.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens encouraged for on-street
parking lanes.
(b) Deciduous street trees encouraged to lower summer cooling
load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
C. The site.
§ 203-183 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-183
198:1221
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Bike racks.
[2] Water features/fountains.
[3] Decorative pedestrian lighting.
[4] Litter containers.
[5] Architectural lighting.
[6] Benches.
[7] Clock towers.
[8] Kiosks.
[9] Public art.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Lot area 20,000 square
feet
Lot width 100 feet
Corner lot 100 feet
Lot depth 150 feet
Impervious coverage — 85%
Front yard setback 10 feet 30 feet
Side yard setback 10 feet
Rear yard setback 20 feet —
§ 203-183 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-183
198:1222
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Ratio (spots/du) 0.8 1.3
Driveway length 20 feet —
Driveway width 8 feet 12 feet
(a) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Front yard hedge height: maximum of three feet.
(b) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(c) Foundation plantings.
(d) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(e) Parking planting.
(f) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(g) Planters.
(h) Potted plants.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Long-life trees encouraged to maximize green infrastructure
funds.
(b) Xeriscape.
(c) Nonexotic, noninvasive species encouraged to minimize water
needs.
(d) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material encouraged to aid in reducing stormwater
runoff.
D. The public realm.
§ 203-183 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-183
198:1223
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Balconies/balconettes.
[8] Decorative cornices.
[9] First-floor colonnade.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Usable open or covered stoops.
[12] Porticos.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 45 feet 60 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
Window-to-eave
offset
2 feet —
§ 203-183 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-183
198:1224
Minimum Maximum
Upper front facade
fenestration
30%
Lower front facade
fenestration
60% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
25% —
Building face or
roof offset
5 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Rear-loaded attached garage with windows and storage space.
(b) Individual garage doors.
(c) Carports.
(d) Structured parking.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Pools and spas are not permitted.
(c) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
E. The private realm.
§ 203-183 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-183
198:1225
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, stucco, synthetic trim
board, or similar masonry material.
[2] Roof materials shall be clad in raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be flat, mansard, or a combination thereof.
[4] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Terraces
Patios 8 feet 10 feet
Bay windows 8 feet 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette 2 feet 8 feet
(2) Parking requirements.
§ 203-183 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-183
198:1226
Minimum Maximum
Garage height 10 feet 15 feet
Garage width 14 feet 24 feet
Garage depth 25 feet —
Garage setback 20 feet —
(a) Structured parking shall have a maximum height of two
stories.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
F. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade. A
front door required on a public street.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
§ 203-183 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-183
198:1227
(b) Minimum area of window opening on upper front facades:
30%.
(c) Minimum area of window opening on lower front facades: 30%.
(d) Vertically align windows.
(e) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(f) Minimum area of window opening on wide and rear facades:
25%.
(3) Vertical breaks: Required every 30 feet minimum through use of
offsets, fenestration, bay windows, balconies, balconettes or
material change requires minimum one-foot offset.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(b) May use banding, setbacks, or material change.
(5) Roofline.
(a) Flat and mansard are permitted.
(b) Maximum length of roofline: 60 feet.
(c) Minimum offset: five feet.
(6) Building materials permitted.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(7) Roof materials permitted.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(8) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Prominent front entry feature required.
§ 203-183 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-183
198:1228
(b) Balconies, balconettes, terraces and/or patio are required at
one per unit.
(c) Bay windows are encouraged.
(9) Accessory structures.
(a) Structured parking is permitted.
(b) Freestanding garages are permitted.
(c) Carports are permitted.
(10) The public realm.
(a) Front of building set back from sidewalk.
(b) Entry plazas and courts should be designed to welcome public
use.
(c) Front doors or doors to common lobbies should be grand in
scale and largely transparent to public space through the use
of glass walls and doors.
(d) Canopies, awnings and overhangs are encouraged on the first
floor with emphasis on the front doors.
(e) Screening of loading, service and trash storage areas are
required.
(11) The semipublic realm.
(a) All semipublic space (i.e., yards, courts, plazas) must be fully
appointed with landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental
grasses and groundcover or a combination of decorative
paving and landscaping. Where appropriate, seating and
lighting shall be provided.
(b) Semipublic space must be separated from public space by a
low garden wall, decorative fence (maximum six feet high),
hedge material or a combination of the three.
(12) The private realm.
(a) Residential storage space is required.
(b) Residential outdoor space is required.
(13) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Parking lots adjacent to street edges must be screened with
four-and-one-half-foot-high hedge or masonry wall.
(b) Parking adjacent to residential use must be screened with
minimum six-foot-high masonry wall or fence and must include
§ 203-183 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-183
198:1229
a minimum three-foot-wide vegetated buffer that is a minimum
of six feet high at time of planting.
(c) Lighting must be screened from residential uses.
(14) Amenity design guidelines.
(a) Must provide at least one direct pedestrian connection to
perimeter public streets per 150 feet of frontage.
(b) Connection must be a minimum of ten-foot-wide path with fivefoot-
wide landscaped edges.
(c) Must provide textured pedestrian crosswalks internal to
parking lots.
(15) Parking amenities/access notes.
(a) Porous pavement driveways are permitted.
(b) Vehicle access from alley or secondary streets only.
(c) Maximum one vehicle access point per secondary street
frontage.
§ 203-183 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-183
198:1230
ARTICLE XXV
Big Box Retail
[Added 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 203-184. Big box retail.
A. Goal: to provide locations for regional big box retail commercial uses
that are auto-dependent, that are single- or multi-use buildings and that
may or may not be on individual lots.
B. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the big box retail unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) The addition of amenities such as fountains, squares and
plazas provides site identity as well as focal points for
customer use. The elements also act to reduce the harshness of
large parking lots often associated with big box retail.
(b) Scale of otherwise large buildings can be broken down through
the use of offsets in facades and rooflines, materials use and
arcades and other sheltered walkways.
(c) Signage should be integrated into the facade design.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) The playful use of signage can serve to break down the scale of
otherwise large buildings when integrated into the entire
architectural design of the building and used in conjunction
with vertical and horizontal building offsets, material changes
and orientation of horizontal and vertical elements.
(b) Over-scaled objects can serve as both whimsical sculpture and
safety bollards to protect pedestrians. The objects further
provide a playful dialogue on scale within the public and
semipublic spaces.
(c) Public entry points should be distinguished in the architecture.
§ 203-184 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-184
198:1231
(d) It is important to use architectural techniques to reduce the
perception that big box stores are horizontal buildings with
large blank walls. Creative use of materials, offsets and glass
will be required.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Pad sites present the opportunities to establish a strong
architectural edge along Route 322.
(b) All vehicle circulation is internal to the site.
(c) Pedestrian pathways woven into the landscape are a key
design requirement.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Parking lots constitute the largest public or semipublic space
in a big box center. Details associated with the use of
landscaping, textured pavement, wide sidewalks, textured
crosswalks, lighting and street furniture all serve to control
automobile speeds and to provide a safe and attractive
pedestrian environment.
(b) Arrangement of buildings into small countyards helps to
reduce the scale perception of big box buildings and makes
parking proximate to front doors of multiple tenants.
§ 203-184 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-184
198:1232
C. Size and scope.
(1) Zone acreage: 97.8 acres.
(2) FAR: 0.2 or approximately 900,000 square feet.
(3) The purpose of the zone is to provide the opportunity for a largeformat,
regionally based retail center that is attractive to national
chains and large anchor stores.
(4) Buildings are to be arranged in a manner that reinforces the Route
322 street edge while allowing for large parking fields.
(5) Maximum building height: 60 feet.
(6) On-street parking is not permitted on Route 322.
(7) Front-yard parking is permitted.
D. The site.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
[4] Plazas.
[5] Bus shelters.
(b) Zoning requirements:
§ 203-184 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-184
198:1233
Minimum Maximum
Sidewalk width 5 feet 25 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Decorative street
lighting (distances on
center)
50 feet 75 feet
Lot area 25 acres —
Lot width 200 feet —
Corner lot 200 feet —
Lot depth 250 feet —
Impervious coverage 30%
Front yard setback* 25 feet —
Side yard setback* 25 feet —
Rear yard setback 50 feet —
Note:
* From exterior roads only/Route 322
(2) Parking.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW (where
appropriate)
22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking stalls shall be nine feet by 18 feet and, where
practical, applicants may provide up 10% of required parking
inventory in the form of compact parking stalls measuring 8 1/
2 feet by 18 feet. Projects associated with single-use home
improvement stores in excess of 75,000 square feet must
provide 10% of required parking inventory as contractors'
parking with stalls measuring a minimum of 9 1/2 feet by 18
feet. Parking spaces shall not be utilized for outdoor display
and/or sales of retail products.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided through driveways.
(c) Belgian block curbing or concrete curbing is permitted.
§ 203-184 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-184
198:1234
(d) Retail/office parking shall be provided at a ratio of four spots
per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area, excluding outdoor
garden centers up to 24,000 square feet or those that do not
exceed 20% of the size of the primary building, whichever is
less.
(e) Shared parking is conditionally permitted.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Side and rear yard fence height: maximum of six feet.
(b) Street trees shall be provided at a quantity equal to one street
tree per 30 linear feet of street edge (i.e., typically two edges
per street). Spacing of trees shall be determined at time of site
plan.
(c) Planting buffers.
(d) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(e) Custom mailboxes.
(f) Tree grates.
(g) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(h) Parking planting.
(i) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(j) Planters.
(k) Potted plants.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for parking
areas.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
(d) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(e) Xeriscape.
(f) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(g) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material is encouraged to aid in reducing stormwater
runoff.
§ 203-184 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-184
198:1235
E. The public realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Decorative cornices.
[8] First-floor colonnades.
[9] Porte cocheres.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Porches.
[12] Porticos.
[13] Arcades.
[14] Terraces.
(b) Specifications.
§ 203-184 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-184
198:1236
Minimum Maximum
Building height 20 feet 60 feet
Front facade
fenestration (per
building)
15%
Side and rear
facade fenestration
(per building)
10%
(2) Parking requirements: structured parking is permitted.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Solar screens are permitted.
(b) Solar panels are permitted.
(c) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
F. (Reserved)
G. (Reserved)
H. The private realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
§ 203-184 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-184
198:1237
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco, decorative CMU or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be "A" frame, flat, pitched or combinations
thereof. All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
[4] Building facades shall be parallel to frontage property
lines (where appropriate).
(b) Specifications.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side yard
encroachments
Terrace 8 feet —
Patio 8 feet 10 feet
Bay window — 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette — 8 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes are permitted.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens are permitted.
(d) Green roofs are permitted.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood, masonry, metal (excluding woven wire) or similar
material.
(3) Environment design recommendations.
§ 203-184 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-184
198:1238
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
I. General design standards.
(1) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 7.5%.
(c) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
(d) Side and rear building facades facing US Route 322 shall not
be required to have window openings; however, blank walls are
prohibited and architectural detailing is required.
(2) Vertical breaks:
(a) Five-foot building offsets every 100 feet minimum.
(b) Maximum facade length: 500 feet.
(3) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Material change, horizontal banding, window lines, pediments
and offsets are required.
(b) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(4) Roofline.
(a) "A" frame, pitched and flat or combinations thereof are
permitted.
(b) Minimum five-foot offset required every 100 feet.
(5) (Reserved)
(6) Building materials permitted.
(a) Wood and simulated clapboard.
(b) Brick.
(c) Stone.
(d) Glass.
(e) Stucco.
(f) Decorative CMU.
(g) Synthetic trim boards.
§ 203-184 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-184
198:1239
(h) Similar materials.
(7) Roof materials permitted.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(e) Similar materials.
(8) Accessory structures.
(a) Drive-through windows facing public streets are discouraged.
(b) Parking structures are permitted.
(9) Appurtenances.
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades may be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture shall reflect the difference between public versus
private doors and entries.
(10) The public realm.
(a) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
(b) Front doors shall be on a public street or interval parking
court.
(c) Except as stipulated below, public sidewalks shall be provided
at a minimum width of 10 feet along all building frontages and
adjacent to parking lots.
[1] Along all single-use buildings greater than 75,000 square
feet, a minimum of 70% of the building's frontage shall
have a curb-to-building facade dimension of 15 feet, and a
maximum of 30% of the building's front facade may have a
curb-to-building facade dimension of 10 feet. A minimum
of 10 feet of pedestrian area (with minimum eight-footwide
sidewalks) must be kept clean and devoid of sidewalk
displays, cart storage, etc. at all times and shall be
expressly reserved for pedestrian use only.
[2] For all other buildings, those under 75,000 square feet and
those of multipletenants, a minimum fifteen-foot-wide
sidewalk along building frontages is required.
(11) The semipublic realm.
§ 203-184 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-184
198:1240
(a) Fronts of buildings (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground
cover.
(b) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted to address
stormwater.
(c) Parking courts shall be fully landscaped to break down scale,
provide user comfort and to modulate microclimate.
(d) A minimum of 10% of a parking area shall be landscaping
(applies to parking areas with 60 or more spaces).
(12) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(b) Minimum front yard wall, fence and hedge height: three feet
high.
(c) Maximum side yard edge height: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(d) Maximum rear yard edge height: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(e) Buffers must be provided on all external property edges.
Residential buffers are only required where directly abutting a
residential property.
(f) Minimum front yard buffer width: 25 feet (from exterior roads/
Route 322).
(g) Minimum side yard buffer width: 25 feet (from exterior roads/
Route 322).
(h) Minimum rear yard buffer width: 50 feet.
(i) Minimum buffer width where directly abutting a residential
property: 75 feet.
(13) Amenity design guidelines.
(a) Multipurpose path within buffer.
(b) Pedestrian system within parking court shall be comprehensive
and articulated with textured pavement.
(14) Parking amenities/access guidelines.
(a) Porous pavement parking courts and isles permitted to address
stormwater.
(b) Vehicle access from alley or secondary street system.
(c) No parking in front yard.
§ 203-184 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-184
198:1241

ARTICLE XXVI
Regional Hotel and Office
[Added 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 203-185. Regional Hotel and Office.
A. Goal: to provide locations for everyday services necessary to sustain a
mixed-use regional community with general commercial and general
office locations that are quasi-auto-dependent, that are single-use
buildings and that may or may not be on individual lots.
B. Permitted uses:
(1) Hotels, extended stay conference centers.
(2) Offices for administrative, executive, professional, business sales,
government offices and similar uses, the normal attributes of which
do not involve the storage, exchange or delivery of merchandise to
the general public.
(3) Office of banks and loan associations not having drive-through
facilities for the transaction of business from motor vehicles.
(4) Public transportation stations and shelters.
(5) Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer, electricity and
gas.
(6) Wireless telecommunications towers and antenna located entirely
within an existing building or on the roof or side of a building or
attached to an existing structure.
C. Accessory uses:
(1) Flag poles; clock towers.
(2) Parking structures.
(3) Temporary building or yards for construction materials or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
immediate area.
(4) Temporary construction trailers.
(5) Health and fitness centers accessory to hotels and for use by hotel
guests.
(6) Surface parking lots.
(7) Swimming pools on individual lots accessory to hotel uses.
(8) Walls and fences.
(9) Rental halls for meetings and social occasions accessory to hotel
uses.
§ 203-185 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-185
198:1243
(10) Restaurant, full service or fast food with no drive-through
accessory to hotel uses.
(11) Brewpubs, taverns and nightclubs serving legal beverages
accessory to hotel uses.
(12) Signage.
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of the regional hotel/office unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Single-use hotel and office buildings sit in a parklike setting
where the quality of landscape features is a critical design
element.
(b) While largely auto-dependent, the size of parking courts should
be kept small and integrated into the total land scape concept.
(c) The oversize portico matches the building scale and is
appropriate for the grand scale of the regional hotel and office.
(d) Vertical scale is broken by two layers of horizontal banding.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Stormwater features can be designed as an amenity such as a
lake and provide a community park setting to the wider
residents of the Township.
(b) The sophisticated use of materials such as glass and masonry
helps to mitigate the large massing of the building.
Approximately 60% of the facade is glass.
(c) The building is further broken down in scale by sitting the
building in an "L" shape with a glass corridor connection. The
"L" shape is an organizing element that helps provide context
to the public space, like a public square.
§ 203-185 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-185
198:1244
(3) Photo 3.
(a) The vertical scale of the building is broken by the use of three
layers of horizontal banding. The three alternating layers of
masonry, glass and masonry help define the base, the body and
the top of the building.
(b) Two-foot to ten-foot vertical and horizontal offsets further
mitigate the perception of a large monolithic building.
(c) Front yard parking is absent.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Corner elements and roofline offsets provide architectural
interest and identify the location of the "front" door.
(b) The building facade is approximately 60% glass.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zone acreage: 118.25 acres.
(2) FAR: 0.25 or approximately 1,000,000 square feet.
(3) The purpose of the zone is to provide for a hotel/office park.
(4) Buildings are to be arranged in a manner that reinforces street
edges.
(5) Maximum building height: 60 feet.
(6) On-street parking is not permitted on Route 322.
(7) Front yard parking is prohibited.
F. The site.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
§ 203-185 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-185
198:1245
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private-outdoor spaces are accessible and
visible to the public.
[4] Plazas.
[5] Bus shelters.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Decorative
streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
Lot area 400 feet —
Lot width 200 feet —
Corner lot 200 feet —
Lot depth 250 feet —
Impervious coverage — 80%
Front yard setback 35 feet —
Side yard setback 25 feet —
Rear yard setback 35 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Alley width
ROW 22 feet 25 feet
Cartway 18 feet 21 feet
Alley access points 2 3
On-street stalls
Length 20 feet —
Width 8 feet —
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided through driveways.
(b) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving or porous pavement.
(c) Belgian block curbing.
(d) Hotel/office parking shall be provided at a ratio of four spots
per 1,000 square feet conditionally permitted.
§ 203-185 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-185
198:1246
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
Minimum Maximum
Street tree spacing
(distance on center)
36 feet 50 feet
Side and rear yard
fence height
— 5 feet
(a) Planting buffers.
(b) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(c) Custom mailboxes.
(d) Tree garages.
(e) Foundation plantings.
(f) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(g) Parking planting.
(h) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(i) Planters.
(j) Potted plants.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for parking
areas.
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
(d) Long-life trees are encouraged to maximize green
infrastructure funds.
(e) Xeriscape.
(f) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(g) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
G. The public realm.
§ 203-185 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-185
198:1247
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Decorative cornices.
[8] First-floor colonnades.
[9] Porte cocheres.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Porches.
[12] Porticos.
[13] Arcades.
[14] Terraces.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 45 feet 60 feet
Eave height 24 feet 36 feet
§ 203-185 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-185
198:1248
Minimum Maximum
Window to eave
offset
6 inches —
Front facade
fenestration
60% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
30% —
Building face or
roof offset
16 inches —
Window trim offset 2 feet —
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Carports.
(b) Structured parking.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
H. The private realm.
§ 203-185 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-185
198:1249
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be "A" frame, flat, mansard or
combinations thereof. All rooftop equipment shall be
screened from view.
[4] Building facades shall be parallel to frontage property
lines.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side yard
encroachments
Terrace 8 feet —
Patio 8 feet 10 feet
Bay window — 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette — 8 feet
§ 203-185 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-185
198:1250
Minimum Maximum
Rear deck — 8 feet
(2) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roof.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(3) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
I. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 60%.
(c) Minimum area of windows on side and rear facades: 30%.
(3) Vertical breaks.
(a) Five-foot building offsets every 100 feet minimum.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
§ 203-185 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-185
198:1251
(a) Material change, horizontal banding, window lines and
pediments are required.
(b) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(5) Roofline.
(a) Flat and mansard are permitted.
(b) Minimum five-foot offset required every 100 feet.
(6) Building materials.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(7) Roof materials.
(a) Architectural asphalt shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(8) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades shall be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture shall reflect the difference between public versus
private doors and entries.
(c) Balconies and balconettes are encouraged.
(9) Accessory structures.
(a) Structural parking is permitted.
(b) Carports are permitted.
J. Public space design guidelines.
(1) Fronts of buildings shall be set back from sidewalks.
(2) Front doors shall be on public streets or interval parking courts.
K. Semipublic space design guidelines.
§ 203-185 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-185
198:1252
(1) Fronts of buildings (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground cover.
(2) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted to address stormwater.
(3) Parking courts shall be fully landscaped to break down scale,
provide user comfort and to modulate microclimate.
(4) A minimum of 15% of the interior of parking courts shall be
landscaping.
L. Private space design guidelines.
(1) Storage space is required.
(2) Outdoor patio space is required.
M. Edges, buffers and transitions design guidelines.
(1) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(2) Minimum front yard wall, fence and hedge height: 3 1/2 feet high.
(3) Maximum side yard edge height: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(4) Maximum rear yard edge height: six feet (exclusive of trees).
(5) Buffers must be provided on all external property edges.
(6) Minimum front yard buffer width: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum side yard buffer width: 30 feet.
(8) Minimum rear yard buffer width: 50 feet.
(9) Minimum buffer width adjacent to residential neighborhood: 75
feet.
N. Amenity design guidelines.
(1) Multipurpose path within buffer.
(2) Pedestrian system within parking court shall be designed with
textured pavement; required.
(3) Minimum ten-foot-wide sidewalks adjacent to buildings.
O. Parking amenities/access design guidelines.
(1) Porous pavement parking courts and isles are permitted to address
stormwater.
(2) Vehicle access shall be from an alley or secondary street system.
(3) No parking in front yards.
§ 203-185 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-185
198:1253

ARTICLE XXVII
Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
[Added 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 203-186. Neighborhood Commercial District.
A. Goal: To provide locations for everyday services, retail, and office
necessary to sustain a mixed use local community.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Cafes and restaurants.
(2) Brewpubs.
(3) Breweries, distilleries, and wineries.
(4) Hairdressers, barbers, salons, and spas.
(5) Personal services, including but not limited to dry cleaners,
laundromats, shoemakers, and tailors.
(6) Newsstands.
(7) Studios for instruction, including but not limited to fitness, dance,
martial arts, fine arts, and music.
(8) Florists.
(9) Churches or other places of worship.
(10) Congregate care.
(11) Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer, electricity and
gas.
(12)Wireless telecommunications towers and antenna located entirely
within an existing building or on the roof or side of a building or
attached to an existing structure.
C. Customary accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the
above permitted principal uses in the NC Zone, including:
(1) Flag poles; clock towers.
(2) Kiosks and street vending carts.
(3) Parking structures and surface parking lots.
(4) Temporary building or yards for construction materials or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
immediate area.
(5) Temporary construction trailers.
§ 203-186 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-186
198:1255
(6) Walls and fences.
(7) Signage.
(8) Outdoor/sidewalk sales and display in accordance with the
conditions of this chapter.
(9) Carports.
D. The following examples best embody the purpose, goals and objectives
of neighborhood commercial unit:
(1) Photo 1.
(a) Commercial buildings should be clean, simple and inviting.
(b) Signage should be integrated into architecture.
(c) Modern materials are acceptable if they respect well
established rules of scale and rhythm.
(2) Photo 2.
(a) Restaurants and cafes are encouraged.
(b) Outdoor seating is permitted within property lines.
(3) Photo 3.
(a) Small office and retail uses are permitted.
(b) More than one use is permitted in a single building.
(c) Driveways directly accessing Swedesboro-Paulsboro Road
permitted.
(4) Photo 4.
(a) Businesses servicing local residents, including but not limited
to beauty parlors and salons, florists, dry cleaners and tailors,
and other personal services are encouraged.
(b) Front facades should have ample fenestration to provide a
rhythm of solid and void and a view of interior activity.
(c) Individual or multi-tenant flex space is a typical need of
growing communities.
E. Size and scope.
(1) Zone acreage: 47 acres.
(2) FAR 0.2 maximum.
(3) Generally located along Swedesboro-Paulsboro Road and Kings
Highway.
§ 203-186 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-186
198:1256
(4) The zone is intended to provide locations for a mixture of service
retail and office space.
(5) May be single- or multi-tenant buildings.
(6) Buildings are permitted to be 45 feet tall or three stories.
(7) Front yard parking is permitted.
F. The site.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Contextual neighborhood consistency.
[2] Special architectural features at corners.
[3] Public and private outdoor spaces accessible and visible to
the public.
[4] Off-street parking shall be located to the side or rear.
[5] Drive-through windows shall be located to the side or rear.
[6] Bus shelters.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Buffer/pedestrian
zone
Front 25 feet —
Rear 20 feet —
Sidewalk width 5 feet 10 feet
Planting strip width 4 feet 10 feet
Decorative
streetlighting
(distance on center)
50 feet 75 feet
Lot area 20,000 square feet —
Lot width 100 feet —
Corner lot 100 feet —
Lot depth 150 feet —
Impervious coverage — 60%
Front yard setback 50 feet —
Side yard setback 25 feet —
Rear yard setback 50 feet —
§ 203-186 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-186
198:1257
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Off-street parking provided through driveways.
(b) Porous pavement.
(c) Belgian block curbing.
(d) Driveways shall be constructed of colored asphalt, scored
concrete, decorative paving blocks or porous pavement.
(e) Front yard parking permitted only with landscaped buffer
between street and parking.
(f) Retail/office parking to be provided at a ratio of four spots per
1,000 square feet.
(g) Shared parking is conditionally permitted.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Street tree spacing (distance on center):
[1] Minimum: 36 feet.
[2] Maximum: 50 feet.
(b) Side and rear yard fence height:
[1] Maximum: six feet.
(c) Planting buffers.
(d) Maximize uniqueness to street.
(e) Custom mailboxes.
(f) Tree grates.
(g) Foundation plantings.
(h) Planting buffers between different land uses.
(i) Parking planting.
(j) Screen ground-mounted utility boxes.
(k) Planters.
(l) Potted plants.
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Porous pavement and rain gardens are encouraged for parking
areas.
§ 203-186 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-186
198:1258
(b) Deciduous street trees are encouraged to lower summer
cooling load.
(c) Trees to modulate microclimate.
(d) Long-life trees encouraged to maximize green infrastructure
funds.
(e) Xeriscape.
(f) Nonexotic, noninvasive species are encouraged to minimize
water needs.
(g) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens, and porous pavement
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
(5) Tree protection requirement.
(a) A black cherry tree, Prunes seratina, is located in the U.S.
Route 322 corridor receiving zone toward the western end and
north of U.S. Route 322. To maximize opportunities for its longterm
survival, the following procedures will be adhered to by
all applicants for development on these parcels:
[1] An area the size of the tree's dripline will be designated as
a tree protection zone and fenced off prior to construction
activities. No material storage, equipment parking,
excavation, benching, equipment clean-outs or soil
compaction shall occur within this area. Signage
identifying the area as off-limits shall be posted on the
fence.
[2] The existing grade of the area surrounding the tree
protection zone shall be maintained. Black cherry as a
species is listed as sensitive to drainage changes that raise
the natural water level in the soil.
[3] Dead wood pruning or crown cleaning of the tree should
be performed by a New Jersey certified tree expert (CTE)
hired by the applicant.
[4] To the extent that grade changes do not raise the water
level around the tree, a layer not to exceed three inches in
depth shall be applied to the soil within the tree protection
zone.
G. The public realm.
(1) Zoning and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Dormers.
§ 203-186 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-186
198:1259
[2] Gables.
[3] Recessed entries.
[4] Cupolas or towers.
[5] Pillars or posts.
[6] Bay windows.
[7] Decorative cornices.
[8] First-floor colonnades.
[9] Porte cocheres.
[10] Decorative patterns on exterior finishes.
[11] Porches.
[12] Porticos.
[13] Arcades.
[14] Terraces.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
Building height 30 feet 40 feet
Building height
(stories)
3
Window-to-eave
offset
6 inches —
Front facade
fenestration
60% —
Side and rear
facade fenestration
30% —
Building face or
roof offset
5 feet —
(2) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Patio setback from side and rear property lines: minimum of
five feet.
(b) Gutters shall be architecturally compatible with a building.
(3) Environment design recommendations.
(a) North-south building orientation.
(b) Solar screens.
§ 203-186 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-186
198:1260
(c) Solar panels.
(d) Discharge spouts shall have splash parts or be discharged
underground.
H. The private realm.
(1) Architecture and design.
(a) Design elements.
[1] Building walls shall be brick, stone, synthetic trim board,
stucco or similar material.
[2] Roof materials shall be raised-seam metal, slate,
architectural asphalt shingles, tiles or similar material.
[3] Roof types shall be A-frame, flat, mansard or combinations
thereof.
[4] All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
[5] Building facades shall be parallel to frontage property
lines.
(b) Zoning requirements.
Minimum Maximum
First story clear
height
10 feet 15 feet
Roof pitch — 9/12
Front and side
encroachments
Bay window — 8 feet
Awning — 8 feet
Solar screen — 8 feet
Balcony/balconette — 8 feet
Rear deck — 8 feet
§ 203-186 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-186
198:1261
Minimum Maximum
Terrace 8 feet 8 feet
Patio 8 feet 10 feet
(2) Parking requirements: four spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
area.
(3) Edge and buffer design recommendations.
(a) Window boxes.
(b) Espaliers.
(c) Roof decks/gardens.
(d) Green roofs.
(e) Garden walls may be brick, stone or stucco to match the
principal building.
(f) Side and rear yard fences may be wood picket, wrought iron or
materials similar in appearance and durability.
(g) All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be
wood or similar material (shadow box design).
(4) Environment design recommendations.
(a) Bioswales, cisterns, rain gardens and porous payment
driveway material are encouraged to aid in reducing
stormwater runoff.
I. General design standards.
(1) Building orientation.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street facade. A
front door required on a public street.
(b) At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to the
minimum setback line.
(c) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize winter solar gain,
consistent with the north/south orthogonal grid.
(2) Fenestration.
(a) No blank facades or walls are permitted.
(b) Minimum area of window opening on front facades: 60%.
(c) Vertically align windows.
(d) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
§ 203-186 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-186
198:1262
(e) Minimum area of window opening on wide and rear facades:
30%.
(3) Vertical breaks:
(a) Two-foot building offsets every 100 feet minimum are required.
(4) Horizontal breaks.
(a) Use of material change, window lines and pediments is
required.
(b) Required at a minimum of one per every 24 feet of vertical
height.
(5) Roofline.
(a) A-frame, mansard, and flat are permitted.
(b) Minimum two-foot offset required every 100 feet.
(6) Building materials permitted.
(a) Brick.
(b) Stone.
(c) Stucco.
(d) Synthetic trim boards.
(7) Roof materials permitted.
(a) Architectural asphalt roof shingles.
(b) Raised-seam metal roof.
(c) Tiles.
(d) Slate.
(8) Appurtenances.
(a) Solar screens, awnings, and arcades shall be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture should reflect the difference between public
versus private doors and entries.
(9) The public realm.
(a) Front of building set back from sidewalk.
(b) Front doors shall be on public streets or internal parking
courts.
(10) The semipublic realm.
§ 203-186 YOUTH SPORTS § 203-186
198:1263
(a) Fronts of buildings (i.e., yards) must be fully appointed with
landscaping of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses or ground
cover.
(b) Bioswales and rain gardens are permitted.
(c) Front stoops are encouraged as public space transition.
(d) Parking lots shall be fully landscaped to break down scale, to
provide user comfort and to modulate microclimate.
(11) The private realm.
(a) Storage space is required.
(b) Outdoor patio space is permitted.
(12) Edges, buffers and transition design guidelines.
(a) Edge treatments may include walls, fences, and hedges.
(b) Maximum edge height for front yard: 3 1/2 feet.
(c) Maximum edge height for side yards: six feet (exclusive of
trees).
(d) Maximum edge height for rear yard: six feet (exclusive of
trees).
(e) Buffers must be provided on all external property edges.
(f) Minimum front yard buffer width: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum side yard buffer width: 30 feet.
(h) Minimum rear yard buffer width: 50 feet.
(i) Minimum buffer adjacent to residential neighborhoods: 75
feet.
(13) Amenity design guidelines.
(a) Multipurpose path within buffer.
(b) A pedestrian system within parking court defined by textured
pavement is required.
(c) Minimum ten-foot-wide sidewalks adjacent to buildings.
(14) Parking amenities/access notes.
(a) Porous pavement in parking courts and drive aisles is
permitted to address stormwater.
(b) Parking in front yard is permitted.
§ 203-186 WOOLWICH CODE § 203-186
198:1264
Part III, Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 207
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 203-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 203-186
207:1265

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-7]
§ 207-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of
the Township of Woolwich of a general and permanent nature, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 207 through 213, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code of the
Township of Woolwich," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 207-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 207-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall take effect 30 days after
the date of the first publication.
§ 207-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 207-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Woolwich" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as amendments
and supplements thereto.
§ 207-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 207-6
207:1267
a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 207-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Secretary's office for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 207-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 207-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 207-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 207-11. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 207-6 WOOLWICH CODE § 207-12
207:1268
§ 207-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 207-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 207-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to 7-1-1968.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which
are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
as set forth in Schedule B attached hereto and made a part hereof
(chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).139
139. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 207-13B, the sections which were amended by this
ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 207,
General Provisions, Art. I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating
§ 207-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 207-13
207:1269
amendments will be replaced with the following history: "Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-7." Schedule B, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
township offices.
§ 207-13 WOOLWICH CODE § 207-13
207:1270
Chapter 213
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
§ 213-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6.
A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 213-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is commonly known as
the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)."
§ 213-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Retail Food Establishment Code (1965) have been
placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of Health
upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there until final
action is taken on this chapter for the use and examination of the public.
§ 213-4. Violations and penalties.140
Any person who violates any provision or order promulgated under this
chapter or the code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be
liable to a penalty of not less than $2 nor more than $500 for each violation.
Every day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Appendix
Chapter A222
FRANCHISES
140. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 207, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-13 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 213-4
213:1271

ARTICLE I
Cable Television Franchise
[Adopted 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 97-28]
§ A222-1. Definitions. [Amended 1-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4]
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of the term is supplemental to those definitions given by the
Federal Communication Commission, FCC Rules and Regulations, 47 CRF
Subsection 76.1, et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 USC
§ 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1
et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with
federal or state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Subchapter 186 of the General Laws
of the State of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
COMPANY — The grantee of the rights under this ordinance, and is known
as "Suburban Cable."
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Woolwich, County of Gloucester and
State of New Jersey.
§ A222-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and
the municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications
of the company to receive this consent, the municipality hereby finds the
company possesses the legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications and that the company's operating and construction
arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A222-3. Renewal of franchise.
The Township of Woolwich hereby consents to a renewal of the franchise,
subject to the terms and conditions of this ordinance, and upon the
condition that the company accepts the provision of this ordinance and and
confirms, in writing, that it shall comply with all commitments.
§ A222-4. Consent to place conductors and fixtures.
At the time that this municipal consent becomes effective, as provided
below, and for and throughout the renewal term, the municipality shall
review and continue its consent for the company to place in, upon, along,
across, above, over and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
public ways and public places in the municipality poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and
§ A222-1 FRANCHISES § A222-4
A222:1273
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the municipality of
the cable television system and cable communications system.
§ A222-5. Expiration of franchise.
The renewal term that the municipality grants the company herein shall be
for a period of 15 years commencing on August 17, 1997, nunc pro tunc.
The consent granted herein is subject to automatic renewal for a term of
10 years in accordance with procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and
48:5A-25 and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13 et seq.
§ A222-6. Territory.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
municipality and any property hereinafter annexed.
§ A222-7. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers to its cable television
reception service in the municipality or any amount permitted by the Cable
Television Act or such other amount as may be fixed by law. In the event that
the applicable law hereafter permits a larger franchise fee to be collected
but does not fix the amount thereof, the municipality and the company shall
negotiate in good faith with respect to the amount thereof.
§ A222-8. Construction timetable.
The company will complete construction as set forth in § A222-9 within one
year of the issuance of a certificate of approval of the New Jersey Board of
Regulatory Commissions.
§ A222-9. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service along any public right-ofway
to any residents or businesses located in those areas of the franchise
territory as set forth on the map included in the company's application.
Additionally, the company shall provide service to the following streets:
A. North on Sharpstown Road to Harrisonville-Pedricktown Road to
Turnpike. Turnpike north to Route 602 on Audubon Road to border.
B. Woodstown Road (605) south to border of Harrisonville-Pedricktown
Road.
C. Harrisonville-Pedricktown Road west on Russell Mill Road to
intersection of Woodstown Road.
D. Kelly Road to border of Warrington Mill Road north and south to border.
Route 551 north to Repaupo Road (Asbury) to border.
§ A222-4 WOOLWICH CODE § A222-10
A222:1274
§ A222-10. Construction requirements.
§ A222-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigation and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
§ A222-12. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-7.1.
§ A222-13. Performance bonds.
To secure its faithful performance of its obligations under renewal of the
franchise during the renewal term, the company shall provide a
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, streets, surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore or replace such places or things so disturbed in as good
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
right-of-way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the
municipality, shall remove, re-lay and relocate its equipment at the
expense of the company. The company shall temporarily move or
remove appropriate parts of its facilities to allow for the moving of
buildings and machinery, or in other similar circumstances, the expense
of which shall be borne by the party requesting such action, except
when requested by the municipality, in which case the company shall
bear the cost.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming into contact with wires and cables of the company. Such
trimmings shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's facilities.
D. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon the request of
the municipality, at the company's expense, temporarily raise, lower or
remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery.
§ A222-10 FRANCHISES § A222-13
A222:1275
performance bond, which bond shall be in the amount of $25,000. Such
bond shall be specifically to secure the faithful performance of all
undertakings of the company as represented in the application and in the
commitments. The municipality reserves the right, by resolution, to require
reasonable increase in the amount of said bond as it relates to construction
activities by the company, subject to review by the Office of Cable Television
and approval of the Board. The bond shall be in a form acceptable to the
Municipal Solicitor and shall at all times maintain an AM Best rating of at
least "A."
§ A222-14. Rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law. To the extent that the federal laws and/or any other
applicable laws hereafter are amended to permit the exercise of regulatory
power over rates by municipalities, the municipality reserves the right to
exercise the maximum power permitted by law.
§ A222-15. Emergency use of programming.
The company shall be required to participate in the statewide emergency
alert system for the purpose of providing the capability to override the
audio portion of the system for the broadcast of emergency messages. The
company shall not, however, be held liable for any injuries suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during or as a result of an emergency, if
for any reason the municipality or other governmental authority is unable
to make full use of the cable system as contemplated under this section.
§ A222-16. Public, educational or governmental access channels.
The cable operator shall provide access time for noncommercial, public,
governmental and educational entities to the extent such access is
requested by the municipality. Although a specific channel will not be
dedicated for exclusive use by the municipality, the company will continue
its policy of providing the municipality with an access channel to be used
for public, educational and/or governmental use.
§ A222-17. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability for any
death, personal injury, property damage or other liability arising out of its
construction and/or operation of the cable television system and an excess
liability ("umbrella") policy in the amount of $10,000,000. The municipality
shall be named as an additional insured under said policy, and a valid
certificate of insurance shall be provided to the Township Administrator,
121 Woodstown Road, Swedesboro, New Jersey 08085 for all effective
dates.
§ A222-13 WOOLWICH CODE § A222-18
A222:1276
§ A222-18. Incorporation of application.
All statements and commitments contained in the application for renewal
referenced herein, and any amendments thereto or otherwise submitted, in
writing, by the company to the municipality, except as modified herein, are
binding upon the company as the terms and conditions of their consent.
The application and any other relevant writings submitted by the company
shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof by reference. To the extent
that the requirements of this ordinance exceed or are more stringent than
the requirements set forth in the application or writings referenced above,
then the terms of this ordinance shall supersede the application and other
writings referenced above.
§ A222-19. Free services.
The company shall provide the installation of one outlet and basic monthly
service to each school, library and municipally owned buildings within the
municipality free of charge. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be
paid for by the institution requesting the same on a materials plus labor
basis. Monthly service charge shall be charged at regular tariff rates for
additional outlets only.
§ A222-20. Reduced rates for senior citizens.
The company has agreed to implement a senior citizen discount in the
amount of 10% of the monthly basic service rate to any person 62 years
of age or older who subscribes to cable services and does not share the
subscription with more than one person in the same household who is less
than 62 years age. Such subscribers must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to Aged and Disabled
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21 and as may hereafter be amended.
§ A222-21. Annual meetings with municipality. [Amended 1-20-1998
by Ord. No. 98-4]
The company agrees to appear at a public hearing before the Mayor and
Committee of the Township of Woolwich or such subcommittee as may be
determined by the Mayor and Committee, on an annual basis, at which
time the company will review construction progress and general compliance
with this ordinance. Unless otherwise agreed to by the company and the
municipality, the annual meeting shall be held the first Monday in June
beginning in the year 1998. Nothing herein should be construed as limiting
the township from making reasonable inquiry to the company regarding
compliance with this ordinance or service within the municipality.
§ A222-22. Number of subscribers irrelevant. [Amended 1-20-1998
by Ord. No. 98-4]
The company shall be bound by the terms and provisions of this ordinance
irrespective of the number of subscribers to its system.
§ A222-18 FRANCHISES § A222-23
A222:1277
§ A222-23. Severability. [Amended 1-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid, illegal or unconstitutional by any
federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction or court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, severable, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ A222-24. Consistency with future federal and state statutes,
regulations, rules and orders. [Amended 1-20-1998 by Ord. No.
98-4]
Should any of the federal or state statutes, regulations or pronouncements
applicable to the regulation of cable television be modified in any way, such
modifications, to the extent they embody required terms and conditions
and meaningfully can be incorporated into this ordinance, shall be so
incorporated, consistent with any applicable effective date specified in such
modification. To the extent that any such modification places limits on
permissible terms and conditions and any provisions of this ordinance
becomes invalid by virtue of such modification, then the preceding
severability section shall apply.
§ A222-25. Effective date of consent. [Amended 1-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-4]
This municipal consent shall be effective as of the date upon which the
municipality receives written notification that the company accepts the
provisions of this ordinance, including the commitments.
§ A222-26. Effective day of ordinance. [Amended 1-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-4]
This ordinance shall be effective upon final passage by the Committee and
publication as required by law.
§ A222-23 WOOLWICH CODE § A222-26
A222:1278
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition legislation.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
98-29 12-7-1998 Environmental Committee Superseded by Ord.
No. 02-09
98-30 12-7-1998 No-passing zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. IV
98-31 12-21-1998 Speed limits amendment Ch. 182, Art. III
99-1 1-19-1999 Administrator amendment Ch. 29, Art. V
99-2 3-15-1999 Exceed index rate NCM
99-3 3-15-1999 Salaries NCM
99-4 3-15-1999 Sewage franchise agreement
amendment
NCM
99-5 3-15-1999 Water franchise agreement
amendment
NCM
99-6 3-15-1999 Adoption of Code by
Township Committee
Ch. 1, Art. I
99-7 3-15-1999 Adoption of Code by Board of
Health
Ch. 207, Art. I
99-8 4-5-1999 No-passing zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. IV
99-9 4-19-1999 Recommendation for
creation of farmland
preservation program
NCM
99-10 4-19-1999 Recommendation for
creation of farmland
preservation program
NCM
99-11 4-19-1999 Authorization for
expenditure for capital
improvement
NCM
99-12 5-3-1999 No-passing zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. IV
99-13 5-17-1999 No-passing zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. IV
99-14 5-17-1999 No-passing zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. IV
§ A222-26 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1279
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
99-15 5-17-1999 No-passing zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. IV
99-16 5-17-1999 Stop intersections
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VI
99-17 5-17-1999 Through traffic roads
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. I
99-18 6-21-1999 Tuition credit program Ch. 46
99-19 6-21-1999 Salaries NCM
99-20 7-19-1999 Establishment of farmland
preservation program
NCM
99-21 11-8-1999 No-passing zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. IV
99-22 Nepotism Not adopted
00-1 Salaries NCM
00-2 2-7-2000 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 163 and 203
00-3 2-7-2000 Business Development
Committee amendment;
Administrator repealer
Repealed by Ord. No.
2017-06; Ch. 29, Art.
V
00-4 3-6-2000 Index rate NCM
00-5 4-3-2000 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
00-6 5-1-2000 Salaries NCM
00-7 5-15-2000 Police Department:
establishment amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
00-8 5-15-2000 Development fees
amendment; application fees
and escrow deposits
amendment
Ch. 95, Arts. I and II
00-9 Capital budget NCM
00-10 9-18-2000 Numbering of buildings Ch. 72
00-11 9-18-2000 Street name changes and
designations
Ch. 182, Art. VIII
00-12 9-18-2000 Establishing names of access
roads
NCM
00-13 11-13-2000 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 135
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1280
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
00-14 11-13-2000 Numbering of buildings
amendment
Ch. 72
01-1 2-5-2001 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 135
01-2 2-20-2001 No stopping or standing
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. V
01-3 3-5-2001 Personnel policy amendment See Ch. 33, Art. I
01-4 3-19-2001 Index rate NCM
01-5 3-19-2001 Building construction:
Uniform Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I
01-6 4-2-2001 Salaries NCM
01-7 5-21-2001 Personnel policy amendment See Ch. 33, Art. I
01-8 6-4-2001 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 135
01-9 7-2-2001 Stormwater management:
obstruction of easements
Ch. 157, Art. I
01-10 7-2-2001 Development fees;
application fees and escrow
deposits amendment
Ch. 95, Arts. I and II
01-11 Bond Not adopted
01-12 9-17-2001 Bond NCM
01-13 9-17-2001 Construction and
maintenance operations
Ch. 182, Art. IX
01-14 10-15-2001 Snow and ice removal on
unaccepted and unapproved
roads
Ch. 159, Art. IV
01-15 12-27-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
02-01 2-4-2002 Salaries NCM
02-02 2-19-2002 Index rate NCM
02-03 4-1-2002 Alcoholic beverages: open
containers amendment
Ch. 56, Art. II
02-04 5-6-2002 Salaries NCM
02-05 5-6-2002 Adoption of checklist for
development applications
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2005-06
02-06 7-1-2002 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
02-07 7-1-2002 Bond amendment NCM
02-08 8-5-2002 Access to public records Ch. 39, Art. I
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1281
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
02-09 8-19-2002 Environmental Commission Repealed by Ord. No.
2013-02
02-10 8-19-2002 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
02-11 9-3-2002 School Crossing Guard Ch. 29, Art. VII
02-12 9-3-2002 Salaries amendment NCM
02-13 9-16-2002 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 99
02-14 10-21-2002 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 135
2003-01 Exceed index rate NCM
2003-02 4-7-2003 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 163
2003-03 2-17-2003 Personnel policy amendment See Ch. 33, Art. I
2003-04 3-3-2003 Antinepotism policy Ch. 33, Art. II
2003-05 4-7-2003 Grading plans Ch. 109
2003-06 4-21-2003 Parking prohibited for snow
removal
Ch. 159, Art. V
2003-07 4-21-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2003-08 Salaries NCM
2003-09 Bond NCM
2003-10 Capital improvement NCM
2003-11 5-19-2003 Establishment of Police
Department amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
2003-12 6-2-2003 Basketball standards Ch. 159, Art. VI
2003-13 6-2-2003 Police rules amendment NCM
2003-14 6-16-2003 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2003-15 6-7-2003 Uniform Construction Codes
amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I
2003-16 6-16-2003 Street excavations and
openings
Ch. 159, Art. II
2003-17 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-18 7-7-2003 Youth Sports Code of
Conduct
Ch. 198, Art. I
2003-19 7-7-2003 Youth Sports Code of
Conduct Committee
Ch. 198, Art. II
2003-20 7-21-2003 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1282
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2003-21 Police salaries NCM
2003-22 7-21-2003 Street excavations and
openings amendment
Ch. 159, Art. II
2003-23 Personnel policy amendment See Ch. 33, Art. I
2003-24 12-15-2003 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 163, 203
2003-25 11-24-2003 Application fees and escrow
deposits amendment
Ch. 95, Art. II
2004-01 2-17-2004 Exceed index rate NCM
2004-02 12-20-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2004-03 3-15-2004 Architectural Design
Advisory Board
Repealed by Ord. No.
2007-04
2004-04 4-5-2004 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord. No.
2005-15
2004-05 4-5-2004 Street vacation NCM
2004-06 4-5-2004 Street easement NCM
2004-07 Not adopted
2004-08 Not adopted
2004-09 5-3-2004 Bond NCM
2004-10 5-17-2004 Salaries NCM
2004-10A 6-7-2004 Appropriation NCM
2004-11 6-7-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 143
2004-12 6-7-2004 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2004-13 8-2-2004 Access to public records
amendment
Ch. 39, Art. I
2004-14 8-2-2004 Application fees and escrow
deposits amendment
Ch. 95, Art. II
2004-15 8-16-2004 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2004-16 9-7-2004 Agricultural Advisory
Committee
Ch. 2
2004-17 9-7-2004 Conservation Design
Ordinance Committee
Ch. 10
2004-18 9-20-2004 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1283
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-01 1-18-2005 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2005-02 1-18-2005 Speed limits amendment Ch. 182, Art. III
2005-03 Index rate NCM
2005-04 Not adopted
2005-05 2-15-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2005-06 3-7-2005 Adoption of checklist for
development applications
Repealed by Ord. No.
2007-37
2005-07 3-21-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2005-08 3-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2005-09 3-21-2005 Speed limits amendment Ch. 182, Art. III
2005-10 3-21-2005 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2005-11 3-21-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2005-12 Capital ordinance NCM
2005-13 Capital ordinance NCM
2005-14 Salaries NCM
2005-15 4-4-2005 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 143
2005-16 6-6-2005 Site plan review; subdivision
of land amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 149, 163 and
203
2005-17 5-2-2005 Curfew amendment Ch. 79
2005-18 5-16-2005 Animals running at large
amendment
Ch. 59, Art. II
2005-19 6-6-2005 Uniform Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I
2005-20 6-6-2005 Parking amendment Ch. 182, Art. II
2005-21 6-6-2005 Drug-free and drunkdriving-
free zones
amendment
Ch. 87, Arts. I and II
2005-22 6-6-2005 Drug- and drunk-driving-free
parkland
Ch. 97, Art. III
2005-23 Salaries NCM
2005-24 6-20-2005 Establishment of Police
Department amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
2005-25 8-1-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1284
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-26 7-18-2005 Environmental site
assessment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2009-12
2005-27 7-18-2005 Adoption of checklist for
development applications
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2006-08
2005-28 7-18-2005 Stop intersections
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VI
2005-29 Bond NCM
2005-30 Bond NCM
2005-31 9-6-2005 Hazardous waste removal
costs
Ch. 113, Art. II
2005-32 9-19-2005 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2005-33 10-3-2005 Peddling and soliciting Ch. 140
2005-34 10-17-2005 Construction and
maintenance operations
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. IX
2005-35 Emergency appropriation NCM
2005-36 11-21-2005 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2005-37 11-21-2005 One-way streets Ch. 182, Art. X
2005-38 12-5-2005 Professional service
contracts
Ch. 11, Art. I
2005-39 12-5-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2005-40 12-19-2005 Business Development
Advisory Committee
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2017-06
2005-41 Housing code Not adopted
2006-01 2-21-2006 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 163
2006-02 2-21-2006 Housing standards Ch. 115
2006-03 5-15-2006 Sex offenders: residency
restrictions
Repealed by Ord. No.
2009-08
2006-04 4-3-2006 Municipal Administrator Ch. 29, Art. V
2006-05 3-6-2006 Exceed budget limits NCM
2006-06 3-6-2006 Appropriation NCM
2006-07 Soil removal Repealed by Ord. No.
2006-24
2006-08 3-20-2006 Adoption of checklist for
development applications
Repealed by Ord. No.
2007-37
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1285
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-09 4-3-2006 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 99
2006-10 4-17-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2006-11 Salaries NCM
2006-12 5-1-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2006-13 Number not used
2006-14 5-15-2006 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 135
2006-15 6-19-2006 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2006-16 6-19-2006 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2006-17 6-19-2006 Boards, committees and
commissions: absenteeism
Ch. 4, Art. I
2006-18 7-17-2006 Stormwater control Ch. 157, Art. II
2006-19 Bond NCM
2006-20 8-7-2006 Street vacation NCM
2006-21 8-21-2006 Topsoil Ch. 173
2006-22 9-18-2006 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2006-23 11-20-2006 Police Department: off-duty
employment; construction
and maintenance operations
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. IV; Ch.
182, Art. IX
2006-24 11-18-2006 Soil removal Ch. 153
2006-25 11-20-2006 Uniform Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I
2006-26 11-20-2006 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 163
2006-27 Purchase of easement NCM
2006-28 11-20-2006 Bond NCM
2006-29 12-27-2006 Stormwater control
amendment
Ch. 157, Art. II
2006-30 12-18-2006 Towing amendment Ch. 175
2007-01 2-5-2007 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
2007-02 2-5-2007 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1286
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-03 2-5-2007 Drug-Free School Zone Map
amendment
NCM
2007-04 3-5-2007 Architectural Design
Advisory Board repealer
Ch. 3, reference only
2007-05 3-5-0007 Purchase of property NCM
2007-06 3-5-2007 Purchase of property NCM
2007-07 4-2-2007 Wedding and civil union
ceremonies
Ch. 192
2007-08 4-2-2007 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2007-09 4-2-2007 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2007-10 4-2-2007 Turn prohibitions Ch. 182, Art. XI
2007-11 4-16-2007 Solid waste: Construction
and Demolition Debris
Diversion Program
Ch. 155, Art. III
2007-12 4-16-2007 Zoning amendment
(Municipal Housing Liaison)
Ch. 203
2007-13 5-7-2007 Adoption of checklist for
development applications
Repealed by Ord. No.
2007-37
2007-14 5-21-2007 Appropriation NCM
2007-15 5-21-2007 Appropriation NCM
2007-16 5-21-2007 Appropriation NCM
2007-17 5-21-2007 Appropriation NCM
2007-18 6-4-2007 Salaries NCM
2007-19 6-4-2007 Lease agreement NCM
2007-20 6-4-207 Bond NCM
2007-21 6-18-2007 Peace and good order:
standards of conduct
amendment
Ch. 138, Art. I
2007-22 6-18-2007 Motorized recreational
vehicles
Ch. 184
2007-23 7-23-2007 Adoption of Personnel Policy
and Procedures Manual
See Ch. 33, Art. I
2007-24 7-23-2007 Salaries NCM
2007-25 7-23-2007 Easement agreement NCM
2007-26 7-23-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2007-27 7-23-2007 Mid-block crosswalks Ch. 182, Art. XII
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1287
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-28 7-23-2007 Easement agreement NCM
2007-29 8-6-2007 Joint Land Use Board Ch. 23
2007-30 8-20-2007 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2007-31 8-6-2007 Numbering of buildings
amendment
Ch. 72
2007-32 8-20-2007 Appropriation NCM
2007-33 8-20-2007 Director of Community
Development
Ch. 29, Art. VIII
2007-34 8-20-2007 Salaries NCM
2007-35 9-4-2007 Motorized recreational
vehicles amendment
Ch. 184
2007-36 9-17-2007 Joint Land Use Board
amendment
Ch. 23
2007-37 9-17-2007 Adoption of checklist for
development applications
Ch. 23, Note only
2007-38 10-1-2007 Easement agreements NCM
2007-39 10-15-2007 Turn prohibitions
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. XI
2007-40 11-5-2007 Utility easement agreement NCM
2007-41 11-19-2007 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
2007-42 11-19-2007 Salaries NCM
2007-43 11-19-2007 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I
2007-44 11-19-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 163
2007-45 11-19-2007 Appropriation NCM
2007-46 12-17-2007 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I
2007-47 12-27-2007 Personnel policy amendment See Ch. 33, Art. I
2008-01 1-22-2008 Salaries NCM
2008-02 3-3-2008 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
2008-03 3-17-2008 PMC Steering Committee NCM (temporary
measure)
2008-04 5-5-2008 Community Safety
Coordinator
Ch. 29, Art. IX
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1288
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-05 5-5-2008 Checklist for development
applications amendment
See Ch. 23
2008-06 5-5-2008 Purchase of property NCM
2008-07 5-5-2008 Purchase of property NCM
2008-08 5-19-2008 Personnel policies and
procedures manual
amendment
See Ch. 33, Art. I
2008-09 6-16-2008 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
2008-10 6-2-2008 Appropriation NCM
2008-11 6-2-2008 Salaries NCM
2008-12 7-7-2008 Bond NCM
2008-13 7-7-2008 Claims approval amendment Ch. 8
2008-14 7-21-2008 No parking zones
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2008-15 7-21-2008 Personnel policies and
procedures manual
amendment
See Ch. 33, Art. I
2008-16 8-4-2008 Defined contribution
retirement program
Ch. 40, Art. I
2008-17 9-15-2008 Bond NCM
2008-18 9-2-2008 Appropriation amendment NCM
2008-19 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2008-20 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2008-21 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment
(Woolwich Regional Center
and Auburn Road Village
regulations and design
standards)
Ch. 203 (Part 2)
2008-22 10-6-2008 Peace and good order:
standards of conduct
amendment
Ch. 138, Art. II
2008-23 10-20-2008 Checklist for development
applications amendment
See Ch. 23
2008-24 12-15-2008 Affordable housing
development fees
Ch. 95, Art. III
2009-01 1-20-2009 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 99
2009-02 5-18-2009 Acceptance of deed of
dedication
NCM
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1289
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-03 2-2-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-04 4-20-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2009-05 5-4-2009 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
2009-06 5-4-2009 Land use application and
appeal fees; escrow deposits
Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-11
2009-07 5-18-2009 Salaries NCM
2009-08 6-1-2009 Sex offenders repealer Ch. 147, reference
only
2009-09 6-1-2009 Steep slopes Ch. 156
2009-10 Subdivision of land
amendment
Not adopted
2009-11 Sale of property Not adopted
2009-12 7-20-2009 Environmental site
assessment repealer
Ch. 92, reference
only
2009-13 7-20-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-14 7-20-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-15 9-8-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-16 10-19-2009 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 56, Art. I
2009-17 11-16-2009 Tree removal Ch. 177, Art. I
2009-18 12-7-2009 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. II
2009-19 12-7-2009 Uniform Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I
2009-20 12-21-2009 Shade Tree Commission Ch. 177, Art. II
2010-01 1-19-2010 Flood damage prevention Ch. 103
2010-02 1-19-2010 Towing amendment Ch. 175
2010-03 2-1-2010 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 56, Art. I
2010-04 2-1-2010 Easement NCM
2010-05 4-5-2010 Volunteer service application Ch. 48
2010-06 4-5-2010 Revised personnel and
procedure policy
NCM
2010-07 5-17-2010 Dedication of open space NCM
2010-08 5-17-2010 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
2010-09 5-17-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1290
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-10 5-17-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2010-11 6-7-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2010-12 5-17-2010 Tree removal amendment Ch. 177, Art. I
2010-13 6-7-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-14 6-7-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2010-16
2010-15 6-21-2010 Reimbursement by Fire
Department
NCM
2010-16 7-19-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2010-17 7-19-2010 Refunding bond NCM
2010-18 7-19-2010 Dedication of open space
amendment
NCM
2010-19 8-2-2010 Peace and good order: public
nuisances
Ch. 138, Art. II
2010-20 8-16-2010 Salaries NCM
2010-21 9-7-2010 Dedication of open space NCM
2010-22 10-4-2010 Parks and recreation:
general regulations
amendment; athletic fields
and recreational use
Ch. 135, Arts. I, II
2010-23 11-16-2010 Easement NCM
2010-24 11-16-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-25 11-16-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-26 12-20-2010 Affordable housing
development fees
amendment
Ch. 95, Art. III
2011-01 3-7-2011 Officers and employees: Park
Ranger
Ch. 29, Art. X
2011-02 4-4-2011 Police Department:
establishment amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
2011-03 4-4-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2011-04 6-6-2011 Salaries NCM
2011-05 6-6-2011 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
amendment
Ch. 40, Art. I
2011-06 6-6-2011 Curfew amendment Ch. 79
2011-07 6-20-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-08 7-18-2011 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1291
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-09 8-1-2011 Peddlers, solicitors, vendors
and transient merchants
amendment
Ch. 140
2011-10 8-1-2011 Police Department:
establishment amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
2011-11 8-15-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-12 12-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2012-01 1-17-2012 Salaries NCM
2012-02 1-17-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-03 Not adopted
2012-04 3-5-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-05 3-5-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2012-06 4-2-2012 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking zones amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2012-07 4-2-2012 Parks and recreation:
athletic fields and
recreational use amendment
Ch. 135, Art. II
2012-08 4-2-2012 Sewage disposal systems:
required connection of septic
systems to sanitary sewers in
adopted sewer service area
Ch. 148, Art. I
2012-09 4-2-2012 Sewage disposal systems:
maintenance of individual
subsurface sewage disposal
systems
Ch. 148, Art. II
2012-10 6-18-2012 Riparian zones Ch. 145
2012-11 4-16-2012 Application and appeal fees;
deposits; guaranties;
contributions
Ch. 95, Art. I
2012-12 4-16-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2012-13 4-16-2012 Salaries NCM
2012-14 6-4-2012 Rental property: registration
of rental units
Ch. 144, Art. I
2012-15 9-17-2012 Bond NCM
2012-16 8-20-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-17 8-20-2012 Peddlers, solicitors, vendors
and transient merchants
amendment
Ch. 140
2012-18 9-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1292
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-19 10-1-2012 Police Department:
establishment amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
2012-20 Appropriation NCM
2012-21 12-28-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-01 3-18-2013 Salaries NCM
2013-02 5-6-2013 Joint Environmental
Commission
Ch. 16
2013-03 5-6-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2013-04 6-3-2013 Salaries NCM
2013-05 7-15-2013 Trees and shrubs adjacent to
sidewalks and roads
Ch. 177, Art. III
2013-06 9-3-2013 Property maintenance:
vacant, abandoned and
foreclosed properties
Ch. 143, Art. II
2013-07 9-3-2013 Tree removal amendment Ch. 177, Art. I
2013-08 9-16-2013 Bond NCM
2013-09 11-4-2013 Participation in Gloucester
County Energy Aggregation
Program
NCM
2013-10 12-2-2013 Rental property: registration
of rental units amendment
Ch. 144, Art. I
2014-01 3-17-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2014-02 4-7-2014 Salaries NCM
2014-03 4-7-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-04 5-5-2014 Vehicles and traffic: engine
compression brakes
Ch. 182, Art. XIII
2014-05 5-5-2014
2014-06 6-16-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2014-07 7-21-2014 Salaries NCM
2014-08 8-18-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2014-09 8-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2014-10 8-4-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-11 8-18-2014 Loitering repealer; peace
and good order: standards of
conduct amendment
Chs. 128, reference
only; 138, Art. I
2014-12 9-15-2014 Officers and employees:
Qualified Purchasing Agent
Ch. 29, Art. XI
2014-13 9-15-2014 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1293
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-14 10-20-2014 Vehicles and traffic: speed
limits amendment
Ch. 182, Art. III
2014-15 11-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2014-16 11-17-2014 Bond NCM
2014-17 12-15-2014 Site plan review amendment;
subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 149; 163; 203
2015-01 1-20-2015 Personnel policy amendment See Ch. 33, Art. I
2015-02 2-2-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2015-03 2-17-2015 Bond NCM
2015-04 3-16-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-05 5-4-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2015-06 5-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic: speed
limits amendment
Ch. 182, Art. III
2015-07 5-4-2015 Site plan review amendment;
subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 149; Ch. 163
2015-08 6-15-2015 Street vacation NCM
2015-09 7-13-2015 Designation of block as area
in need of redevelopment
NCM
2015-10 8-3-2015 Parks and recreation:
vehicular traffic within park
property
Ch. 135, Art. III
2015-11 8-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic: no
stopping or standing
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. V
2015-12 8-3-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-13 8-17-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2015-14 9-21-2015 Appropriation NCM
2015-15 9-21-2015 Towing amendment Ch. 175
2015-16 9-21-2015 Bond NCM
2015-17 9-21-2015 Parks and recreation:
athletic fields and
recreational use amendment
Ch. 135, Art. II
2015-18 10-5-2015 Rental property repealer Ch. 144, reference
only
2015-19 10-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1294
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-20 10-5-2015 Adoption of Property
Maintenance Code
amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
2015-21 10-19-2015 Tree removal amendment Ch. 177, Art. I
2015-22 11-2-2015 Wedding and civil union
ceremonies amendment
Ch. 192
2015-23 11-2-2015 Limousine services Ch. 127
2015-24 11-2-2015 Officers and employees: Park
Director
Ch. 29, Art. XII
2015-25 12-21-2015 Vacant, abandoned and
foreclosed properties
Ch. 143, Art. II
2016-01 2-1-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2016-02 2-16-2016 Application and appeal fees;
deposits; guaranties;
contributions amendment
Ch. 95, Art. I
2016-03 2-16-2016 Joint Land Use Board
submission checklist
See Ch. 23
2016-04 3-21-2016 Long-term tax exemption
agreement
NCM
2016-05 4-4-2016 Salaries NCM
2016-06 4-18-2016 Personnel Policy and
Procedure Manual
amendment
NCM
2016-07 5-16-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2016-08 5-16-2016 Property maintenance:
vacant, abandoned and
foreclosed properties
amendment
Ch. 143, Art. II
2016-09 9-6-2016 Bond NCM
2016-10 8-1-2016 Bond NCM
2016-11 Zoning changes for Master
Plan
Not adopted
2016-12 12-5-2016 Trees Ch. 177
2016-13 8-15-2016 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 103
2016-14 9-19-2016 Parks and recreation:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 135, Art. I
2016-15 9-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1295
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-16 10-17-2016 Vehicles and traffic: engine
compensation brakes
amendment
Ch 182, Art. XIII
2016-17 11-21-2016 Fire insurance claims Ch. 117, Art. I
2016-18 11-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2017-01 3-6-2017 Granting Use of Streets to
South Jersey Gas Company
NCM
2017-02 3-6-2017 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2017-03 3-6-2017 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2017-04 3-6-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2017-05 4-3-2017 Street Vacation NCM
2017-06 4-3-2017 Business and Economic
Development Advisory
Committee
Ch. 5
2017-07 4-3-2017 Site Plan Review
Amendment; Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 149; Ch. 163
2017-08 4-3-2017 Fees: Application and Appeal
Fees; Deposits; Guaranties;
Contributions Amendment
Ch. 95, Art. I
2017-09 5-15-2017 Salaries NCM
2017-10 5-15-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 182
2017-11 6-19-2017 Refunding Bond NCM
2017-12 7-17-2017 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2017-13 7-17-2017 Taxation: Five-Year
Exemption
Ch. 168, Art. III
2017-14 7-17-2017 Agreement NCM
2017-15 9-5-2017 Parks and Recreation
Committee
Ch. 31
2017-16 8-21-2017 Appropriation NCM
2017-17 Not adopted
2017-18 11-20-2017 Joint Land Use Board See Ch. 23
2017-19 12-18-2017 Bond NCM
2018-01 3-19-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2018-02 3-19-2018 Parks and Recreation:
Athletic Fields and
Recreational Use
Amendment
Ch. 135, Art. II
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1296
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-03 3-19-2018 Peace and Good Order:
Standards of Conduct
Amendment
Ch. 138, Art. I
2018-04 4-16-2018 Fees: Application and Appeal
Fees; Deposits; Guaranties;
Contributions Amendment
Ch. 95, Art. I
2018-05 5-7-2018 Appropriation NCM
2018-06 5-21-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-07 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203
2018-08 5-21-2018 Joint Land Use Board
Submission Checklist
See Ch. 23
2018-09 5-21-2018 Bond NCM
2018-10 6-4-2018 Police Department:
Establishment Amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
2018-11 7-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: No-
Parking Zones Amendment
Ch. 182, Art. VII
2018-12 8-20-2018 Bond NCM
2018-13 8-20-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203
2018-14 9-17-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-15 10-1-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203
2018-16 10-1-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-17 11-19-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-18 12-3-2018 Peddlers, Solicitors, Vendors
and Transient Merchants
Amendment
Ch. 140
2018-19 Bond Not adopted
2018-20 12-17-2018 Agreement NCM
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-01 2-4-2019 Animals: Licensing of
Dogs Amendment;
Animals Running at
Large Amendment
Ch. 59, Art. I;
Ch. 59, Art. II
23
2019-02 2-19-2019 Officers and
Employees:
Department of
Municipal Services
Ch. 29, Art.
VI
23
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1297
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-03 2-19-2019 Parks and Recreation
Committee
Amendment;
Retirement: Defined
Contribution
Retirement Program
Amendment; Parks
and Recreation:
General Regulations
Amendment; Athletic
Fields and
Recreational Use
Amendment
Ch. 31; Ch.
40, Art. I; Ch.
135, Art. I;
Ch. 135, Art.
II
23
2019-04 2-19-2019 Officers and
Employees:
Recreation
Coordinator
Ch. 29, Art.
XII
23
2019-05 2-19-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 23
2019-06 5-6-2019 Salaries NCM 23
2019-07 6-3-2019 Alarm Systems
Amendment
Ch. 53 23
2019-08 Not Adopted 23
2019-09 7-15-2019 Salaries NCM 23
2019-10 7-15-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203 23
2019-11 8-6-2019 Bond NCM 23
2019-12 9-3-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203 23
2019-13 8-5-2019 Vehicles and Traffic:
Speed Limits
Amendment
Ch. 182, Art.
III
23
2019-14 9-3-2019 Bond NCM 23
2019-15 10-7-2019 Joint Land Use Board
Amendment
Ch. 23 23
2019-16 9-30-2019 Court Ch. 12 23
2019-17 11-4-2019 Agreement NCM 23
2019-18 10-21-2019 Trees Amendment Ch. 177 23
2019-19 10-21-2019 Vehicles and Traffic:
Through Traffic
Roads Amendment
Ch. 182, Art.
I
23
2019-20 Not Adopted 23
§ DL-1 WOOLWICH CODE § DL-1
A222:1298
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-21 11-18-2019 Agreement NCM 23
2019-22 11-18-2019 Agreement NCM 23
2019-23 11-18-2019 Salaries NCM 23
2019-24 12-2-2019 Joint Land Use Board
Checklist
See. Ch. 23 23
2019-25 12-30-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 23
2019-26 12-30-2019 Solid Waste: Solid
Waste and Recycling
Amendment
Ch. 155, Art.
II
23
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A222:1299